* 1556075
* SBIR Phase II:  Handheld and Low-cost Pulmonary Function Testing Device using Smart Coherent Multi-signal Oscillometry Technique
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Gaurav Patel, Cognita Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2019
* USD 909,800.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a pulmonary function testing
device for detection and diagnosis of pulmonary conditions. Today more than 650
million globally, nearly 10% of the world's population, suffer from lung
conditions like Asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD).
Currently, the most well-established method for lung function testing is
spirometry, which requires the patient to conduct an unnatural breathing
maneuver. In addition, spirometry cannot detect certain lung conditions. The
proposed technology will be used without special breathing maneuver, and will be
able to differentiate more lung conditions than spirometer. Since the proposed
device can be used while the patient is breathing normally, it will also cater
to currently under-served patient segments, e.g. young children and senior
citizens, for detection and diagnosis of pulmonary conditions. By targeting a
portable form-factor, the proposed technology will empower point-of-care
pulmonary testing where it is currently infeasible. The proposed project will
develop the first handheld implementation of the well-studied principle of
forced oscillation technique (FOT), where an acoustic pressure wave is sent via
the mouth to a patient's lungs and reflections are used to measure lung
function. Thus, no special breathing maneuver is required from the patient.
Cognita Labs will adopt a modular approach for product design, and develop
product-caliber advanced and integrated devices, that will include hardware,
tablet app and EHR integration. The design will include all the innovations
developed during Phase I to reduce the device size and cost while increasing its
measurement accuracy. The proposed device will further develop and integrate a
new ultra-sound based non-invasive sensor into the device to significantly
reduce the cost of the consumable (disposable mouthpiece) and ultimately the
cost of test. The team will also develop a new multi-resolution pre-screening
test, with the objective to reduce bench time in outpatient clinics.