* 1556010
* Collaborative Research: The Adoption of an Emerging Technology for Improving the Electrical Delivery System
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Scott Frickel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 212,275.00

This collaborative project will study the "smart grid" - with advanced- or
"smart" metering technologies at its core and its adoption by communities
seeking a more efficient, responsive, and sustainable energy system. Smart meter
implementation across the U.S. has been intermittent and uneven and the reasons
for this are poorly understood. This study will explore the impacts of the new
technology, and the social and institutional dynamics that facilitate and impede
its implementation at different levels of social organization. The project will
synthesis field theory and transition theory to understand smart meter
implementation, and more broadly, the transformation of the American electricity
system. It is significant because it will contribute to our understanding of the
rapidly evolving smart meter field and of energy transitions more generally. The
proposed research will benefit society because it will provide practitioners,
policymakers, and researchers with insight into the field-level factors and
processes that facilitate and impede the implementation of smart meters - widely
seen as key to an efficient, secure, and sustainable energy system in the 21st
century.

The proposed study examines relational dynamics in an emerging sociotechnical
field, focusing on the case of smart meters. The objective of the proposed
research is to investigate inter-organizational conflict and cooperation that
have led to the uneven development of smart metering systems. The study proposes
a nested research design and triangulated multi-method approach aiming to 1)
investigate inter-organizational relations that structure and produce a state's
contemporary smart meter field; 2) conduct in-depth studies of four smart meter
projects that illustrate different successes and failures; and 3) build and
analyze a quantitative dataset containing national- and state-level information
on smart meter implementation and its relationship to public and private
funding, knowledge production, technological innovation, and governance. Results
will be disseminated to practitioners, including interview partners in
government, private businesses, and utility companies. When complete, the
quantitative dataset and related metadata will be also made available to
interested individuals through the project website.