* 1556177
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Direct and indirect effects of natural sounds on the structure of vertebrate insectivore communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jesse Barber, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 03/31/2020
* USD 524,928.00

Scientists have long explained where particular species of animals are found by
examining what we, as humans, see in the environment. For example, we know that
the type and density of plants affect where sparrows can be found. However, many
animals rely heavily on non-visual senses, such as hearing, when interacting
with their surroundings and deciding where to live. Although the acoustic
environment -- what animals hear -- may be important to many species, it remains
largely unexplored as a force influencing where animals can be found. This
project will examine the extent to which natural sounds, such as those generated
by wind and water, influence where animals settle, how they interact with one
another and, ultimately, how they structure entire communities. Focusing on
birds and bats, the investigators will conduct a large-scale experiment in which
they place many speakers in the forest to create "phantom" oceans and rivers --
the sounds of moving water without the water itself. This will allow them to
figure out how sounds can change the way in which species interact with their
environment and with each other. Specifically, this study will test how noise
can explain where animals live, how they behave, and the extent to which they
are impacted by human-made noise generated, for example, along major highways.
This study will also provide research opportunities for undergraduate students
at small universities and will result in an "Acoustics in Ecology and Evolution"
workshop to teach young scientists how to incorporate acoustics into their own
ecological field research.

Researchers will test for acoustic impacts on bird and bat communities in areas
characterized by high levels of natural sounds from moving water (natural river
and ocean surf sounds), low levels of natural sounds, high levels of
artificially created natural sounds (phantom river and surf sounds), and
spectrally-shifted, artificially created natural sounds. The latter two
treatments will be generated via large-scale playbacks of sounds recorded
elsewhere. The experimental approach of playing back natural sounds at different
frequencies will allow researchers to parse the influence of acoustic masking
versus more general effects of sounds (e.g., disturbance and distraction) on
bird and bat behavior and on community structure. Researchers will also assess
the potential role of low frequency natural sounds as acoustic beacons for
habitat selection. Field work will entail a combination of behavioral
experiments, bird, bat, arthropod and vegetation surveys, and spatially explicit
quantification of the acoustic environment. Researchers will test hypotheses
regarding how sounds structure communities directly by masking cues used for
communication or predator/prey detection, directly via elevated perceived risk
through a reduction in auditory surveillance, or indirectly by altering prey
distributions.