* 1556135
* SBIR Phase II:  A Non-invasive Image-based Skeletal Muscle Analytics Tool
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Xue Feng, Springbok, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 747,567.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a new tool revealing important
information regarding skeletal muscle strength and health. Muscle weakness is a
pervasive problem across our society, including people with joint disease, aging
people, obese people, and people with neuromuscular disorders. All of these
problems affect muscles across the body in different and non-intuitive ways;
however, to date there has not been marketed technology that allows for
quantitative measurement of muscle size on a muscle-by-muscle basis and specific
analysis to address the muscle weakness problem. Due to the current high cost,
the initial targeted customers will be elite athlete organizations, with the
goal of using the technology to improve performance as well as to provide more
quantitative metrics for predicting injury susceptibility and make return-to-
sport decisions. However, with research and development to bring down the cost,
the ultimate goal is to make a broadly used clinical tool for prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of health conditions related to musculoskeletal disease
and mobility, which will have broad societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will provide a major advancement in image-based modeling and
data analysis tools in order to allow high-throughput imaging, rapid and
accurate segmentation of muscles and efficient data analysis. Currently,
physical therapists, athletic trainers and strength and conditioning coaches
only have very blunt tools to assess each individual?s strength and very limited
information about the optimal muscle profile. Therefore, training and
rehabilitative approaches are developed via experience and trial and error. The
technology proposed here solves these problems by making using of an image-to-
model pipeline to quantify muscle size and provide valuable and actionable
information based on the quantification. However, the obstacles for a wide
adoption of this technology include specific magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
protocols and lengthy image segmentation process. In the previous funding cycle
these two problems have been addressed with substantial technology advancements.
The proposed activities in this funding cycle will continue the technical
development process to further bring down the cost with improved image
segmentation process and provide additional value with advanced data analysis.
It will ultimately be a revolutionary tool to improve muscle health.