* 1556455
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Basis Of Novel Phenotypes Resulting From Interpopulation Hybridization
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Felipe Barreto, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 399,310.00

Climate change affects the geographic distribution of populations and species
and can result in increased opportunities for hybridization between previously
isolated populations. Hybridization can have a range of outcomes. Most
frequently, hybridization results in loss of fitness (hybrid breakdown),
effectively reducing interbreeding and promoting the formation of new species.
Occasionally, however, novel combinations of genes yield ecological advantages
to hybrids, including adaptation to new ecological niches. What attributes of
parental populations predict the outcome of hybridization? Answering this
question is the focus of this project, and will provide new insights into the
effects of climate and ecological changes on adaptation rates and species
formation. The researchers also will engage in novel public informal education
at the Birch Aquarium and in hands-on experiences in marine biology for 5th
grade students in underserved San Diego neighborhoods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting hybridization outcomes requires an
understanding of the molecular basis of hybrid phenotypes. This project will
conduct genomic analyses of hybrids produced by crosses between divergent
populations of the copepod Tigriopus californicus. Previous work has shown that
energy production by mitochondria is frequently disrupted in hybrids. Whole
genome sequencing will be used to determine genetic differences between groups
of hybrid copepods with normal versus disrupted mitochondrial performance;
differentiation between the groups will identify candidate genes that are
potentially responsible for hybrid breakdown. Results will address: a) Does
hybridization result in widespread incompatibilities across the genome, or can
targeted genes be identified? b) Are the same genomic regions responsible for
hybrid breakdown in different interpopulation crosses? A similar approach will
be used to examine the genomic basis of improved hybrid thermal tolerance. What
genetic interactions allow some hybrids to survive temperatures that are lethal
to both parental populations? Is hybrid performance predictable from genetic or
ecological differences between parental populations?