* 1556498
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Cost and Green Deposition of Multifunctional Oxide Films
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jacob Richardson, Solution Deposition Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project could be very significant for the field of
light emitting diodes (LEDs) and other optoelectronics. This project is aimed at
developing a solution based technology for depositing transparent conductive
zinc oxide (ZnO) layers for use in LEDs and other optoelectronic devices. This
ZnO deposition technology has potential to provide a lower cost and higher
performance alternative to the physical vapor deposited indium tin oxide (PVD-
ITO) layers that are currently used. The technology could be commercialized for
LED manufacturing in only a few years. Lighting is one of the modern world's
primary usages of energy and the adoption of high efficiency LED lighting has
potential to significantly reduce lighting energy demand. By lowering
manufacturing cost and improving performance, the technology developed in this
project can help increase LED adoption and energy savings. In the longer term,
this technology may also be used to lower manufacturing cost and improve
performance of solar cells, impacting clean energy supply as well as
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project is aimed at commercializing a technology which addresses the problem of
Transparent Conductive Oxide (TCO) film performance and cost, in particular for
light emitting diodes (LEDs) and other Gallium Nitride based optoelectronics.
This proposal aims to bring a solution based method for depositing Zinc Oxide
(ZnO) based TCO films to the point of commercial competiveness, with the longer
term goal of providing significantly lower materials, energy, and capital
equipment costs than current deposition methods and TCO materials. The approach
being taken in the proposal relies on well understood characterization
techniques as methods of determining successfulness as well as direct feedback
from device manufacturers. The small business has the support and validation of
strategic partnerships with device manufacturers eager to support this
development of this technology.