* 1556710
* A Study in Arctic Alaska of Relations between Cold War Bio-medicine, Indigenous Politics, and Circumpolar Health
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Tess Lanzarotta, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,808.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researcher
will peruse Alaskan archival collections and conduct interviews at the Inupiat
Heritage Center in Barrow to study the emergence of circumpolar health. The need
to understand circumpolar health, meaning how the Arctic environment impacted
human bodies and minds, came about as Cold War tensions rose in the United
States, which resulted in Alaska taking on a new strategic importance. From its
inception, circumpolar health was entangled in the processes of American
colonialism in Alaska and was instrumental in generating sustained scientific
interest in Alaska Native peoples. It also became a site from which Alaska
Native peoples made claims for autonomy, articulated their health demands, and
critiqued the policies of the American state. The researcher will share the
results of this study at academic conferences and in peer-reviewed historical
journals. The project will culminate in the publication of a book with an
academic press. Any oral histories produced over the course of this research are
to be donated to an appropriate library collection and thereby contribute to the
broader aim of increasing the representation of Native Alaskan voices in the
Alaskan archival record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explain the construction of circumpolar
health through three key periods, during the early Cold War, the 1960s and 1970s
when the U.S. government began to rapidly expand Alaska's public health
infrastructure, and in the 1980s when Alaskan circumpolar health movement became
institutionalized locally through academic institutions and scientific
organizations. At each stage, the researcher will consider how the imperatives
of Cold War politics, the aims of biomedicine, and the priorities of Alaska
Native peoples interacted to shape the development of circumpolar health. The
study builds upon work in the history of Cold War science that have shown how
science and technology became tools for militarizing and industrializing Arctic
regions during the Cold War. It adopts an innovative approach. By contrast with
existing histories, it focuses on Native Alaskans' agency as Cold War historical
actors and traces their role in altering the power dynamics of circumpolar
health research over time. It situates Alaska as a site where Cold War
biomedical knowledge was actually produced, beginning as knowledge made about
the Arctic, and transitioning to knowledge made in the Arctic. The project will
also reflect on the ways that historical antecedents have shaped the ethics and
practice of contemporary Arctic biomedical research.