* 1556774
* Pleiotropy and Modularity of Morphological Variation in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Thomas Hansen, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,300,000.00

Scientists can rapidly obtain the DNA sequence of an individual, and find sites
in the DNA that affect one trait. It is believed that many sites will affect
more than one trait, a phenomenon called pleiotropy. The proportion of sites
that are pleiotropic is not known, in part because how to find such sites is
unclear. This project investigates the patterns of pleiotropy in a model
organism to see whether those effects are typically restricted to one simple
part of the body, or are likely to have effects on many different parts. If the
team finds that a DNA change generally affects many traits, then this will
suggest that those studying human genomes will have to look at diverse traits to
understand how DNA changes affect specific aspects of heath. This project makes
a fundamental contribution to our understanding of how genotypes map onto
phenotypes. Additionally, the PIs will provide research opportunities for
undergraduates in computational biology and will develop statistical software
for the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize pleiotropy,
the scientific team will use the fruit fly because of its rapid generation time
and low cost. They will develop methods to automate the measurement of multiple
body parts, and then characterize these parts in a set of 200 fully sequenced
fly stocks. They will develop statistical techniques to quantitatively
characterize pleiotropy using these data. The data and statistical techniques
will then be used to find the DNA sites that affect the shape of the body, and
to determine whether those effects typically are restricted to one part of the
body, or affect many parts. The statistical techniques to characterize
pleiotropy developed in this project will apply directly to other species,
including humans. This project also includes active collaboration with Norwegian
scientists, including international training for US graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, which was partially funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.