* 1556280
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the geography of sodium as a catalyst in terrestrial communities and ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Michael Kaspari, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2021
* USD 551,733.00

Essential services performed by Earth's ecosystems, such as decomposing detritus
into nutrients, transforming plants into meat, creating and aerating fertile
soil, arise from the combined actions of millions of organisms. Each of these
organisms, from bacteria to butterflies to bison, best contribute to these
services when they consume a healthy diet, which includes access to minerals,
especially sodium. Sodium is a critical mineral for ecosystems because plants
are generally low in sodium but the things that eat them, from fungi to
grasshoppers, require it to grow and reproduce. Thus every plant eater must
search out, harvest, and hang onto quantities of sodium, and will go to extremes
eating carcasses, soil, and urine, to get that quota. Moreover, sodium is not
uniformly distributed on the landscape. It falls as dilute ocean water near the
coasts, it clings to clay soils but is leached from sandy soils, and it is
distributed by the truckload to keep snowy roads free from ice. This project
combines these two facts, that sodium is potentially one of the most important
drivers of the health of plant consumers, and that sodium is geographically
patchy, to predict the abundance and services of plant consumers across the
North American continent. This research should lead to better prediction of such
disparate phenomena as why grasshoppers are bigger crop pests in one county than
another; why carbon is better stored in inland soils than those near the ocean;
and why termite damage claims are centered along the Gulf Coast of the U.S. and
up into the Mid-Atlantic states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate this
proposition, the project combines two methods. The first maps the distribution
of sodium across and within North American ecosystems and focuses on the easily
accessible and widespread grasslands, old fields, and roadsides, and the
invertebrates that live in them. The goal in Year 1 is to explore the basic
hypothesis that as soil supplies of sodium increase - due to deposition from the
ocean, high clay content, or because they are salted every winter - plants will
not be affected but the animals that eat them (and the predators that eat the
plant consumers) will. Thus the first year will generate a map of the abundance
and activity of invertebrates above and belowground, and the degree to which
both track sodium supply (and other nutrients). Then, in Year 2 and 3, these
correlations will be put to the test experimentally in 6 grasslands from the
central and eastern U.S. At each grassland, 50 meter square plots will be
fertilized with a dilute sodium concentrations mimicking the slightly salty
rainfall of the island of Puerto Rico; smaller plots will receive sodium
mimicking that deposited on a regular basis by every animal as urine. By
carefully tracking where the sodium goes, and how it boosts the numbers and
activity of invertebrates, the project will test how animal health and vigor
across North America is influenced by sodium supply. By examining how
pollinators, herbivores, and detritivores respond, the project will test the
transformative idea that sodium is a catalyst for ecosystem services.