* 1556069
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Performance, Environmentally Friendly Polymer Systems for Paints and Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Andriy Popadyuk, Renuvix
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2019
* USD 659,434.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to provide the paint and coatings industry with new
high-performance, cost-competitive polymer/resin systems that reduce solvent
emissions and use of petrochemicals. In addition, these new polymer/resin
systems enable one-component, ambient-cure coatings to be produced. This means
that highly protective coatings can be produced without the need for mixing
multiple components together prior to application or applying heat or light to
cure the coatings. The one-component, ambient-cure features of these
polymer/resin systems largely eliminate waste and energy costs associated with
coating application and lend themselves to the production of paints and coatings
that can be applied by the average person. Compared to the current state-of-the-
art in one-component, ambient-cured resins, these new polymer/resin systems
provide dramatically shorter drying times, dramatically better chemical
resistance, and much higher film hardness, while exhibiting excellent impact
resistance and flexibility. The highly desirable properties of these new cost-
competitive polymer/resin systems will enable commercial success, while their
low solvent emissions and high renewable content will reduce impact on the
environment.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are to: 1) further optimize the
polymer/resin systems to produce compositions that minimize solvent content and
maximize performance, while meeting the cost constraints of the market; 2) put
in place a pilot-line to provide potential customers with adequate sample sizes
to enable their own evaluation of potential products, 3) generate weathering,
corrosion, and storage/shelf stability data to further understand the
application potential of optimized polymer/resin systems; and 4) optimize the
polymer/resin production process to minimize cost and minimize production waste.
By meeting these objectives, the Phase II project will result in the generation
of new polymer/resin systems that will enable the development and
commercialization of new paints and coatings that are one-component, ambient-
cured, low in solvent content that exhibit exceptional properties, while being
primarily based on renewable materials. Optimized polymer/resin systems will be
provided to potential customers for their own internal evaluation. If necessary,
feedback from customer evaluations will be used to modify polymer/resin system
composition to meet customer needs. By the end of the Phase II project, the
technology will be ready to proceed to manufacturing scale-up and product
commercialization.