* 1556081
* SIINN JTC 2014 Tanguay Travel
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Robert Tanguay, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/29/2016
* USD 3,618.00

1556081(Tanguay)

This proposal was submitted as an international travel award to cover
transportation and lodging costs for U.S. panelists. These panelists
participated in the transnational Evaluation (Peer) Review panel for the Safe
Implementation of Innovative Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (SIINN) which took
place in Lisbon, Portugal June 29-30, 2015. . The panel was composed of 17
panelists from Europe and the U.S. of which 4 were from the U.S a total of 26
transnational proposals were reviewed by 17 reviewers.

The European Research Area (ERA-NET) is a coordination activity funded by the
European Commission within the 7th Framework Program. The main objective of an
ERA-NET is to provide a framework to network and mutually open national or
regional research programs, leading to concrete cooperation, such as the
development and implementation of joint transnational calls. The ERA-NET for
Safe Implementation of Innovative Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ERA-NET SIINN)
and the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET)
Division within the National Science Foundation collaborated to issue a call to
encourage joint U.S.-European research collaborations focusing on the
environmental and health impacts of manufactured nanomaterial (MNMs). The
research areas identified covered 4 topic areas:

Topic 1. Exposure assessment Topic 2. Fundamental aspects underlying toxicity
mechanisms Topic 3. Effects of MNM on human health Topic 4. Environmental
impacts of MNMs The SIINN partners are: Austrian Ministry for Transport,
Innovation and Technology (Austria), Executive Agency for Higher Education,
Research, Development and Innovation Funding (Romania), Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (Germany), Foundation for Science and Technology
(Portugal), Fund for Scientific Research (Belgium), Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness (Spain), National Science Foundation (U.S.), and Regional
Council Nord-Pas de Calais (France). The NSF contribution is part of the
National Nanotechnology Initiative.

A total of 26 projects were determined to meet all eligibility criteria and
subsequently underwent peer review in Lisbon, Portugal June 28-29, 2015. A panel
composed of 17 reviewers were selected - 13 from Europe and 4 from the U.S. In
accordance with the MOU NSF signed with ERA-Net in November, travel costs for
the 4 U.S. reviewers was to be paid by NSF/CBET. The RA-Net Call Office paid for
the travel costs of the 13 European reviewers.