* 1556396
* Importance of Acclimatory and Adaptive Response to the Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Douglas Crawford, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 723,527.00

Part 1: How animals survive and prosper under changing environmental conditions
depends on both their physiological responses and adaptive changes in their
genes. Physiological responses include changes in the metabolic rates and the
proteins that affect metabolism during the animal's lifetime. These reversible,
non-genetic changes buffer an individual's health in a changing environment.
Yet, there are limits to these physiological responses, and animals may evolve
genetic changes that affect their metabolism and enhance their survival. This
research investigates the interaction between physiological and adaptive changes
to better understand the mechanisms affecting health and fitness. This research
takes advantage of new DNA sequencing technologies to define 10,000s of genetic
differences among environments and relate these to measures of gene expression.
The data from this research will inform society about the genes and gene
expression that enhances health in a variety of environments. Included in this
research is the training of undergraduate and high-school students from a
diversity of economic and social backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:To
enhance our ability to predict responses to climate change, we need to
understand the relative importance of acclimatory responses and the potential
for adaptive divergence. Although there are several good vertebrate models for
thermal adaptive divergence among taxa and many acclimation response examples,
few studies examine the interaction between acclimatory responses and adaptive
divergence. To examine this interaction, this research first measures derived
changes in metabolism and the effect of thermal acclimation and then uses the
variation in these measures to interrogate the importance of mRNA and DNA
variation. Two major goals of this proposed research are to utilize genotyping
by sequencing to provide tens of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms
and apply RNA-Seq to measure most expressed genes to determine if 1) nucleotide
divergence among the three thermal effluent populations share similar adaptive
divergence and 2) acclimatory and adaptive changes in mRNA expression affect the
same loci. Our predictions are that acclimatory and adaptive changes in mRNA
expression involve different genes, that many loci can effect a change in
metabolism and thus different populations will have different mRNA expression
patterns that statistically explain the variation in metabolism, and similarly,
that the SNPs associated with changes in mRNA expression or metabolism will
differ in different populations. These predictions suggest that because the loci
involved in physiological responses are different from those affected by
adaptive divergence, there is greater potential for adaptive change than if the
same loci were involved. Additionally, we predict that there are many different
ways to achieve a change in metabolism, which means that there are many
different polymorphic loci that selection can act on. Providing the data to
support or reject these hypotheses would enhance our understanding of
evolutionary physiology and thus significantly influence our ability to predict
climate change effects on species' abundance and survival.