* 1556120
* SBIR Phase II:  High Frequency Network Traffic Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Nithin Michael, Waltz Networks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,399,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will dramatically increase the
efficiency of communications networks. Commercially, the ability to dynamically,
adaptively and optimally route traffic on data networks will lead to network
cost savings ranging from 60% - 70% for network service providers. Critically,
the project leverages the recent industry shift towards software-defined
networking (SDN) that is projected to become a $45 billion market by 2020. The
excitement behind SDN is driven primarily by the promised performance benefits
of better traffic control. By bringing to market its provably optimal, dynamic
and adaptive traffic control algorithms, the company will be uniquely positioned
to capitalize on this market opportunity. The immediate resulting social impact
will be that end users will have access to faster, cheaper and more robust data
networks. In the longer term, efficient software control of networks will enable
rapid innovation in networking leading to new network applications that have not
even been envisioned yet. The project also enhances technological and scientific
understanding by commercially verifying the company's solution to a longstanding
open problem in networking - namely, whether an easy to deploy, dynamic,
adaptive and optimal routing algorithm can be found.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on delivering
commercial, smart, traffic control algorithms that can unlock the full capacity
of modern communications networks. Today, due to unprecedented traffic growth,
network operators face major challenges in the form of efficient resource
utilization. The problem is that the inherent randomness of data traffic has led
to network designers over-provisioning networks to the point where they run at
30% - 40% utilization on average. The company's competitive advantage is a new
algorithm that allows it to optimally manage traffic variations by adjusting
network routes in real time while retaining the scalability and simplicity of
today's protocols. The goal in this project is to build on the beta tests from
Phase I by developing an enterprise-grade, cloud-based network control
application that is ready for general market launch. To this end, the company
will start with small commercial deployments at selected test partners. Feedback
from these deployments will be used to iron out any issues before general market
launch. By the end of the project, the company anticipates generating
significant revenue from initial customers as it continues to innovate and
maintain its current lead in developing SDN control plane software.