* 1556980
* DDRIG: Constructions and Understandings of Cancer Genetic Risk
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Carole Vance, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 12,600.00

General Audience Summary

This study seeks to shed light on how genetic risk for cancer is made visible,
communicated, understood, and acted upon. Breast and ovarian cancer (BOC)
genetic testing in the U.S. has recently undergone dramatic changes. The
standard initial screening offered to patients has expanded from a test for
high-risk mutations on two genes to a test for mutations on as many as 29 genes,
many of which pose only a low or moderate risk of developing cancer. Through 12
months of fieldwork combining document analysis, participant observation, and
in-depth interviews with health professionals and mutation carriers, this study
will investigate the following three key questions. How is BOC genetic risk made
visible in the era of multi-gene panel testing? How is genetic risk information
understood and acted upon by diverse carriers of BOC mutations? Finally, how are
relationships among and between laboratory researchers, medical experts, and
patients being transformed by the utilization of multi-gene panel tests?
Examining these questions will help to reveal the social and structural
dimensions of risk and genetic medicine. The proposed study will broaden and
deepen understandings of the personal, clinical, and societal implications of
the recent expansions of genetic testing. Its findings might also aid patients
in medical decision-making and enhance broader public literacy in genetic
biomedicine.

Technical Summary

This project brings STS frameworks to the study of risk. Using tools and
theoretical frameworks from science and technology studies (STS), medical
sociology, and gender studies, this project aims to understand how these recent
shifts in the practices of genetic medicine are shaping the active construction
of risk, beliefs and communication about risk, risk identities, and risk
management decisions. It aims to examine how certain ideas about genetic risk
gain credibility over others; how genetic risk is actively produced, not just
discovered; and how social and cultural values are embedded in genetic risk
technologies and risk management guidelines. This project also presents an
opportunity to empirically investigate and further develop social theories on
patienthood, biomedicalization, and health citizenship. This study will also
explore whether and under what circumstances patients of BOC genetic medicine--a
rapidly changing field that requires highly technical and specialized knowledge
--form biosocial communities and act as empowered agents in relation to medical
authority.