* 1556574
* Structural and Functional Diversity of Endolithic Microbial Communities in Arid Deserts
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Jocelyne DiRuggiero, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/28/2021
* USD 558,719.00

Microbes are essential for the health and functioning of the environment, yet
their diversity, in terms of the number of different kinds and their functions
in the environment, remains largely unexplored. In very dry desert, when water
is scarce and solar radiation high, the inside of rocks provides the last refuge
for microbial life. Using an array of laboratory experiments and field
measurements, this research will characterize the diversity and activities of
microbial communities found inside rocks in deserts around the world. This
project will inform us on the diversity of robust microbes that we might expect
to find when desertification takes place and help determine the recovery
potential of an area after long periods of desertification. By increasing our
knowledge of the diversity, evolution, and ecology of desert microbes, we will
learn more about our biosphere and how to better conserve resources and protect
the environment.

Using a large-scale interdisciplinary approach, this project will identify the
factors that govern the genetic, structural, and functional composition of
endolithic (living in rock) microbial communities from arid environments. This
research will provide a survey of the biodiversity of microorganisms inhabiting
endolithic ecosystems using high-throughput gene sequencing and state-of-the-art
microscopy methods. In addition, the researchers will determine the genetic
diversity and molecular adaptations of photosynthesizing organisms from these
ecosystems using culturing and single-cell genomics. Results from this study
will provide a comprehensive survey of the biodiversity of microorganisms
inhabiting endolithic ecosystems from several continents, determine whether the
local environment, (i.e. rock type and local climate) or the global environment
(i.e. biogeography) strongly impact community composition, and identify
molecular adaptations of phototrophs from these ecosystems and how they relate
to environmental variables. One postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student, and
several undergraduate students will participate in this project. A public high
school in Baltimore City will be involved in activities centered around the
geology and biology of arid deserts around the world and the impact of
desertification on human well-being. One high school student will participate in
a field expedition in the US. The general public will be engaged via an
international citizen science project.