* 1556583
* Collaborative Research: Extending leaf functional trait ecology to leaf symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Stuart Wright, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2020
* USD 186,972.00

Abundant and diverse fungi live inside healthy leaves of all trees. These
'fungal endophytes' (endo, inside; phyte, plant) can be important in enhancing
plant health under stressful conditions. However, the factors that shape the
diverse communities of endophytes found in different plant species are not well
understood. This project's overall goal is to integrate fungal endophytes into
our understanding of tropical plant ecology, with a special focus on the
relationships among leaf traits, plant productivity, and the ability of plants
to defend against insects and pathogens that attack leaves. Improving our
understanding of fungal endophytes is important since they influence plant
productivity and resistance to environmental stresses such as drought and
disease, including for plants of economic importance. Results will facilitate
use of endophytes in mitigating plant responses to a rapidly changing world,
with potential applications in sustainable agriculture and forest management.
This project will also support the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in interdisciplinary research, including students of under-represented
groups, provide mentored research experiences for K-12 teachers and for high
school students, and contribute to public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
context of tropical forests, where leaf traits and endophytes are highly
diverse, this project will test the hypotheses that (1) endophyte communities in
leaves vary in relation to leaf traits associated with growth vs. persistence
strategies; (2) endophytes will influence leaf and plant functions; (3)
contribution of endophytes to plant defense will vary as a function of leaf
traits; and (4) understanding growth vs. persistence strategies of plants can be
informed greatly by integration of these foliar symbionts. The research approach
involves field observations and experiments as well as bioassays. A field
experiment is planned where endophyte communities are manipulated in 12 focal
species. Additionally, leaves from these same 12 species will be introduced to
leaf cutter ants to test whether longer lifespan species are less attractive to
leaf cutter ants, and whether this will be mediated by endophyte load.
Furthermore, pathogens will be introduced to the 12 focal species to assay if
damage will be lower in leaves with high endophyte loads.