* 1556905
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Landscape-scale consequences of mutualism disruption: invasive ants threaten a widespread ant-plant mutualism in East Africa.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Todd Palmer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 563,189.00

Throughout the natural world, one can find pairs of species living together and
providing services for one another to their mutual benefit. These species
interactions are called mutualisms, and they are thought to maintain much of the
world's biodiversity. Mutualisms are also the basis for important ecosystem
services like seed dispersal, pollination, and nutrient cycling. But what
happens when an invasive species displaces one of the species partners in a
mutualism? That is the question this project will address in the savannas of
Kenya, where an invasive ant species is displacing the native ants that live on
acacia trees. Native ants aggressively defend trees by attacking elephants and
other herbivores that eat trees; in exchange, trees provide food (sugary nectar)
and shelter (swollen thorns) for the ants. In contrast, an invasive species,
big-headed ants, kill native ants but do not defend trees. Without their native
bodyguards, trees are being eaten and killed by elephants more frequently. This
project will assess the rate and extent of tree loss associated with the big-
headed ant species invasion. Because many species of wild herbivores, including
endangered black rhinos, rely on trees in one way or another, this project also
aims to understand how tree loss affects habitat for wildlife. This research
provides a unique opportunity to assess the domino effects of a critical species
mutualism breakdown in a landscape with an abundance of elephants, giraffes, and
other iconic species of large mammals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
test the hypothesis that the cascading effects of the invasive ant species P.
megacephala on the foundational mutualism between Acacia drepanolobium and
native ants are context-dependent. In savannas invaded by P. megacephala,
elephants are expected to reduce tree cover, thereby lowering soil and plant
nitrogen (N) and negatively affecting forage and habitat quality for wildlife
(since A. drepanolobium is an N-fixer). In contrast, where elephants are absent,
P. megacephala invasion should accelerate tree growth, as P. megacephala does
not induce nectar production and thus may reduce metabolic costs to host plants.
Over the long-term, this mutualism breakdown is predicted to lead to higher tree
cover and soil N in invaded areas. This project will (1) quantify the effects of
native versus invasive ants on growth, N-fixation, reproduction and biomass of
trees in the presence and absence of wild herbivores, especially elephants; (2)
use demographic models to project tree population growth rates; (3) use remote
sensing to assess the rate of spread of the P. megacephala invasion in both
wildlife-present and wildlife-extirpated areas; and (4) assess the effects of P.
megacephala invasion on availability of soil and plant nutrients and resulting
habitat use by wild herbivores.