* 1556967
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenetics of autoresistance in poison frogs as revealed by phylogenomics, neurophysiology, and comparative ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Harold Zakon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 698,184.00

Animals have evolved a variety of chemicals defenses against predators. A
premier example is the toxic chemicals in the skin of poison frogs. Because
these frogs are brightly colored, predators such as birds and snakes learn to
avoid them. These toxins are alkaloids, found in many animals and plants. The
frogs acquire these chemical defenses by eating ants and other arthropods that
contain the alkaloids. These frog alkaloids (e.g., tetrodotoxin, batrachotoxin)
are pharmacologically important and cause muscle paralysis, and disrupt
breathing and cardiac function. At the cellular level, alkaloids affect ion
channels, which control the transmission of nerve impulses. Surprisingly, the
ion channels of poison frogs are are not affected by their own toxins; thus,
deciphering how this evolved has important broader impacts that translate to
human health. This research will use evolutionary trees to guide the activities:
fieldwork to acquire and characterize natural alkaloids and collect ecological
data on the species, molecular evolution of ion channel resistance to alkaloids,
and neurophysiological effects of alkaloids on ion channels. The research will
provide opportunities for students from the University of Texas and Indiana
State University to jointly participate in international fieldwork, acquire new
skills in bioinformatics, molecular modeling, genomics, and neurophysiology, as
well as promote interactions between the two
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use Next-Generation DNA
sequencing of transcriptomes, targeted sequencing of hundreds of genes, and
bioinformatics methods to reconstruct evolutionary trees that will guide the
research program with an experimental framework for explaining the origin of
resistance, which has evolved multiple times in the poison frogs (family
Dendrobatidae). Sequencing will also be used to identify novel amino acid
replacements that may confer resistance to alkaloids. Computational modeling and
in vitro assays of mutated ion channels will determine if these novel
replacements provide resistance to natural and synthesized alkaloids. Fieldwork
will focus on acquiring genetic samples, skin alkaloids, and color photographs
from multiple populations of frogs, using natural history collection standards
data collection and voucher specimens preparation. The combination of approaches
will provide novel insights in the systematics of Dendrobatidae poison frogs,
and also the evolution of auto-resistance to toxic alkaloids within the group.