* 1556418
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating unifying principles of soil carbon-nitrogen coupling using a continental-scale grassland experimental network
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Kirsten Hofmockel, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,011,903.00

Human activities such as fertilizer use on crops, cultivation of soybean crops,
and fossil fuel burning are increasing the amount of nitrogen gas that is
circulating in the atmosphere and coming down in rain and snow in what is known
as nitrogen deposition. The full impacts of high amounts of nitrogen deposition
on ecosystems around the world are not well known. In particular, how nitrogen
deposition alters the amounts and forms of carbon in soils is very poorly
understood. Yet, achieving better understanding of this so-called coupling
between the nitrogen and carbon cycles is important for life on earth. Plants
and soils exchange large amounts of carbon dioxide with the atmosphere each year
and so small changes in the rate of that exchange could affect how fast carbon
dioxide in the air is rising. This project will integrate results from extensive
cross-site, coordinated field experiments with modeling to improve our
mechanistic understanding of the coupling of belowground carbon and nitrogen in
grassland ecosystems. This is a key knowledge gap for Earth system models used
to predict the biogeochemical consequences of human-caused global environmental
changes and to refine predictions of carbon cycle feedbacks to climate change.
This project will also connect researchers with education and outreach programs
of the Cedar Creek Long-Term Ecological Research project. These programs are
aimed at training K-12 students and teachers and increasing participation and
retention of women and members of other underrepresented groups in science, with
a special focus on mentoring undergraduate Native Americans in research. Project
investigators will also mentor graduate students and post-doctoral scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use a network of decade-long nutrient
addition experiments in North American grasslands, the Nutrient Network, to
study how enhanced nitrogen inputs influence soil microbial dynamics, soil
carbon cycling, and the release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Results
will be used to enhance the Microbial ENzyme Decomposition (MEND) model towards
determining how nitrogen inputs affect: (1) biochemical stabilization of soil
organic matter (SOM) by altering the quantity and quality of plant inputs to
soils, and soil microbial community structure, stoichiometry, and functional
potential; and (2) physicochemical stabilization of SOM by altering soil
aggregate formation and SOM-mineral interactions. Results of computer simulation
models of ecosystem carbon and nitrogen cycling will be made available to the
scientific community at large through the Accelerated Climate Model for Energy
program at the Department of Energy. All data generated from the proposed work
will also be made publically available through the Nutrient Network research
project and the Long-Term Ecological Research network.