* 1556006
* The Rice University Robert Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Richard Tapia, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,484,025.00

This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project seeks to provide activities for
the development of 16 school-based leaders in mathematics, who are deeply
grounded in sound content and research-based pedagogical, leadership, adult
education, and mathematics advocacy skills. The master teachers will participate
in coursework that highlights mathematics content and pedagogical techniques and
complementary Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID) Path Trainings on
classroom strategies that utilize writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization,
and reading (WICOR) and culturally relevant teaching. The master teachers will
have a variety of opportunities to take leadership roles such as performing
mathematics demonstrations, co-teaching courses, and acting as district
advocates in their high-needs schools. The project involves collaboration
between the Rice University School Mathematics Project, Tapia Center for
Excellence and Equity, and Glasscock School of Continuing Studies, AVID, and
educators from the Houston Independent School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project
will utilize Avid Path Trainings and complementary, content-rich graduate
courses to develop master teachers ability to prepare college-ready, STEM
students. The focus on WICOR and culturally relevant teaching are in response to
an emerging body of research that recommends that training for instructional
leaders integrate high-quality instructional methods in an equitable learning
environment. A novel aspect of the project is the introduction to adult
education skills that master teachers will receive, which they will then apply
as they mentor other teachers. This work is grounded in the theory of andragogy,
which has six principles that address adult learners' (1) need to know, (2)
self-concept, (3) prior experiences, (4) readiness to learn, (5) orientation to
learning, and (6) motivation to learn. Project evaluation will include
assessment of the master teachers' effectiveness through Teaching for Robust
Understanding of Mathematics classroom observation protocols, leadership through
a modified version of the Survey for AVID Teachers, and adult education skills
through the Andragogical Practices Inventory. The Diverse Disposition Index will
be use to assess their understanding of diversity and equity issues. The results
of the evaluation plan will be disseminated throughout the region through the
Texas Education Agency, Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, Charles A.
Dana Center at the University of Texas in Austin, Texas Regional Education
Service Centers, and the Harris County Department of Education.