* 1556768
* Phenological sensitivity to climate across space and time: harnessing the diversity of digital herbarium data to generate and to test novel predictions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Susan Mazer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 249,999.00

It is well known that plants alter their flowering times in response to local
climatic conditions, but the factors influencing the magnitude and direction of
their responses are not well understood. Moreover, not all species change their
seasonal flowering time in response to the same climate factors. Consequently,
as climate changes, some species may flower too early, resulting in exposure to
winter frosts, while others may flower too late or fail to shift their flowering
enough to reproduce successfully. This project will improve our understanding of
how the timing of flowering by individual species and groups of plant species
shift in response to future climatic conditions. This research is essential for
forecasting the future availability of floral resources for pollinators and
other animals that feed on nectar and pollen, as well as for assessing plant
risk of exposure to frost damage, herbivore activity, and other seasonal
stresses (e.g., summer drought). To date, however, no comprehensive, continental
study of the direction and magnitude of changes in flowering time in response to
changes in climate has been conducted. This project will create a single, large
database and make all data available online to the public. In addition, this
project will provide research training to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary evidence suggests that the magnitude
of phenological responsiveness (or sensitivity) to climate changes may be
conserved among closely related and functionally similar taxa. Consequently, it
may be possible to predict the phenology of species that have not been studied
through examination of closely related taxa that are well-documented. Hundreds
of thousands of electronic records archived in educational and research
institutions throughout the United States provide standardized information about
plant specimens collected by botanists across the U.S. over the past 200 years,
including the date and location where each specimen was collected and whether it
was flowering on the date of collection. This research integrates these
disparate records into a single database, and leverages them to evaluate the
factors influencing historical and contemporary flowering times across &gt;1000
well-sampled species. In turn, this information will be used to forecast shifts
in seasonal flowering under projected climate scenarios. Digital herbarium
records and recorded in situ observations will be used to evaluate the factors
influencing historical and contemporary flowering times across an unprecedented
diversity of angiosperms (&gt;1000 species, each represented by &gt;100
specimens; &gt;400 genera; 80 families). Predictive models will be generated to
enable researchers to forecast phenological changes of individual species given
specific climatic conditions.