* 1556612
* The Emotional Influence of Gruesome Photographs in the Courtroom
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Janice Nadler, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 323,889.00

Visual images depicting a criminal act can strongly influence judgments about
blame and punishment. In the past decade, the use of visual evidence and
arguments in courtrooms has exploded, but empirical research on the effects of
these tools on legal decision-making has just begun. Lawyers, judges, and juries
are faced with a barrage of images, often gruesome in nature. When determining
whether to exclude gruesome photographs, judges must decide whether the
prejudicial effect outweighs their probative value. This project addresses the
legally relevant question of how and why gruesome photographs increase guilt and
punishment judgments to better inform judges' admissibility decisions. More
specifically, this project examines how emotionally evocative images can pose a
danger of unfair prejudice by making jurors more conviction-prone--even when the
images do not provide additional probative information. This is achieved by
exploring the effect of gruesome photographs on mock jurors' physiological and
emotional response to the evidence, attention to other case evidence, and the
jury deliberation process. The research will also test the effectiveness of
several realistic and relatively simple legal safeguards that might mitigate the
prejudicial effects of gruesome photographs without sacrificing their probative
information (i.e., substituting black-and-white photographs, jury instructions,
deliberation). The implications will extend beyond courtrooms to inform recent
broader societal questions about whether the public should be exposed to graphic
images of harm to inform policy debates, such as images of school shootings,
police shootings, or torture of U.S. military
detainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team to conduct three experiments testing whether viewing
gruesome photographs increases negative emotion, which in turn biases jurors'
attention to other case evidence in a pro-prosecution direction, which
ultimately increases their confidence in a guilty verdict and greater
punitiveness. Jury-eligible adults will view evidence from a murder trial that
includes either no gruesome photographs, B&amp;W gruesome photographs, or color
gruesome photographs of the murder victim and then will make legal judgments
about the case. Participants' physiological emotional responses will be
monitored throughout the process. This project represents the first
investigation of gruesome images on legal decision making that incorporates
jury-level outcomes, physiological monitoring, visual attention to other
evidence, and the dynamics of the group deliberation process. Identifying
specific psychological mechanisms by which photographs influence judgments
(emotional responses, attention to other evidence, deliberation processes) will
inform legal doctrine by clarifying the circumstances under which these
photographs are likely to result in unfair prejudice.