* 1556110
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Non-Invasive Intracranial Pressure Monitoring Method
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Robert Hamilton, Neural Analytics
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2018
* USD 753,756.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to improve the quality and decrease the
high costs associated with treating patients who suffer severe traumatic brain
injuries. This project aims to develop an accurate, affordable (&lt;$100 per
use) and non-invasive device to monitor a patient's intracranial pressure
following head injury. Increased intracranial pressure can result in poor health
outcomes including long-term disability or death, if left untreated. However,
the only available method to monitor intracranial pressure is expensive
(~$10,000 per patient) and requires neurosurgery. The lack of a method to
accurately screen patients to determine who needs surgery results in
misdiagnoses and incorrect treatment in about 46% of patients among an estimated
50,000 patients in the US alone, and hundreds of thousands more globally.
Successful commercialization of product is expected to result in savings in the
range $250 million ever year to the US healthcare
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a medical device
to accurately display a patient's intracranial pressure non-invasively and for
use outside of the neurocritical care unit. The core technological approach of
the proposed work is the analysis of blood flow velocity waveforms using
advanced signal processing methods in a machine-learning framework. The machine-
learning framework allows experience-based learning utilizing prior, established
databases of waveforms that have been well-characterized. Three new machine-
learning paradigms that utilize the shape features of the blood flow velocity
waveforms will be utilized to progressively increase accuracy of intracranial
pressure estimation. The first will establish a basic estimate using shape
features of individual waveform pulses, considered independent of neighboring
pulses. Subsequently, clinically established features of the waveform will be
utilized to learn causal changes in the shape features resulting from changes in
intracranial pressure. Finally, the shape features in successive pulses will be
used as a sequence to machine-learn the intracranial pressure estimate.
Together, these will enable increased accuracy in estimation. All of the methods
proposed in this program are entirely novel. This approach allows for real time
monitoring at an affordable price point that is within current reimbursement
limits for ultrasonography procedures.