* 1556136
* Collaborative Research: Patagonian Fossil Floras, the Keys to the Origins, Biogeography, Biodiversity, and Survival of the Gondwanan Rainforest Biome
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Maria Gandolfo-Nixon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 03/31/2021
* USD 443,552.00

The fossil record of life on land through time predominantly comes from the
Northern Hemisphere. However, the outstandingly rich, relatively little-known
fossil beds of Patagonia, southern Argentina, provide an unrivaled opportunity
to learn whether life responded differently to mass extinction, plate tectonics,
and past climate change on the other side of the world. This project will
intensively sample and analyze fossil plants and animals from Patagonia through
about 20 million years, from just before the end-Cretaceous dinosaur extinction
(66 million years ago), through the early recovery period and the Eocene warming
interval. Through groundbreaking field discoveries and state-of-the-art lab
techniques, this research aims to transform understanding of the origins of the
Southern Hemispheres flora and environments, the role of Patagonia, and the
legacy of surviving living fossils now located in vulnerable rainforest areas as
far away as Southeast Asia. The work will generate the most complete terrestrial
record and curated fossil-plant collection for the Southern Hemisphere through a
critical interval of Earth history. It will produce a new, globally significant
reference point for studying mass extinction, recovery, and response to climate
change from a fossilized living laboratory, with direct importance for
conservation and ecosystem management today. In addition to scholarly
publications and meeting presentations, a large number of educational, training,
and outreach activities are planned. These will include exhibits, educational
resource development for public engagement with the fossil sites, and a
trilingual childrens book. The project will use field paleontology and
stratigraphy at a series of exceptional Patagonian fossil localities, dating
from the latest Cretaceous to middle Eocene, to elevate understanding of
Patagonia's uniquely informative fossil floras. Most of the fossil sites are
located in the La Colonia, Lefipan, Salamanca, Penas Coloradas, and Huitrera
formations of Chubut and neighboring provinces. The research will focus on five,
broadly related questions targeting significant gaps in knowledge. (1) Was
Patagonia a refuge from the end-Cretaceous mass extinction? (2) What are the
composition, diversity, and biogeographic affinities of the earliest Paleocene
floras and insect faunas? (3) Do the Eocene floras and faunas contain lineages
that now survive in South America, Asia, and Africa, as well as Australasia? (4)
Do the Eocene floras document the earliest phases of South American isolation by
showing a loss of Gondwanan taxa and an increase in New World taxa through time?
(5) How much geologic time does the prolific early Eocene site at Laguna del
Hunco represent, and what processes formed these unique deposits that preserved
one of the most diverse fossil biotas in the world?