* 1556753
* Collaborative Research: Volatile organic compounds released during litter decomposition and their relevance to soil ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2019
* USD 530,198.00

Walking through a forest, one can often smell the characteristic scents of
decomposing vegetation - fragrances from the many natural chemicals (volatile
organic compounds or VOCs) that are released as vegetation breaks down. These
compounds not only give decomposing leaves their characteristic odor, they are
also important to the chemistry of the atmosphere, and to underlying soils,
where they can influence soil fertility and alter the types of organisms
residing in soil. Hundreds of different VOCs can also be released by the
microbes that consume vegetation on the forest floor, and microbial decay of
leaves and branches from different plant species produces distinct VOCs during
decomposition, contributing to the different smells of a pine versus an oak
forest, for example. Scientists do not yet understand how the types and amounts
of these substances vary as plant matter decomposes. Researchers also need to
understand how the release of VOCs will be altered as forest composition shifts
seasonally with changes in the environment. This research will not only address
these knowledge gaps, it will also determine the importance of VOCs to
underlying soils; how they may promote the storage of carbon in forest soils,
and how they can influence soil fertility by altering nitrogen cycling and the
types of microorganisms found in soils. This project will be conducted by a team
of researchers both at the University of Colorado and at Virginia Tech where the
project will train undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge research.
In addition, researchers at these universities will use the research results to
introduce high school students to key concepts and tools in the study of soils
and their roles in sustaining ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All decomposing
plant litter emits VOCs, and the total amount of carbon (C) released as VOCs can
be surprisingly high, with some litters emitting VOCs at rates approaching that
of C emissions as carbon dioxide. The proposed research will use a series of
field and laboratory-based studies to determine 1) how the amounts and types of
VOCs emitted vary as litter decomposition progresses, 2) the sensitivity of
these emissions to changes in moisture and temperature regimes, 3) the degree to
which the VOCs produced during litter decomposition represent a source of
organic C to underlying soils, and 4) how these VOCs impact microbial
communities and key nitrogen cycling processes in soil. Together, the proposed
work will improve model representations of VOC fluxes from terrestrial
ecosystems, an important objective given that some of these litter-derived VOCs
can promote the formation of ozone and secondary organic aerosols in the
atmosphere. In addition, this research will explore an understudied mechanism by
which leaf litter can influence the biotic and abiotic characteristics of
underlying soils. Ultimately this research could lead to the development of
novel strategies to manage soil by identifying specific VOCs that could reduce
soil pathogen loads or alter the rates of specific microbial processes that are
critical to the maintenance of soil fertility.