* 1556983
* Talented Teachers in Training for Texas Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Chrissy Cross, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,049,936.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program, the project, Talented Teachers in Training for Texas (T4)
Phase II, will continue to address the extreme need for highly-qualified
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teachers by recruiting,
educating, and equipping talented undergraduate STEM majors. In T4 Phase II,
scholarships will be awarded to 20 undergraduate STEM majors who are seeking to
earn their teaching certifications and who commit to teaching in high-needs
school districts for at least four years. Building on the successful elements of
Phase I, these new cohorts of scholars will participate in intensive academic
mentoring during their scholarship years, three years of classroom induction and
mentoring, and opportunities to attend STEM teaching conferences in an effort to
build a collaborative network of science and mathematics teachers. Two new
courses at SFA will be designed specifically to provide authentic explorations
into teaching, including field experiences, supervised by Master Teachers.
Additionally, the T4 Phase II leadership team will work in partnership with
representatives from 11 community colleges in Texas to raise awareness of STEM
teaching as a career option before students transfer to a university. Phase I
initiated a Master Teacher Job Shadow for freshmen/sophomore STEM majors,
providing an opportunity for undergraduate STEM majors to spend an entire week
with a Master Teacher for a realistic look into the profession. Phase II will
provide an opportunity to reach into its community college partners' STEM major
populations to identify additional shadowers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through T4
Phase II, project researchers will conduct longitudinal investigations into (1)
How early teaching engagement and short-term mentoring activities affect STEM
majors' persistence and career choice; (2) What factors affect Scholars'
persistence to degree and persistence to undergraduate STEM teaching
certification; and (3) How inclusion into the T4 mentoring community impacts the
Scholars in the areas of teaching efficacy, their students' learning, and their
growth as teacher leaders. Phase II will sustain paired longitudinal comparison
groups developed in Phase I and generate new comparison groups for the new
Scholars. T4 Phase II will expand opportunities to study the effect of the
cohort model on preservice teachers as well as the impact of including Master
Teacher mentors in their preparation. Better understanding the linkage between
supportive academic community and the retention of classroom teachers is vital
to improving teacher retention rates nationwide.