* 1556031
* SBIR Phase II:  Reducing size and cost of optical devices with nanomanufacturing - a novel use of disk drive technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Longfei Ye, MagAssemble, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2018
* USD 733,870.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in advanced manufacturing. This project will
develop a low cost, small-footprint high-resolution nanomanufacturing platform
for building optical devices that are traditionally manufactured using cleanroom
microlithography. Compared with modern cleanroom approaches that require
significantly more complicated and expensive facilities, this platform holds
strong promise to build visible-to-infrared wavelength optical components that
are both smaller and lower cost, in order to serve the fiber-optic sensor,
telecommunications, and lens markets. If this platform can deliver optics
components that meet specifications, demand could reach 8-figures for a single
customer, thus transforming optics manufacturing across the entire spectrum of
markets that use photonics: biomedical, energy, military, and consumer. If it
meets the needs of the photonics sector, this platform could penetrate a much
broader commercial marketplace such as information technology, nanoelectronics
and personalized low-cost consumer devices. The scientific and technological
understanding created by developing this platform could enable businesses to
leverage low-cost US-based nanomanufacturing to address markets for advanced
materials and components around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will commercialize an innovative nanomanufacturing platform for
producing diffractive optical elements (DOEs) with potential to reduce component
cost and size. Recently fiber-optic communications has expanded beyond its
traditional function of long haul or backbone communications. Reducing the size,
cost and complexity of optical components could allow DOEs to further expand
their reach. Ideally the functionality of these components could be built right
onto the end of an optical fiber. The proposed technology could allow true
fiber-to-fiber components at a cost equal to or less than currently available
optical components. It could further allow for sensing capabilities of "lab on a
fiber" with the lab incorporated onto the end-face of a fiber. The project will
focus on scaling the nanomanufacturing capability demonstrated during Phase I
for end product prototype demonstrations that incorporate the DOEs.