* 1556772
* LTREB: Following the reorganization and resynchronization of biogeochemical cycles after an unprecedented tundra fire
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Adrian Rocha, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2023
* USD 440,572.00

The arctic tundra north of the tree line in Alaska is responding to the most
rapid rates of warming on the globe. The responses include increased plant
growth, thaw of the underlying permafrost, loss of soil carbon through increased
microbial activity, and increased frequency and severity of wildfires.
Historically, low temperatures have kept tundra fires as relatively infrequent
events. But warming is anticipated to impact the fire regime by doubling fire
size and frequency in the arctic by the year 2100. Fires impact ecosystem
services provided by the tundra for decades to centuries by burning the
vegetation and the layer of dead organic matter on top of the soil. As
vegetation rapidly recolonizes the landscape after a fire through a process
known as succession, its composition changes, as do the cycles of carbon and
associated nutrients, like nitrogen and phosphorus. In fact, fires remove a
large portion of nutrients needed to fuel the regrowth and recovery of
vegetation, while at the same time, increase soil temperatures because the
insulating organic layer has also been removed. Warmer soils may increase soil
nutrient availability and lead a shift from grasses to shrubs over time. But it
is unclear whether these changes are large enough to offset the initial carbon
and nutrient losses during the fires, which is the main question this project
seeks to answer. Besides the scientific results, an online documentary series
will be produced that explains the effects of climate change and fire on arctic
ecosystems. Formal outreach programs developed in prior projects that
specifically address indigenous and minority populations living on the North
Slope in Alaska and in Indiana will also be enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a multi-decadal record and mathematical model of post-fire
carbon and nutrient cycling across three sites along a disturbance severity
gradient within the largest recorded arctic tundra fire, the Anaktuvuk River
fire from 2007. An existing eddy covariance system will be used to continue
measurements of carbon and energy fluxes begun in 2008, along with soil
chambers. A quantitative soil and biomass harvest was conducted in 2011 across a
burn severity gradient. Post-fire trajectories from grass to shrub-dominated
tundra should create a positive climatic feedback and produce a warming effect
through decreased albedo. This project will be used to create a multi-decadal
record of carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus fluxes and stocks to parameterize,
validate, and test the Multiple Element Limitation (MEL) model as applied to the
biogeochemistry of arctic tundra.