* 1556119
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-cost Detection and Enrichment of Nucleic Acids by Interfacing with Commercially Available Cell Sorters
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Adam Sciambi, Mission Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 748,729.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to enable affordable detection and enrichment of
rare DNA or RNA molecules from a large background population. Currently, such
detection is performed on expensive, dedicated instruments that have low
sensitivity and are not able to enrich. The strategy is to encapsulate the
fluorescently-identified target molecules in thin oil shells so that they mimic
cells, and then process them on sensitive and high-throughput cell-sorting
instruments that are commonly available. By offloading the detection and
enrichment to such machines, all that is required by researchers is a simple
tool that encapsulates the molecules in thin oil shells. Applications made
possible by high sensitivity and enrichment are numerous, from rare pathogen or
cell detection to target capture of uncommon mutant sequences with the goal of
downstream sequencing. Between the reduced cost and expansion of capabilities,
this approach is likely to become a widely adopted
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop a
deployable instrument that allows high-throughput, low-cost quantitation of
DNA/RNA molecules in a sample by interfacing with existing flow cytometry
instruments. The initial objective is to quickly engineer all the functionality
desired in that final instrument into a rough alpha version. Its features will
include reliable droplet generation from iteratively optimized hard-plastic
microfluidic chips, and automation via an advanced fluid handling system with
precise feedback control. The second objective is to build the actual beta
version for customer trials. The beta version will replace most of the off-the-
shelf parts with streamlined, custom engineering and focus on reducing size and
cost while still improving function through more iterative chip optimization.
The final objective is to use the beta instrument to optimize the protocols and
reagents for several applications using customer samples and benchmarking. At
the conclusion of the project, the goal is to have instruments at customer sites
generating data.