* 1556279
* Collaborative Research: The evolution of bioluminescence and light detection in deep-sea shrimp (Oplophoridae and Sergestidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tamara Frank, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Cannatella
* 08/31/2019
* USD 215,564.00

Bioluminescence, which is rare on land, is extremely common in the deep sea,
being found in 80% of the animals living between 200 and 1000 meters depth.
These animals rely on bioluminescence for communication, feeding, and/or
defense; so, the generation and detection of light is essential to their
survival. Our present knowledge of this phenomenon has been limited due to the
difficulty in collecting live deep-sea animals, and the lack of proper
techniques needed to study this complex system. However, new genomic techniques
are now available, and a team with extensive experience in deep-sea biology,
vision, and genomics has been assembled to lead this project. This project will
study three questions 1) What are the evolutionary patterns of different types
of bioluminescence in deep-sea shrimp? 2) How are deep-sea organisms' eyes
adapted to detect bioluminescence? 3) Can bioluminescent organs (called
photophores) detect light in addition to emitting light? Findings from this
study will provide valuable insight into a complex system vital to
communication, defense, camouflage, and species recognition. This study will
bring contributions to the fields of deep sea and evolutionary biology, and
immediately improve our understanding of bioluminescence and light detection in
the marine environment. In addition to scientific advancement, this project will
reach kindergarten through college aged students through the development and
dissemination of educational tools, a series of molecular and organismal-based
workshops, museum exhibits, public seminars, and biodiversity initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines phylogenomic, physiological, and
molecular studies to test several hypotheses addressing the evolution of
bioluminescence and light detection in a remarkable family of deep-sea shrimp.
All shrimp within the family Oplophoridae use a luminescent secretion discharged
from the mouth to deter predators, while only some possess a second mechanism of
bioluminescence in the form of photophores. Photophores are light-emitting
organs found across the body that are thought to function in counterillumination
and mate attraction. These different types of bioluminescence emit light at
slightly different wavelengths and spectral bandwidths. Past studies have shown
shrimp with both the secretion and photophores possess unique visual systems to
distinguish between these different bioluminescence types. However, an in-depth
characterization, which combines genomic, molecular, and physiological methods,
has never been applied to investigate this system. In addition, how animals with
photophores can so precisely match the downwelling irradiance has remained a
long-standing mystery. New preliminary evidence suggests that the photophores
contain photopigment proteins (opsins) and other phototransduction genes that
allow for light detection. This is the first indication that autogenic light
organs may also have light detection capabilities. This raises the exciting
possibility that some shrimp can "see" from structures other than their eyes and
might provide a mechanism for their unique counterillumination abilities. The
first objective is to use phylogenomic methods to build a robust phylogeny to
trace the evolutionary origins of the two bioluminescence modes (secretion and
photophore) within oplophorid shrimp. Secondly, this project will characterize
the visual systems of deep-sea shrimp to better understand how shrimp
distinguish between different wavelengths of emitted bioluminescence. Lastly,
integrative methods will be used to examine photosensitivity in several non-
bacterial (autogenic) light organs - the photophore and organs of Pesta (light
organ of Sergestidae).