* 1556415
* Applications of Quantum Probability Theory to Human Causal Reasoning
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Trueblood, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2017
* USD 177,811.00

Understanding how people reason about causes and effects is a central topic in
cognitive science and decision-making. In the past, much of the research on
human causal reasoning has focused upon learning the relationship between a
single cause and effect. However, most real world causal structures are more
complex. For example, there can be multiple causes for a single effect where the
causes themselves interact. When faced with complex problems such as this, how
do people make causal judgments? There is evidence that people's judgments about
complex causal systems often deviate from the normative rules of classic
probability theory. This project will explore the application of quantum
probability to human causal reasoning. Quantum probability theory is the
noncommutative analog of classical probability theory. In particular, quantum
probability can account for order effects, which are violations of the
commutative rule of classic probability theory. Order effects occur in causal
reasoning when the judged likelihood of an effect depends on the order in which
the causes are processed. Previous work has demonstrated that the quantum
probability approach can account for many paradoxical findings in judgment and
decision research. The current project will further develop the quantum
probability account by applying it to the area of causal
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad and long term goals of this research
program are (1) to increase the understanding of human judgments about complex
causal systems and (2) to provide a new foundation for constructing models of
human causal reasoning from the principles of quantum probability theory. Human
causal reasoning is an important topic in numerous fields including
developmental psychology, decision-making, and learning, thus the proposed
research has the potential to advance knowledge across a range of disciplines.
The proposed research also has the potential to benefit society. Many
researchers are currently investigating the use of Bayesian causal networks to
help decision-makers, such as intelligence analysts, process large amounts of
data. While Bayesian decision tools have great potential, research is needed to
understand and improve the causal judgments of analysts who interact with these
tools. This research program addresses this topic through experiments designed
to investigate complex causal reasoning and to improve causal judgments through
learning. The proposed research also adds to the growing field of quantum
cognition aimed at developing quantum probabilistic-dynamic systems for social
and behavioral sciences.