* 1556057
* RUI: Cell Wall Associated Kinases As Pectin Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Bruce Kohorn, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 03/31/2023
* USD 617,805.00

All complex organisms are composed of cells that must bind to and communicate
with each other, and all cells are surrounded by an extra-cellular matrix that
provides some of these abilities. In plants, the extracellular matrix is termed
the cell wall, and is partially composed of the carbohydrates cellulose and
pectin. Several cell surface proteins act as sensors or receptors for the state
of the cell wall, monitoring its integrity and composition. The Wall Associated
Kinases (WAKs) are cell surface receptors that bind to the pectin in the cell
wall, and regulate cell enlargement. WAKs are also activated by fragmented
pectins generated by pathogens, mechanical stress and perhaps by normal
developmental changes. The experiments that will be conducted during this
project will begin to help in understanding the mechanism by which WAKs can
distinguish and respond to different types of pectin in the cell wall, and
thereby how plants sense the state of their cell wall, essential for their
growth and development. This work will be carried out at a small liberal arts
college where the focus is on undergraduate education and research. Students
receive a thorough training in experimental science through work in this
project, and a significant portion go on to graduate and professional school.
The PI also incorporates many aspects of plant cell biology and genetics from
his lab into the core cell biology and genetics lab course at the scientist's
institution, and is involved in courses for underprepared students in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cell walls of angiosperms are composed of a
complex arrangement of cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin. The pectins can be
selectively and locally modified to be cross-linked into a structural network
that can have dramatic effects on cell enlargement. Localized digestion by plant
secreted polygalacturonases can also modify the pectin network by loosening the
cell wall to permit directional expansion of cells. Numerous pathogens and
mechanical disruptions fragment pectin, often leading to a plant stress
response. This project involves the Wall Associated Kinases (WAKs) that bind to
both long polymers of cross-linked pectin and to pathogen and damage induced
pectin fragments, or oligo-galacturonides (OGs). WAKs bound to native polymers
are required for normal cell expansion, but bind newly generated OGs with higher
affinity, and subsequently activate a distinct stress response pathway. This
project will characterize receptor like kinases, cytoplasmic kinases, and
potential scaffolding proteins that are phosphorylated upon OG treatment of
Arabidopsis. The role of each of the 5 individual WAK isoforms, clustered in one
30 kb locus in Arabidopsis will be genetically dissected using a new CRISPR/Cas9
based WAK deletion mutant. The puzzle is how one receptor type can distinguish
and respond in different ways to different types of pectin, during development
and the response to environmental disturbance. The goal is to understand if this
is achieved through different WAKs each binding different pectins, and in
combination with different co-receptors and ligands to activate alternate
pathways.