* 1556651
* RUI Collaborative Research: Niche evolution, ecological limits, and the macroecology of land plant biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Andrew Kerkhoff, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 279,330.00

The study of the long-term evolution of plant species diversity is important to
understanding current losses or maintenance of diversity as habitats shift and
become fragmented. This project will examine how diversity has evolved in the
western hemisphere using a database of over 100,000 plant species. Using new
approaches in informatics applied to genetic, geographical and environmental
data, the project will investigate the possible causes of shifts in species
diversity at extensive geographic scales by considering evolutionary
diversification, dispersal, adaptation, and coexistence. Additionally, the
project will determine if hard limits on species diversity exist and the extent
to which these are determined by environmental history. This is a "Big Data"
project that will simultaneously develop tools in informatics and train students
on the use of these statistical tools. The tools will be made widely available,
and training will build on the collaboration among those at a liberal arts
college, a comprehensive master's institution, and a research
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will contribute to a
predictive science of biodiversity based on underlying ecological and
evolutionary processes. The Botanical Information and Ecology Network will be
leveraged to test explanations for assembly of diverse biomes over evolutionary
time by taking advantage of recent advances in biodiversity informatics,
phylogenetic analysis, and the modeling of multivariate niche hypervolumes. How
the evolutionary contingencies of adaptation, diversification, and dispersal
interact with possible ecological limits on the niche space of different
environments will be investigated. The taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic
diversity of whole biomes and clades will be quantified in order to model niche
evolution and biome shifts at extensive geographic and temporal scales. Whether
evolutionary biome shifts are systematically associated with changes in
functional traits or niche hypervolumes will be examined. Whether or not the
functional niche space of biomes becomes saturated over evolutionary time, and
if saturation reflects ecological limits on diversification through physiology,
will be tested. The research will contribute novel answers to some of the most
persistent questions in ecology, evolution, and biogeography, as well as
innovative new tools in ecoinformatics.