* 1556359
* IDBR:  TYPE A: Auto-CATM Development:  An Instrument for Dynamical Fingerprinting
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Andrea Markelz, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2020
* USD 395,534.00

An award is made to the State University of New York at Buffalo to develop an
instrument to measure the internal vibrations of proteins. Proteins are large
molecules with thousands of atoms and perform most cellular functions. Proteins
consist of long chains of amino acids, and these chains fold into specific
structures. In general, proteins must alter their shape in order to perform
their biological function. For example, Hemoglobin, the protein that transports
oxygen, changes shape in order for oxygen to bind. The internal vibrations of
the protein structure that enable this change in shape are critical for
understanding protein function. Recently a method has been devised to measure
protein internal vibrations, called crystal anisotropic terahertz microscopy
(CATM). The instrumentation and protocol development in this project makes CATM
accessible to non-specialists, and enables broad application of the technique.
The development of this instrument leads to the interdisciplinary education of
two graduate students and two undergraduates. Integrated with the instrument
development are educational and outreach activities that include an
undergraduate seminar course and a week-long summer program for 7-12th grade
inner city students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to produce a compact turn-key spectroscopic system for the
routine characterization of intramolecular vibrations of proteins. The technique
called crystal anisotropic terahertz (THz) spectroscopy (CATM) uniquely measures
these motions. Auto-CATM provides non-experts with the ability to quickly and
easily categorize and classify biomacromolecules. The mini-system from Zomega
Terahertz Corp. is the starting platform for the final instrument. A proof-of-
concept database, and molecular modeling and data visualization software toolbox
facilitate the development this new instrument. This instrument provides
insights into how intramolecular vibrations are impacted by frequently modified
parameters such as binding state and temperature. The technology developed for
Auto-CATM also enable new rapid measurements for both bulk and micron scale
materials and thus impact solid state physics and materials science.