* 1556049
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Resolution Shop Floor Video-Rate Surface Metrology System
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Erik Novak, 4 D Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,348,048.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
produce a robust, hand-held, video-rate three-dimensional surface metrology
system with vertical and lateral resolution of several micrometers, in order to
bridge a critical existing metrology gap for precision-machined surfaces. Many
modern manufactured parts, such as turbine blades, drive shafts, orthopedics,
and various additive manufactured components require in-situ metrology with high
resolution for accurate characterization during manufacturing and/or maintenance
operations. Current high-resolution surface measurement systems are slow,
vibration-sensitive and laboratory-based and thus are impractical for everyday
use by manufacturing technicians. Meanwhile, shop-floor inspection is often only
visual, and thus qualitative rather than quantitative, leading both to
rejections of acceptable components as well as potential acceptance of failing
ones. The absence of high-precision, in-situ metrology has hindered
manufacturers from applying real-time data analysis and closed-loop process
controls that can improve yields and reduce manufacturing costs. This research
program will yield a hand-held, easy-to-use, robust, and quantitative shop-floor
measurement system, allowing manufacturers to improve lifetimes, performance,
and yield as they rapidly assess the features under test and feed the results
back to improve process control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During Phase I, a
breadboard system was designed and implemented using a polarization-based fringe
projection method and micropolarizer phase-mask technology to achieve vibration
insensitive measurement in a compact package. This Phase II program leverages
that research to design a video-rate, compact, robust and portable system for
handheld surface measurements in shop-floor environments. This will first
involve improvements to measurement resolution with an improved optical design
and new self-calibrating measurement modes; new optical elements will lower
noise artifacts caused by imperfections in the earlier design and to reduce
system size. Once performance of the new design is verified, an ergonomic,
compact, robust, wireless housing for the instrument must be created to enable
shop-floor use; the system must handle drops of over one meter onto concrete,
have useful battery life for extended field operations, be light enough to not
fatigue users and have intuitive controls and feedback. A final, critically
important development effort will create automated software routines for
measurement, analysis, and system diagnostics to enable adoption by unskilled
personnel in manufacturing environments. Lastly, extensive applications testing
in the field will allow optimization of the system to handle a wide range of
potential use cases and environments.