* 1556480
* REU Site: San Diego State University Mathematics Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Vadim Ponomarenko, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2020
* USD 326,654.00

This summer program brings talented undergraduate students together, from all
over the country, to engage in mathematics research for eight weeks. Their work
frequently leads to scientific progress in the form of published scholarly
papers. It also leads to students jump-starting successful careers in the
mathematical sciences. Additionally, by including a diverse group of students,
this program increases the participation of historically underrepresented groups
in mathematics.

This REU site conducts a nationwide recruitment effort to target primarily
talented undergraduates with limited opportunity for research at their home
institutions. They are brought for 8 summer weeks to SDSU's campus, where they
are immersed in an mathematically intensive environment with graduate students
and faculty. In this setting, they are trained in the entire experience of being
a research mathematician. They read background papers, write code to formulate
conjectures, prove theorems, write papers in LATEX, collaborate with peers, and
present their results in seminars and at conferences. Research projects will
come from various areas of the mathematical sciences, including monoid theory,
mathematical biology, and modeling of water waves. Students will also learn
about graduate school and mathematical careers as a whole.