* 1556645
* Mutational variance of the transcriptome and the origins of phenotypic plasticity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2024
* Jeffry Dudycha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,064,000.00

This research seeks to determine how often genetic mutations occur, whether they
produce a change in how gene activity levels respond to the environment, and
whether those altered responses have effects on observable traits. This study
will provide insight into how genetic differences among organisms arise, the
basis for all evolutionary change and the diversity of life. Differences among
organisms are driven, in part, by differences in their genes and differences in
the rate at which genetic information is used for the building of proteins and
other cell structures, the activity of those genes. Genetic differences arise
due to errors made when copying DNA, the molecule in which genetic information
is stored. If these errors happen during cell divisions that lead to an
individual's offspring, the differences will be inherited by all future
generations. A parallel educational activity will develop a computer-based
application that simulates copying errors in the context of music. When students
learn genetics, they often begin with several misconceptions about mutations.
However, realistic experiments illustrating properties of mutations are
difficult to execute in class settings. Therefore, the project includes
development of "Mutational Music", an application for mobile devices that uses
computer-based music to simulate spontaneous mutations, along with an
educational program appropriate for use in introductory genetics
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spontaneous mutations are the ultimate source
of genetic variation; understanding their characteristics is therefore a
fundamental goal of biologists. Existing work has quantified the rate and
effects of spontaneous mutations, usually focusing on the molecular spectrum of
mutations or on fitness effects. These foci are widely separated, and the
processes that link molecular mutations to fitness effects have received less
attention. This project is aimed at bridging the gap between fitness and the
molecular spectrum of mutations, focusing on mutational changes in the
transcriptome and in phenotypic plasticity of key life history traits. The
research involves a mutation accumulation experiment in the model crustacean
Daphnia pulex, coupled with analyses of gene expression and life history traits
made in distinct resource environments. The work will generate estimates of the
mutational variance and heritability of expression for each gene, including the
ability to identify allele-specificity and splice variant-specificity. In
addition, the work will quantify the distribution of effects spontaneous
mutations have on life history traits and their plasticity. The components will
be joined to investigate the potential that expression mutations contribute to
the origin of phenotypic plasticity.