* 1556719
* SG: Preference by birds for rare species of fruits and its role in maintaining diversity in plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Tomas Carlo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to better understand the process of fruit-selection in birds,
and in turn, how fruit-selection affects the diversity and composition of plant
communities. The vast majority of woody plant species - especially in the most
diverse forests - depend on fruit-eating birds to disperse their seeds, but
information on the factors governing fruit choice and seed dispersal at a
community level is lacking. This project will address this shortcoming through
observations and experiments across the Americas. The overarching goal of the
research is to test the hypothesis that fruit-eating birds of different sizes
and classes increase dispersal rates for plant species that are proportionally
rare in the environment. Achieving a better understanding of seed dispersal by
birds is critically important to advancing ecology, since plant populations
depend on seed dispersal to regenerate, coexist, colonize new areas, shift
geographic ranges, and cope with climatic and other environmental changes.
Beyond advancing basic science, the knowledge generated by this research will
have positive implications for forestry, natural resource management,
restoration ecology, and conservation. The activities will result in the
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and broaden the education and
participation of minorities in the sciences while fostering international
collaboration and exchanges between researchers and students from the USA, Peru,
and Argentina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing theory and empirical work suggest
that equalizing and stabilizing mechanisms involving negative density-dependence
(NDD) play key roles in the maintenance of species diversity by conferring
advantages to species that are relatively rare in communities. This project will
study a little known class of NDD process that, if proven to be of widespread
occurrence, can be important for diversity maintenance and the structuring of
plant-frugivore mutualistic communities: antiapostatic frugivory and seed
dispersal. Antiapostatic frugivory would result in disproportionately high seed
dispersal when species' fruits are relatively rare in communities of plants that
share frugivorous seed dispersal agents such as birds. To examine the generality
of antiapostatic frugivory, this research will conduct field studies in four
continental localities representing four distinct plant-frugivore communities.
These communities provide fully independent biotic and abiotic elements in which
to test occurrence and magnitude of antiapostatic frugivory as they are located
across a latitudinal gradient: from eastern North America (Pennsylvania) to
southern South America (Patagonia), including two Peruvian forest sites (lowland
Amazonian rainforest at Madre de Dios, and an Andean cloud forest at Abra
Patricia). In addition to observations of fruit consumption and plant
demography, controlled fruit-selection experiments using natural and artificial
fruit displays will be conducted.