* 1556246
* LTREB Renewal: Long-Term Effects of a Species Invasion on an Aquatic Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Stuart Findlay, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Human activities have moved thousands of species around the world, allowing them
to establish populations in new places. These non-native species have large
effects on biodiversity and ecosystems, cause enormous economic damage, and are
one of the most important and least controlled of human impacts on the world's
ecosystems. Scientists know that these effects can change through time, but the
amount, timing, and nature of these changes are poorly known. This project will
continue a long-term study of the changing impacts of the zebra mussel on the
Hudson River ecosystem, an ecologically and economically important invasive
species that first appeared in the Hudson River in 1991. This study will improve
understanding of one of the world's most problematic invaders in aquatic
ecosystems, and provide one of very few detailed studies of the long-term
effects on a non-native species. The results of this research will continue to
be used by government agencies that manage the Hudson River, and should inform
management of non-native species in general. Findings will be disseminated by
posting research data on open websites, continuing highly successful educational
programs to provide data, lesson materials, and training to middle- and high-
school teachers and students in the Hudson Valley and New York City school
systems, and continuing an active program of public outreach.

The researchers will continue measuring population parameters (density,
mortality rates and size structure) and filtration rates of zebra mussels,
phytoplankton biomass, zooplankton density and species composition, bacteria
production, water quality parameters (transparency and nutrient concentrations)
and particulate and dissolved Carbon to answer the following questions: (1) How
will the long-term changes in the zebra mussel population and its effects
continue to develop? (2) Can these changes be explained by relationships between
the size and characteristics of the zebra mussel population and the Hudson River
ecosystem? (3) How does zebra mussel grazing interact with climate to shape
properties of the Hudson River ecosystem? The researchers will use time series
and regression models to explore zebra mussel population dynamics and the
relationship between zebra mussel filtration rates and various components of the
river food web. In addition they will analyze three interactions between zebra
mussel invasion and climate: 1) effects of freshwater flow on zebra mussel
grazing, 2) effects of water temperature and mussel grazing on phytoplankton
biomass and 3) correlations between warm temperature and inter-annual variation
in zebra mussel mortality. Five additional years of data will allow the
researchers to document the remarkable changes that are now occurring in the
Hudson River, and substantially increase the power of statistical models to
describe these events.