* 1556914
* Collaborative Research: Consequences of Climate-Induced Range Shifts on Multiple Ecosystem Functions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2022
* Brad Taylor, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2022
* USD 356,821.00

The healthy functioning of natural ecosystems depends on the interactive roles
of the various species that coexist in them. Different but closely related
species replace each other along environmental gradients (e.g., from dry to
wet). In some cases the new species function similarly, but in others species
replacements have major impacts on the ecosystem and the goods and services
provided to humans. Around the planet, species distributions are shifting in
response to a changing climate, yet little is known about how the shifts will
affect ecosystems. One continuous study over the past 25 years of the animals
that live in high elevation ponds in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado shows that
species are shifting to higher elevations. And at the same elevation animals are
moving to different types of ponds (permanent vs. temporary) as the water regime
varies. The goal of this new project is to determine how such shifts impact
ecosystem function. Training of undergraduate students is a key component of the
project and undergraduates will be involved with all aspects of the research. A
cross-institutional research experiment will be developed for them, where they
can work together to study the impacts of species range shifts from North
Carolina to Maine. One graduate student and a postdoctoral associate will also
be trained. Finally, the team will continue public outreach at each home
institution, as well as at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Colorado
where most of the research will be conducted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will test how range shifts along environmental gradients in the dominant group
of detritivores (caddisfly larvae) will affect multiple ecosystem processes,
including the transfer of detrital energy to detritivore secondary production,
release of detritus-bound nutrients for algal uptake, bottom-up effects of algae
on herbivores, and ecosystem metabolism. Researchers will use models,
experiments, and comparative data from whole ponds to investigate the degree to
which 1) species replacements along permanence and elevational gradients are
functional replacements in terms of detritus processing rates and cascading
effects on brown (detrital) and green (algal) trophic paths, 2) the interactive
effects of species shifts across the permanence gradient within an elevation and
those associated with range shifts across elevations, and 3) how changes in
ecosystem processes with community rearrangements scale up to natural ponds.
Impacts will be assessed on three components: 1) the amounts of nutrients and
energy from dead plant parts that are eaten by animals (detritivory), 2) how
much of the consumption is released back into the environment and stimulates the
growth of algae, which can then also be eaten, and 3) how new combinations of
species affect the overall productivity of the ponds.