* 1556379
* Collaborative Research: Extending phylogenetic comparative methods for evaluating within-species trends in a macroevolutionary context
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Dean Adams, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2020
* USD 315,000.00

How do evolutionary changes within species translate into broad patterns across
a group of related species? This question is at the heart of evolutionary
ecology, but has been very difficult to answer. A major problem is that current
analytical approaches, known as phylogenetic comparative methods, require that a
single value be used to represent a trait for an entire species. As a result,
valuable information on differences among individuals within a species can't be
used. This limits the types of questions that these comparative methods can
address. The main goal of this project is to develop new analytical software
that accounts for trait variation within species, which will result in a much
more powerful computational tool. The newly developed software will be tested
using experimental data from salamanders and fish. This award will have multiple
broader impacts. This new tool will let a whole new set of hypotheses be tested
and will be widely used by scientists doing evolutionary ecology research.
Undergraduate students will receive hands-on training in mathematical modeling
and software development. Educational outreach activities include a research-
education exchange between a regional undergraduate university and a large
research university. National and international teaching workshops will help
train the next generation of students and scientists from around the world.

Analyses of phenotypic data tend to remain distinctly different enterprises
between microevolutionary and macroevolutionary studies. Consequently, we still
do not know how microevolutionary trends from ecological selection associate to
macroevolutionary trends across phylogenies. Phylogenetic comparative methods
(PCMs) measure the amount of phylogenetic signal in a set of data or account for
the phylogenetic relatedness among observations when evaluating ecological
variation, but currently work only with single values for species. Thus, large
amounts of within-species data are disregarded when using PCMs, which limits
their inferential capability. This project will develop an analytical solution
to this problem, and provide a framework for extending PCMs to large data sets
comprising microevolutionary data. The methods developed will allow scientists
to evaluate the consistency of small-scale and large scale evolutionary
relationships in a comparative framework. This project will incorporate both
theoretical and empirical components. Statistical research will evaluate the
statistical power and inferential error rates of "expanded-PCM" to varied
analytical designs, phenotypic variables, tree topologies, and data balance.
These methods will be applied empirically to two vertebrate systems to study the
phylogenetic relatedness of intra-species morphological variation, as it is
associated with intra- and interspecific ecological variation. Several
educational outreach activities will also be conducted, including: a research-
in-education exchange between a primarily undergraduate university and large
research university, and teaching workshops in quantitative methods to train the
next generation of students and scientists from around the world.