* 1556171
* A Novel Mechanism Regulating Inflorescence Development in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Zachary Lippman, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 11/30/2019
* USD 630,660.00

In both nature and agriculture plant productivity depends on flowers, which are
the foundation for fruits and seeds. Depending on the plant, the number of
flowers that form on reproductive branches, known as inflorescences, can vary
substantially. Discovering the genes responsible for this species-specific
diversity, and understanding how these genes work together to control flower
production, is a major focus in plant biology with direct relevance for crop
improvement. In tomato and its close relatives in the nightshade (Solanaceae)
family, such as eggplant, pepper, and potato, flower production on each
inflorescence varies dramatically, from a solitary flower on a single branch, as
in pepper, to dozens of flowers on many branches, as in several wild tomatoes.
This project will take advantage of variation in flower production found in
tomato to study a group of genes that are required for generating multi-flowered
inflorescences, and thus the familiar "tomatoes-on-the-vine" architecture
characteristic of all tomato varieties. By mutating these genes using new gene-
editing technology, it will be possible to dissect how the proteins encoded by
these genes control precisely when, where, and how many flowers and fruits are
produced on each tomato plant. Results from this project should reveal new
flower-production genes and their modes of action, which can then be targeted
for modification using both classical and modern genetic tools to improve yields
in tomato and many related crops. Additionally, an outreach program at an inner-
city middle school will educate young students on the process of genetic
engineering to help shed popular misconceptions about genetically modified food.

All above ground plant growth originates from shoot meristems, small populations
of stem cells that give rise to vast architectural diversity, particularly in
inflorescences. At the heart of this diversity lies a critical, yet poorly
understood, process of meristem maturation. A major question in plant
development is how timing of meristem maturation, and thus inflorescence and
flower production, is controlled in different plants. Compared to knowledge on
meristem maturation in other model plants, much less is known in tomato and
related Solanaceae, despite representing the widespread sympodial growth habit.
Recent work in tomato has exposed a new maturation program, defined by a novel
transcriptional regulator encoded by the TMF gene. This project integrates
genetics, genomics and biochemistry to study the mechanisms by which TMF and its
interacting protein partners regulate meristem maturation. In Aim 1, TMF
transcriptional co-factors will be studied genetically, molecularly, and
developmentally. In Aim 2, transcriptional targets of TMF and its expression
network will be explored by integrating RNA-seq and ChIP-seq. In Aim 3, TMF
family members will be characterized using CRISPR/Cas9. This project comprises a
first molecular mechanistic study to understand how meristem maturation is fine-
tuned to quantitatively control flower production in sympodial plants. The
findings should reveal new principles of meristem maturation that can enable
modulation of inflorescence architecture and flower production to benefit
agriculture.