* 1556862
* The Rise of Ecosystem Services in Biodiversity Conservation
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* David Winickoff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 16,972.00

General Audience Summary

This doctoral dissertation project investigates how the concept of ecosystem
services has gained widespread currency among conservationists over the last two
decades. It will shed light on what explains its expanding influence, what is at
stake in re-representing biodiversity in this manner, and what the use of this
term tell us about conservation, including its constitutive politics and what it
means for those who take part in it. The project will focus on the experiences
of core champions of the framework who have been instrumental to its
propagation. It will use qualitative social science methods, including
interviews, participant observation, and embedded organizational ethnography
among conservation practitioners in British Columbia, with the Natural Capital
Project, and inside the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services. In addition to seeking to analyze struggles to define ecosystem
services discourse, it will intervene in that conversation by developing
teaching modules, delivering lectures, and collaborating with research
assistants. Findings will be disseminated through publications, conferences, a
weblog hosting discussion of ecosystem services issues, editorials for popular
press, and volunteer assistance to pertinent environmental organizations.

Technical Summary

This project extends theoretical frameworks from science and technology studies,
political ecology, and institutional theory to understand the rise of ecosystem
services. While research has emerged analyzing particular sites where policies
inspired by ecosystem services have been introduced, this project seeks to
understand the networked actors that connect across these sites and push for
those kinds of policies. This project refocuses analysis from individual
ecosystem services programs to the upstream epistemic struggles that precipitate
them. It will contribute to academic debates exploring the increased
intertwining of market logics with environmentalism; the cultural politics of
neo-liberalization and commodification; how agents of change negotiate the
promise and perils of radical versus reformist politics; the capacity of ideas
and transnational epistemic networks to effect institutional change; and the
power relations arising from and structuring each of these dynamics. This
project will contribute novel insights into the mechanisms and conditions that
allow discourses to institutionalize into policy and practice, and will generate
new knowledge about the ways ecosystem services are being envisioned and enacted
by its adherents.