* 1556343
* Dissertation Grant:  Social Science's Use of Controlled Field Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Margarita Rayzberg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 12,480.00

The project will examine how the adoption of randomized controlled field
experiments became the "gold standard" of evidence and policy. It will address
how they came to shift power relations among the donors, development economists,
local ministries, and intended beneficiaries-turned-research participants. This
project will study how field experiments came to be used to assess international
economic development interventions. The project?s findings will help policy-
makers to understand the kinds of technologies of evaluation that they fund and
how these measure the outcomes of international economic development policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend existing scholarship
on the practices and politics of scientific knowledge by studying the middle
ground between the laboratory and field sciences where randomized controlled
field experiments impact evaluation to produce evidence for "what works" in
foreign aid. Through archival, interview-based and ethnographic research, this
project traces the history of the controlled field experiments to analyze when
and why social scientists and development practitioners use them, how they
construct viable experimental spaces and subjects, and the implications for
foreign aid and its intended beneficiaries. This research will consider how
foreign technical assistance acts on scientific knowledge; and the political and
logistical struggle of creating credibility for their continued use. The project
will contribute to increased public scientific literacy and engagement with
social science, understanding between academia and policy makers, and improved
training of graduate students.