* 1556403
* SBIR Phase II:  Polyaniline Epoxy Primer with Related Topcoat: the Anticorrosion Coating System of a Barrier to Cations with a Barrier to Anions
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,10/31/2018
* Jianguo Wang, AnCatt Co.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2018
* USD 704,730.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in bringing epoxy based conductive polymer
anticorrosion paint system to the market. Corrosion will cost the US economy
over $1 trillion in 2015. It is highly desirable to develop more effective
anticorrosion technologies to reduce this huge economic cost of corrosion. The
most effective anticorrosion pigments in use today are based on heavy metal
pigments, such as chromates, lead compounds, and zinc/zinc compounds.
Environmental, health, and safety concerns are driving the elimination of heavy
metal pigments. The proposed new product will not only reduce toxicity
introduced by current heavy-metal based anti-corrosion pigments, but also
provide much improved corrosion protection. The project is especially targeting
replacement of the epoxy based zinc-rich primer coating systems that are widely
used on highway, marine, and energy infrastructures. Solving the poor
processibility of environmentally friendly conductive polymers should enable
open up a range of new applications beyond anti-corrosion coatings such as
electrostatic dissipation, electromagnetic interference shielding, static
resistant fibers, conductive inks, toners, and adhesives, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project
lies in using advanced knowledge and understanding of anticorrosion coatings. It
is generally assumed that organic coatings act as barriers to water and oxygen
at the coating - environment interface. But corrosion of metals is an
electrochemical reaction process that relates to both cations and anions. The
present proposal suggests developing an ion barrier anticorrosion coating
system: conductive polymer nanoparticle pigmented epoxy primer with a topcoat.
The combination of the primer and topcoat constructs a barrier to both anions
and cations, that inhibits the electrochemical corrosion reaction, therefore,
provides efficient corrosion protection to the metal. This system will not use
heavy metal anticorrosion pigments any more. If present proposed research
succeeds, it will demonstrate how an ion barrier coating provides corrosion
protection to a metal substrate, and how to formulate an ion barrier
anticorrosion coating, and lead to the next generation of anticorrosion coating.