* 1556878
* Linking ecosystem and geomorphic processes to understand the large-scale dynamics of tropical mountains mediated by landsliding
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2024
* Carla Restrepo, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 637,851.00

Landslides are an important agent of change in mountain settings worldwide.
Although the basic geological processes underlying landslides are relatively
well known, increasing evidence indicates that the living components of
ecosystem processes play an important, but largely understudied, role. In
particular, plant root and shoot biomass - two important ecosystem attributes -
are likely to influence the stability of hill slopes in complex ways. This
project investigates the relationships between soil fertility, climate,
ecosystem attributes, and slope stability in the Sierra de Las Minas, a mountain
range in eastern Guatemala. This study area was selected because it is subject
to periodic landslides and has a considerable history of previous research. The
project integrates for the first time basic ecosystem concepts to better
understand the evolution of landforms and landslides, suggesting that the
division of vegetation biomass between roots and shoots is critically important.
This is a highly interdisciplinary project that also will contribute to the
engagement of women and underrepresented minorities in research and outreach,
forge international collaborations, and provide for the dissemination of new
knowledge that will be of interest to a wide range of stakeholders and scholars,
including those interested in landform evolution, ecosystem and landscape
development, carbon cycling, and sustainable management of regions subjected to
landslide hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon previous work, this project
takes advantage of the diverse lithologies and contrasting climates found in the
Sierra de Las Minas, to test the overall hypothesis that variation in soil
fertility inherited from different lithologies influences the partitioning of
biomass between roots and shoots with consequences for slope stability, soil
development, and ultimately landslide regimes. Variation in climatic conditions,
however, may change the magnitude and direction of the observed effects. The
work is organized around three specific goals and corresponding hypotheses: 1)
examine the relationship between soil fertility and vegetation attributes that
influence slope stability, 2) investigate differences in soil development
trajectories in landslides underlain by different parent materials, and 3)
evaluate the interactions between different soil fertilities and vegetation
dynamics on landslides. These goals will be developed using a combination of
geographic information systems and remotely sensed data, fieldwork, tree-ring
studies, biogeochemical and geochronological analyses, and modeling.