* 1556898
* Collaborative Research: The genetic basis, biosynthetic pathways and evolution of chemical defense in carabid beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* A Attygalle, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 277,484.00

The main goal of this project is to understand, at the molecular level, one of
the most remarkable chemical defense systems found in nature - the explosive,
extremely hot spray of the bombardier beetles. Insects make up much of the
animal life that has evolved on Earth. Understanding why there are so many
different kinds of insects and why they are so successful is fundamental to
understanding how the wide diversity of life evolved. Insects are well known for
producing many different chemical compounds that are required for their
communication. Some chemicals help them to locate mates and food resources,
others help them to organize activities within the nest or hive, and many others
are used to warn off and defend against predators. This project focuses on this
last aspect and is specifically testing the idea that the genes responsible for
production of the hot chemical spray of the bombardier beetles are closely
related to the genes responsible for producing similar chemicals in the insect's
outer shell or exoskeleton. A main strength of the project is that it tackles
this question by using multiple complementary approaches and by comparing eight
different beetle species that are related to varying degrees. Half of these
species have evolved a chemical defense system, the other half have not evolved
this ability. Many college students and young scientists will receive scientific
training in conjunction with the project. People of all ages are highly
captivated by these beetles, particularly school age children. With the
bombardier beetle as a model, the project will help develop elementary school
level hands-on activities and lesson plans on topics in chemical ecology and
biological chemical defense evolution that will reinforce the Next Generation
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground beetles and their relatives form the
largest clade of organisms that use a single homologous gland system to produce
no less than 19 distinct classes of chemical compounds for defense. This project
will develop a detailed functional and evolutionary understanding of defensive
chemistry evolution by focusing on species from the four lineages of quinone
producing carabid beetles, including species commonly known as the bombardier
beetles, which chemically blast their defensive quinones at extremely hot
temperatures (up to 100 Â°C). Using a multidisciplinary approach, this project
will identify genes involved in quinone production, elucidate chemical
biosynthetic pathways, and describe the genetic architecture of quinone
evolution. From gland-specific transcripts, candidate genes related to the
production of defensive secretions will be identified and gene function will be
validated experimentally by blocking gene transcription and looking at
phenotypic changes in the compounds produced. The researchers will test the
hypothesis that the genes up-regulated in secretory cells during quinone
synthesis are closely related to those involved in quinone production in
arthropod cuticle. Thus the project will empirically address the well-known, but
untested, scenario of how the bombardier beetle evolved its explosive defense
abilities. Ultimately, this project will explore how genetics and chemistry can
interact over time and will reveal insights into the fundamental process of
evolution.