* 1556937
* Collaborative Research: Continuous Metabolism and Nutrient Uptake Across the River Continuum
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Gooseff, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 393,359.00

Rivers are the major pathways connecting the land to the sea, conveying water,
sediments and nutrients. As water flows through river networks, the materials it
carries are transported, stored, processed, and released in response to changing
physical, chemical and biological characteristics. The goal of this project is
to better understand how river systems process carbon, retain nutrients,
influence ecosystem health globally, and ultimately support healthy ecosystems,
both in the rivers and the water bodies into which they drain. One of the
concepts upon which river ecosystem science is founded is that rivers change
their characteristics and processing rates with size and/or distance downstream.
This idea, called the River Continuum Concept (RCC), has helped organize decades
of river research and management. However, while the RCC has been a useful
conceptual model, it remains relatively poorly tested, which seriously limits
the ability of scientists to predict how river functions will respond to ongoing
and future changes on Earth. This work seeks to fill that important knowledge
gap about how rivers function, and thus has implications for how humans manage
land and water resources.

One constraint to providing information about river function along the river
continuum has been technological; we simply have not had the tools to measure
these functions along river networks. A second constraint has been that the
simple conceptual model of the RCC neglects key features of rivers, specifically
that they are frequently impacted by discontinuities like dams and lakes,
tributary confluences, and geologic divides. This project alleviates both
constraints by coupling state-of-the-art water quality sensor technologies to
new sampling methods in carefully selected river sites. Together, these advances
are expected to provide new insights about the river continuum, the role of
discontinuities in changing river functions, and ultimately about how to best
manage and protect aquatic resources.