* 1556649
* Testing community ecology theory as a framework for predicting co-infection: host resource ratios and viral pathogens
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Elizabeth Borer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2021
* USD 667,475.00

A vast array of microbes (microscopic organisms), such as fungi, bacteria, and
viruses, live inside every animal and plant on Earth. These microbial
communities influence the growth, reproduction, and death rates of their hosts.
Not all microbes are detrimental; the effects of microbes span the full range
from causing deadly disease to being essential for host health. Despite the
importance of microbial diversity to host well-being, we have little ability to
predict the diversity and composition of microbial communities within hosts.
This project will address this knowledge gap by testing whether a mathematical
model developed originally for plants and algae ('resource-ratio theory') can be
used to understand what determines the diversity and composition of the microbes
that inhabit plant hosts. The data from these experiments will be used to
understand when the predictions of the resource-ratio model apply to microbial
communities and how it can be modified to make better predictions. A deeper
understanding of the controls on microbial diversity will lead to more accurate
predictions about microbes within hosts, which may speed advances in medicine
and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will grow plants in
conditions that vary in the supply of critical soil nutrients, and they will
manipulate and measure the abundance and diversity of a group of plant viruses
that cause one of the most widespread and devastating diseases of cereal crops
worldwide (barley and cereal yellow dwarf viruses; B/CYDV's). Five B/CYD virus
species will be used to test the resource-ratio model in a series of growth-
chamber and field experiments. In each experiment, they will create a wide range
of conditions experienced by the viruses by growing host plants under different
resource (nitrogen and phosphorus) supply rates. The researchers will measure
viral abundance (titer) within individuals, using quantitative Polymerase Chain
Reaction (qPCR) for each virus grown alone and in mixture. They will use viral
abundance measurements through time to estimate virus population growth rates.
The resource-ratio model will be tested with lab experiments, in order to
predict viral diversity in each host. The resource-ratio model will also be
modified to include elements of the virus and host biology that could cause
deviations from the classic theory, such as host defences against infection by
microbes and microbial effects on host nutrient content. To test the relevance
of this model to more complex natural communities, the researchers will collect
data on B/CYDV titers in field experiments replicated at a local field site and
in 30 grasslands spanning 5 continents.