* 1556848
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ecological and evolutionary dynamics of secondary contact
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* David Post, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2021
* USD 620,000.00

Rivers and streams across the country are being restored to their original flow
patterns by the removal of dams, many of which were constructed centuries ago to
provide energy for small mills that formed the basis of colonial economies. This
project takes advantage of planned dam removals that will connect fish
populations that have been separated for nearly four centuries, in order to
study the ecological and evolutionary consequences of secondary contact between
these recently divergent fish populations, which may interbreed but also may
compete. Results from this work will contribute to the conservation and
management of migratory alewife fish, a critical resource in coastal freshwater
and marine habitats and the focus of intensive restoration and conservation
efforts. Researchers will work collaboratively with state managers, the
Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, lake
associations, and land trusts to determine the consequences of restoring
migratory populations, provide information vital to alewife recovery, and
educate local communities on the consequences of river restoration. The project
will train a postdoctoral researcher along with graduate and undergraduate
students in an interdisciplinary project that relies on advanced genetics
techniques, field sampling, and manipulative field and laboratory experiments.
An existing program at Yale University will support involvement of
underrepresented minority undergraduate students in summer research. Training
will include the broader scientific context of the research, research methods,
data analysis, written and oral project reports, and direct involvement with the
public to present the societal benefits of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of whole-lake restoration
projects to understand the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of secondary
contact between recently diverged lineages of alewife. Isolation caused by
construction of dams has resulted in two divergent alewife life history forms:
the ancestral anadromous form that moves between lakes and the coastal ocean and
a landlocked form that is resident in lakes. This project will combine advanced
genomics, small-scale experiments, and whole-lake observations and experiments
to document and understand the consequences of secondary contact, when dam
removal allows reintroduction of anadromous alewife into lakes that contain the
land-locked form. Close collaboration with the state agency that removes dams
will allow the investigators to study secondary contact from its initiation. The
project addresses three stages in response to secondary contact: rapid
ecological change in planktonic communities and nutrient flux, rapid
evolutionary responses in invertebrate populations in response to novel
ecological conditions, and interactions between the two alewife morphs that may
result in hybridization and, over the longer-term, alewife evolution and local
adaptation. The first of these responses - ecological changes in lacustrine
communities - is essential in order to interpret the evolutionary changes that
result. The project is unique in its ability to capture the consequences of
secondary contact on both time scales. Results will provide rare insight into
feedbacks between ecological and evolutionary processes in field populations
following secondary contact with important implications for ecosystem function
and the maintenance of biodiversity in restored ecosystems.