* 1556472
* Dissertation Grant:  Finding Form:  Goethe and Plant Morphology in Twentieth Century Anglophone Scholarship
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Andre Hahn, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 18,344.00

General Audience Summary

This project examines the impact of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe on twentieth
century Anglophone plant morphology and biology. The researcher proposes to
visit four archives to complete archival and rare book research: the Hunt
Institute for Botanical Documentation in Pittsburgh, the Newnham College
Archives at the University of Cambridge in England, the University of St.
Andrews Special Collections in Scotland, and the Rudolf Steiner House Library in
London. In addition to enhancing our understanding of the history of biology,
the results of this project will provide a context for and exposure to different
aspects of morphology for those working with morphology in education and design
settings. STEM educational institutions have used morphology to encourage
environmental stewardship. Morphology also has significant implications in the
design sciences, particularly for biomimicry. By reaching out to educators,
designers, and the broader public through lectures, a blog, and conferences, the
significance of the research proposed under this grant would have a broad
impact.

Technical Summary

This project contributes to the historical literature on science in three ways.
It examines the role of scientific alienation in our understanding of the
Goethean tradition within plant morphology and beyond. This will add to
discussions of scientific literacy and cultural engagement with science as the
concept of scientific alienation engages with the experiences of those who make
claims of being marginalized as they seek to engage with scientific knowledge
and practices. In addition, it examines traditionally trained and amateur
scientists who engaged with Goethe's science and used his concepts to critique
scientific norms and explore the relation of science to other areas of society.
Finally, it shows how scientists often engage audiences at the fringe of the
scientific community and well beyond it. Specifically, Goethe's scientific and
larger cultural heritage in the twentieth century Anglophone world engaged with
the core literature of environmental movements. Together, these themes exhibit
how Goethe's reception and twentieth century morphology may be fruitful for
other areas of research being pursued by historians of science.