* 1556091
* Standard Research Grant: Representational Materialities of Internet Protocols
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 193,899.00

This project will focus on representational materialities of the digital
environment. It will study the material properties and consequences of the way
that bits are arranged in wires, data structures are organized on disks,
databases are arranged to support specific kinds of operations, and textual and
graphical representations are designed for human visual and cognitive
processing. This project will contribute to the developing field of software
studies by studying our internet as a historically- and geographically-specific
object. The project will broaden our understanding of the network beyond a
designed object to an evolving object. Findings will speak to public concerns
and policies over internet regulation and network
neutrality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will focus on digital
infrastructures, the representational considerations in the design of Internet
protocols, and the digital conventions that structure network operations. The
approach will combine technoscientific materialities with insights from the
emerging field of Software Studies to document the significance to digital users
and policy-makers, as well as, the competing interests and requirements. The
project will also include interviews with people who have played leading roles
in the development of these systems. The project will contribute to
interdisciplinary collaboration and engagement between technologists, social
scientists, policymakers, and regulators by unpacking the ways in which
protocols act as sites of power, influence, and control, and the political
rationalities and relationalities that they embody, provides opportunities for
reflection, intervention, reconfiguration, and accountability.