* 1556020
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Dual Energy Micro-focused X-ray Excitation Beam for Chemical Analysis and Materials Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Benjamin Stripe, Sigray
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 01/31/2018
* USD 749,678.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
microfocus dual energy x-ray excitation beam delivery system to be used for
micro x-ray fluorescence (micro-XRF) analysis. The development of this system
will address critical needs in a variety of disciplines for substantially
improved detection sensitivity (particularly of low atomic number elements),
higher spatial resolution, better analysis accuracy, and increased throughput.
The proposed project is expected to impact the $ 900 million XRF market by
further accelerating the rapid adoption of this tool, which has been utilized
for a variety of research and industrial applications, including: development of
advanced materials, toxicology of trace metals, mapping mineral distribution in
healthy and diseased biological tissues, determining efficient oil extraction
methods for specific reservoirs in oil &amp; gas, monitoring mine efficiency by
analyzing mine wastes, and chemical analysis of buried structures and packaging
components in the semiconductor industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently,
achieving high spatial resolution mapping of elemental composition at the
micrometer scale resolution with analysis sensitivity in the low parts per
million (ppm) levels is only possible at synchrotron micro-XRFs, of which there
are only a limited number of around the world, and which are often
oversubscribed. The performance of existing laboratory micro-XRF systems is
largely limited - in terms of focus size, focusing efficiency, and spectral
response - by the x-ray optics which are employed. The project will permit the
development of an innovative x-ray compound mirror lens which will enable a
microfocus dual energy x-ray excitation beam delivery system with high
analytical sensitivity to both low- and high-Z elements, large x-ray flux (up to
thirty-fold better than leading systems), microns-scale spatial resolution, and
large working distances (5 cm). This beam delivery system will be usable as an
attachment in a scanning electron microscope and in a standalone micro-XRF
system.