* 1556062
* Doctorial Dissertation Research: Classification Representation in the Sciences: the Epistemology and Ontology of Botanical Taxonomic Systems
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Johanna Drucker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,702.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project will
combine international archival and qualitative fieldwork to better understand
the evolution of taxonomic forms. The project begins with an examination of Pre-
Linnaean bound manuscripts and Enlightenment-era printed texts. It culminates
with a careful examination of the contemporary Catalogue of Life, a federated
database containing the largest cache of taxonomic information of the known
forms of life on Earth. One goal of the project is to show how taxonomy-
disseminating technologies influence the construction and use of classification
systems. Attention will be given to the Western-centric nature of these
scientific systems of organization, and how one method of classification may not
fit all of our global needs. The taxonomies that are the focus of this study
arose from distinctly Western traditions, and evolved with their presuppositions
engrained in their infrastructure. As a result, their taxonomic conventions can
conflict with culturally and geographically local and endemic descriptive
methods. Another goal of this study is to bring some of these cultural biases to
light. By broadening discussion about these systems, new modes of cross-
communicable and flexible taxonomic infrastructures between communities are more
likely to occur. By bridging local biodiversity knowledge (endemic,
underrepresented, cultural marginalized, citizen science, etc.) with larger
scientific infrastructures, and by pooling our global knowledge resources in a
more open, culturally attentive way, the chances of maintaining what natural
biological species exist today increases exponentially.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to our understanding of how the forms in which we disseminate
taxonomic information influence the way that information is used and understood
to fundamentally relate to our knowledge of the world, and to the way in which
their ontological organization is influenced by inherited epistemologies from
previous taxonomic systems. Additionally, given the widespread use of taxonomy
databases in number of disciplines, this study can shed light on the
multivariate uses of taxonomies and promote more inter-disciplinary
collaboration and communication regarding the construction, organization, and
flexibility of these infrastructures. Finally, by looking at scientific
knowledge organization systems from an historical, information, and technical
framework, we can learn much about how the contemporary world deals with, and
can potentially solve, the often-incommensurate information structures embedded
into the myriad of digital systems, software, and idiosyncratic computational
platforms that are encountered daily, a problem assured to amplify in the
future.