* 1556248
* LTREB: TESTING FOR FACULTATIVE SWITCHING BETWEEN MIGRATORY STRATEGIES IN A PARTIALLY MIGRATORY, LONG-LIVED LARGE HERBIVORE POPULATION
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Mark Hebblewhite, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2021
* USD 434,745.00

Animal migrations figure among the most spectacular natural phenomena, ranging
from Monarch butterflies that migrate up to 3,000 miles to over-winter in warm
climates to Arctic terns that travel each year between the Arctic and the
Antarctic. Migratory species are declining worldwide due to human disturbance,
habitat loss, and climate change. In the presence of these ongoing changes, the
ecology of migration has become an important management issue. This research
extends a 15-year study of elk to understand why, across migratory species,
there are individuals that migrate and those that do not migrate within a single
population. The project will help understand the causes of migratory decision-
making among elk and the implications of altered migratory behavior for elk
conservation and management. The researchers will engage graduate students in
journalism, who will develop diverse media outlets to communicate results
broadly, and in geography, who will develop web interfaces for the public to
view elk migration virtually. The project will offer internships to Native
American students through the Native American Natural Resource Program at the
University of Montana. General fascination with migratory animals along with the
broad appeal of elk to conservationists, hunters, and Native Americans alike
promise effective citizen outreach and engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use a partly-migratory population of elk as a model system to
understand the context-dependent costs and benefits of partial migration. The
project builds on long-term knowledge of the demography of more than 300
individually marked female elk of known age, individual reproductive rates, and
juvenile survival rates, combined with spatial analyses of migratory behavior
measured by Global Positioning System (GPS) collars. The researchers will
monitor both intrinsic factors such as age and reproductive history and
extrinsic factors such as forage and predation risk to test competing and
interacting hypotheses to understand why a long-lived mammal switches between
migratory strategies in the face of environmental change. They will next
incorporate results on the causes of switching into a population model that
explicitly tests for the effects of switching on population dynamics. A Bayesian
state-space population model, Bayesian model selection, and cross-validation of
competing models with and without different switching functions will test
between two alternate hypotheses for the population dynamic effects of partial
migration as well as the relative importance of bottom-up (forage) versus top-
down (predation) forces on population growth rates.