* 1556336
* Action influences on visual processing near the hands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Laura Thomas, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 438,389.00

Vision routinely provides information about how to reach for and grasp objects
in the environment. Can action similarly inform our visual experience of the
world? The goal of this research is to determine whether the ability to reach
out and grasp an object enhances visual information that helps people interact
more effectively with their immediate surroundings. The research will also
assess whether training to grasp objects in novel ways can influence people's
visual experience. An enhanced understanding of how the action of grasping might
alter visual perception can inform the design of applications for handheld
mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets and can help tailor interfaces to
enhance user experience and safety. In addition, the project provides
opportunities for high school students and Native American college students to
become involved in STEM research (through the North Dakota Governor's School
program and the NSF-funded NATURE program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How does the
capacity for action shape visual cognition? Observers process objects that are
within peripersonal space (objects they can easily grasp with their hands)
differently than objects outside of their reach. A series of psychophysical
experiments evaluates the hypothesis that changes in visual processing of
graspable objects near the hands reflect an adaptation of the visual system to
behavioral contexts. Dr. Thomas will examine how grasp posture creates
affordances for action that bias processing of action-relevant visual
information. Visual biases associated with power grip and precision grip
postures will also be evaluated in situations with differing visual processing
task demands. Potential plasticity of alterations in visual processing near the
hands will be evaluated by determining whether action-specific training alters
how observers process action-relevant visual information. These experiments
explore the potential influence of both bottom-up and top-down mechanisms that
may contribute to altered vision near the hands and determine the relationships
between visual biases associated with the planning of dynamic actions and those
associated with static hand postures. More generally, the work evaluates the
malleability of the relationship between body position and visual perception,
attention, and memory.