* 1556281
* IDBR: Type A: Development of a high throughput total internal reflection and fluorescence correlation platform for analysis of biomolecular interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ruigang Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2020
* USD 589,250.00

An award is made to the University of Kentucky to develop a new imaging
instrument for analysis of biomolecular interactions. Understanding of
biochemical and cellular processes has profited enormously from the development
of high resolution fluorescence techniques. Total internal reflection (TIRF)
microscopy is a technique that allows high resolution imaging of a thin layer of
the cell close to the plasma membrane and has become a standard technique to
study membrane proteins. Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) provides
the capability to extract dynamics from single biological molecules in vitro and
in cells yielding crucial insights into their inherently heterogeneous and
complex nature. One of the primary limitations of these techniques is that they
are highly labor intensive and thus have been primarily restricted for single
sample analysis followed by costly manual data processing. The proposed
instrument will overcome these challenges by developing high throughput versions
of both techniques under a single, cost-effective imaging and data collection
platform. In addition, a new analysis package Open Fluorescence Spectroscopy
(OpenFS), to be developed by researchers and computer scientists, will be open-
source and made freely available online, providing an alternative to costly and
proprietary imaging software that is often tied to a particular device. Research
enabled by this instrument spans the disciplines of chemistry, physics,
molecular biology, and engineering to answer fundamental questions in biology.
The ability to perform multiple and single molecule studies at high throughput
has the capacity to accelerate basic scientific discoveries essential to the
biosciences. The multidisciplinary nature of this project will also create
unique training and educational opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and
post-doctoral researchers.

The ability to resolve structural rearrangements, biomolecular interactions, and
binding kinetics of complex systems is essential to the research aims across
multiple disciplines of study including biology, chemistry, engineering, and
physics. Imaging of fluorescent biomolecules in their natural cellular
environment to obtain quantitative information about their dynamic behavior is
essential for further understanding their roles in cellular processes. The goal
of this project is to develop a unique, versatile, and multi-faceted platform
that will extend high temporal and spatial imaging for high throughput TIRF and
FCS. The instrument will be able to function in multiple high throughput modes
and provide the tools to extract a broad range of biomolecular dynamics using
ensemble and single-molecule fluorescence measurements in polymeric,
reconstituted, or cellular systems. Due to the multi-modal capabilities of the
instrument, a new open-source fluorescence spectroscopy analysis package, Open
Fluorescence Spectroscopy (OpenFS), will be developed offering offers reusable
software modules for processing of fluorescence spectroscopy data. The
instrument will conduct high-throughput, high sensitivity studies in a cost-
effective and user friendly format that has the potential to transform studies
of biomolecular dynamics and allow the extension of TIRFM and FCS to
applications previously inaccessible.