* 1556035
* SBIR Phase II:  A Programmable Residual Solvent Analyzer based on Fourier Transform Molecular Rotational Resonance (FT-MRR) Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Brent Harris, BrightSpec, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 996,021.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a new
analytical chemistry instrument for rapid quantitation of residual chemical
impurities in complex mixtures. The target application for this project is the
detection of genotoxic impurities during early drug development in
pharmaceutical manufacturing. The instrument to be developed uses Fourier
transform molecular rotational resonance (FT-MRR) spectroscopy to identify
molecules based on their three dimensional geometry, which permits high chemical
specificity. FT-MRR is a high-resolution spectroscopy technique that makes it
possible to directly analyze gas mixtures containing a large number of chemicals
without the need for prior chemical separation using chromatography - a time-
consuming step of current analysis methods that requires significant technical
supervision. As a result, FT-MRR based chemical analysis instruments have the
potential to speed up innovation for pharmaceutical manufacturers by reducing
analytical development cycles from weeks to hours during the high-throughput
drug innovation process. Chemical analysis instruments using FT-MRR spectroscopy
enable faster innovation in research and development labs with the added benefit
of seamless method transferability to on-line process monitoring applications
and routine quality control for final product release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to transfer analysis methods into routine analysis is important to the
industry goal of continuous manufacturing for pharmaceuticals. It is enabled for
FT-MRR in part (yet critically) by the two main objectives of this Phase II
effort: the development of sampling automation for FT-MRR and the design of a
cost-reduced, targeted FT-MRR system. Concepts for both of these designs were
successfully tested during Phase I. The intellectual merit of this project is
the introduction of a new technique for chemical analysis that senses chemicals
based on the absolute molecular structure, with no orthogonal analysis required.
FT-MRR spectral fingerprints can distinguish molecular isomers, conformers,
isotopologues, and even enantiomers. With this kind of absolute structure
information, FT-MRR can enable new studies that trace chemical pathways with
site-specific isotopic ratio information and chiral detection. Both concepts are
otherwise very challenging with current technology. The FT-MRR instrument to be
built for this project combines recent advances in high-power, solid-state
millimeter wave (mm-wave) light sources, low-cost microwave synthesizer
integrated circuits, and high-speed digital electronics to implement a time-
domain, Fourier transform (FT) measurement approach. Standard methods for
chemical sampling will be integrated to maximize the ease-of-use and robustness
of FT-MRR instruments.