* 1556428
* Support for the 2016 North American Summer School on Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI); July, 2016 - New Brunswick, New Jersey
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Kristen Syrett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 44,119.00

The North American Summer School in Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI)
will be held at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-New Brunswick from
July 8-16, 2016. NASSLLI is a biennial summer school that brings together top-
tier faculty in Cognitive Science, Computer Science, Linguistics, Philosophy,
and related areas, with the goal of introducing graduate students and advanced
undergraduate students to topics that intersect various combinations of these
disciplines. The aim of the summer school is to strengthen the training of the
students, expand their knowledge of research possibilities, and introduce them
to ways to engage in forward-looking interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NASSLLI 2016 will feature a variety of weeklong
courses and workshops in five parallel sessions, which fuse together the
foundational questions, unique findings, and innovative methods associated with
each of these fields, highlighting both the commonalities and distinctions among
them. These courses will cover a range of topics in Discourse, Epistemology,
Language and Cognition, Logic, Methodology, Natural Language Programming, and
Semantics. Courses are complemented by student presentations and workshops. In
addition, the school is preceded by mini intensive orientation courses in
fundamental areas). These combined offerings expand beyond those typically
offered at academic institutions. The summer school also provides students with
the opportunity to present their own research and interact with leading faculty
and researchers in related fields. These aspects of NASSLLI make it a unique
venue for training the next generation of researchers in the core cognitive
science areas, providing them with the requisite tools to conduct innovative and
groundbreaking research, and creating connections among them. Funding will
compensate instructors for travel expenses and provide fellowships for graduate
students to attend and present their work.