* 1556356
* Tolerance as a Parasite Defense in a Colonial Bird
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Charles Brown, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 283,125.00

All living organisms must defend themselves from disease-causing parasites and
pathogens to which they are exposed. The typical way that such defense occurs is
by resisting the pathogen or parasite, often through an immune response.
Resistance by the host is the basis for much of modern medicine, in which the
immune response is enhanced or replaced by various therapies. However, another
defense is the tolerance of the parasite or pathogen without mounting any
resistance, which (under certain circumstances) can be beneficial to the host,
in part because tolerance does not require the host to incur the physiological
cost of mounting an immune response. Plants are well known to tolerate various
pathogens, but the ability of animals to tolerate parasites has only recently
been recognized. This project documents how a colonial bird, the cliff swallow,
has rapidly evolved (over 30 years) the ability to tolerate large numbers of
blood-feeding parasitic bugs. By comparing the effects of these parasites on the
birds in the 1980s versus their effects today, insight into conditions that
favor the development of tolerance as a parasite defense in a social animal will
be gained. The results will have wide relevance to understanding ways that
animals (including humans) can potentially minimize the negative effects of
parasites and the diseases sometimes associated with those
parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasite tolerance has been established as a key
host defense in plant-parasite systems, but few empirical studies have explored
the role of tolerance in animal host-parasite relationships. This research seeks
to study the ecology and evolution of tolerance defense strategies against
parasites in colonially nesting cliff swallows (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota) and
their principal parasite, the swallow bug (Hemiptera: Cimicidae: Oeciacus
vicarius). The work builds on a long-term field study and the relatively recent
adoption of new nesting sites by cliff swallows where they have come into
greater contact with their nest parasites. During the 1980s, bugs exerted severe
effects on cliff swallow reproductive success, but subsequent observation
suggests that the birds may have evolved greater tolerance to parasitism in the
intervening 30 years. This research seeks to establish whether cliff swallows
now better tolerate parasites and how the birds? anti-parasite behavior may be
changing as a result. The novelty of this work is that it is the first to
examine temporal changes in tolerance within a natural population. This research
will involve undergraduate students and a postdoctoral scientist, and
participation by a community college faculty member will facilitate involvement
of urban minority students. Because enhancing tolerance by the host may be more
effective in fighting inflammatory and autoimmune diseases than prescribing
antibiotics (a strategy that promotes resistance to parasites), this research
will encourage non-scientists to think about tolerance as a treatment option.