* 1556603
* Deciphering the role of dissolved organic nitrogen in stream nutrient cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2020
* USD 765,448.00

Many surface waters are yellow or brown in color due to the presence of organic
molecules which come from many natural sources such as leaves, soils, and
wetlands. These molecules affect a wide range of characteristics within streams
such as the ability of light to penetrate the water and the acidity of the
water. The organic molecules also can provide streams with energy and essential
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. One particularly important form of
these organic molecules is dissolved organic nitrogen, which is found globally
in forests, arctic tundra, estuaries and streams. However, very little is known
about when and where dissolved organic nitrogen serves as a source of energy, a
source of nitrogen, or both to biological communities. This project will examine
the role of dissolved organic nitrogen in streams across five distinct forested
regions spanning a diverse set of environments in an effort to shed light on the
role of dissolved organic nitrogen. This research is relevant to water resources
management because dissolved organic nitrogen is a source of excessive nutrient
loading causing toxic algal blooms in estuaries, and when it is found in
drinking water supplies it can produce, during water treatment, disinfection by-
products that can harm human health. This research will also integrate under-
represented groups into the laboratory work and field work needed for the
project and provide training opportunities for a graduate student and a post-
doctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differentiating among the competing
roles for dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) is difficult, as direct manipulation
of the DON pool in aquatic ecosystems is most easily accomplished by addition of
specific compounds such as amino acids, which are commercially available but are
not particularly representative of the DON found in streams and rivers under
ambient conditions. Based on initial experimental results, the researchers will
conduct a series of novel field manipulations in streams across New England,
Puerto Rico, Spain, Czech Republic, and Siberia to better understand the extent
to which DON serves as an energy source or nitrogen source in streams globally.
Initial experimental observations in New England show that the DON can serve as
both a nitrogen source and an energy source, but its role appears to vary over
space and time. Here the researchers will perform additional experiments where
nitrate pulses are added to streams across a global network to assess how
frequently, and under what conditions, DON serves predominantly as a nitrogen
source, versus an energy (carbon) source. This set of experiments will provide
some of the first experimental evidence to assess the importance of these two
competing drivers in regulating the levels of ambient DON in natural waters.