* 1556762
* The Effects of Intoxication in Legal Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Nadja Schreiber Compo, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 203,998.00

Intoxicated suspects in the U.S. are routinely interrogated by law enforcement
despite the fact that very little is known about the effects of intoxication in
legal contexts. Specifically, how intoxication impacts confession decisions,
comprehension of Miranda rights, suggestibility, ability to lie, and behavior
during questioning are all unknown. These issues are important, as law
enforcement interrogation practices in the U.S. have drawn criticism for their
coercive nature and these concerns have been validated by proven cases of false
confessions. Of primary concern, alcohol myopia theory suggests that the
intoxicated may be at particular risk for making impulsive decisions - focusing
on immediate consequences at the expense of consequences in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is the first to address this major
research void, examining a) the confession decisions of intoxicated suspects,
and b) how intoxicated suspects are perceived by others. Study 1 will
investigate the impact of intoxication using an experimental lab paradigm
involving the interrogation of guilty and innocent students accused of cheating
and will further assess how intoxication impacts suggestibility and Miranda
rights comprehension. Study 2 will use Study 1's interrogation videos to examine
students' and law enforcements' veracity judgments about true and false
confessors and true and false deniers, and the behaviors exhibited in those
statements. The current studies will contribute to a growing understanding of
intoxication's impact on suspect behavior and interrogation outcomes and will
provide the criminal justice and legal communities with tools to improve the
gathering and evaluation of suspect statements, creating incentives to adopt
evidence-based procedures.