* 1556089
* SBIR Phase II:  Improving food safety using hyper-stable enzyme cleaning products
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Jill Fuss, Cinder Biological, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 899,893.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project will be to improve cleaning in the food processing
industry by integrating hyper-stable enzymes into cleaning products. Industrial
enzymes are a growing, multi-billion dollar green industry that reduces energy,
water, and harsh chemical use while improving process efficiency in many
sectors. Despite the broad use and success of industrial enzymes, their
application and economic impact has been severely limited by narrow thermal and
chemical operational ranges available. The company has developed heat and acid
stable enzymes that significantly expand the reach of enzyme applications. The
goal is to develop an initial product for the dairy cleaning market that will
have the potential to increase production due to faster cleaning, achieve better
removal of protein contaminants and biofilms, reduce water usage, and reduce
food product exposure to chemicals and chemical waste. Better cleaning with
enzymes has the potential to prevent food-borne illness, and decrease water use,
while increasing food-processing profits and providing a biodegradable
alternative to chemical cleaners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of using the first practical
protein expression platform to produce hyperstable enzymes for commercial use.
Although the genes from extreme organisms have been studied for over forty
years, their commercial potential has not been realized due to their
incompatibility with traditional protein expression systems. The unique
hyperstability of enzymes produced using the company's technologies indicate
that enzyme stability is not encoded entirely by gene sequence. In Phase II, the
goal is to develop more comprehensive cleaning formulations and test these with
laboratory and field trial methods established in Phase I. The project
encompasses a set of integrated experiments spanning molecular biology,
microbiology, biochemistry, dairy processor field trials, and practical
industrial bioprocess optimization. The aim is to transform the world's most
extreme enzymes into the world's most effective products for membrane defouling
and sanitation in the dairy industry and beyond.