* 1556674
* Vector Movement and Disease Risk: When Do We Need to Explicitly Account for Vector Behavior and Spatial Patterns in disease models?
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Elizabeth Borer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2020
* USD 443,000.00

Many insects transmit disease as they feed on plants and other animals. However,
we know little about how their movements affect the spread of disease. This
research will combine measures of insect behavior with mathematical models of
disease risk and make predictions about how disease transmission may respond to
environmental change. In addition to sharing their results with other
scientists, the researchers will train K-12 teachers at the world-class
education program at Cedar Creek Long Term Ecological Research site (CDR), and
develop teaching modules about disease for students in grades 7-16. The
researchers will also partner with CDR's NSF ESTEEM project to involve Native
American students in ecology research. The project will promote interaction
between biologists and mathematicians, and between researchers who study disease
and insect behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between movement and
disease is increasingly recognized as an emerging frontier for both the fields
of movement ecology and the ecology of infectious diseases. For pathogens
transmitted by insects, insect vector movement is a key component of the
infection process. Yet, in most ecological disease models, vector behavior is
highly simplified. A deeper understanding of the role of vector movement and
foraging behavior in mediating population-level infectious disease risk is an
important frontier spanning population, disease, and behavioral ecology. The
approach proposed here couples a novel modeling approach with a tractable
experimental system and promotes understanding of vector-host-pathogen
interactions in three parts. First, the modeling approach enables the
incorporation of context-dependent decision making in vector movement and will
generate expected trends for vectored pathogens in animal and plant systems,
broadly. Second, the proposed experimental work will use a globally relevant
phytovirus-aphid system that permits experiments that are near impossible in
other (plant and animal) vectored disease systems. Finally, existing field data
will be used to test model predictions about the importance of vector behavior
for infection in response to environmental change under field conditions. By
generating predictions from a behavioral modeling framework and an
experimentally-tractable empirical system, the proposed theory-experiment
pairing promises novel insights into the likely role of vector behavior in the
dynamics of a wide array of vectored diseases.