* 1556479
* CAREER: Optimization and Parameterization for Multiscale Cardiovascular Flow Simulations Using High Performance Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Alison Marsden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 03/31/2018
* USD 331,587.00

For the past century, advances in cardiovascular surgery have mainly come about
through a `trial and error' approach, using surgeon experience, and evaluation
of patient outcomes to judge success. On the other hand, the engineering field
has developed sophisticated tools for computational simulation and optimization
that have now become commonplace in the the design process. Similar tools could
greatly benefit the medical field by offering the means to systematically test
new surgical designs at no risk to the patient, and to customize designs for
individual patients. While great strides have been made in developing
cardiovascular simulation methods, hurdles remain before ordering a patient-
specific simulation is as easy as, for example, ordering a chest x-ray. Major
roadblocks to adoption of these methods in the clinic include the current lack
of cyberinfrastructure that can achieve clinically relevant time frames, as well
as a lack of tools for efficient manipulation and optimization of surgical
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to pioneer
the development of novel and efficient computational methods which can be
applied for optimization in surgery and device design, and to demonstrate the
use of these tools using high performance computing. Novel cyberinfrastructure
will be developed, including new physics-based tools for patient specific
geometry parameterization, and expanded optimization and uncertainty
quantification methods for use in a parallel environment. This optimization and
uncertainty framework will result in a multi-layered parallel computing
structure, in which multiple cost function evaluations will be performed
simultaneously, each requiring a multi-processor finite element simulation.
These unique computational approaches will be applied to three cardiovascular
shape optimization applications using high performance computing. In particular,
the PI will apply the computational methods and tools to (1) perform
customization of designs for surgery to treat children with single ventricle
heart defects, (2) quantify hemodynamics in coronary aneurysms caused by
Kawasaki disease, and (3) perform robust design to improve coronary artery
bypass graft surgery. The PI will also use systematic uncertainty quantification
tools to assess the reliability of cardiovascular simulations to improve
confidence in results. In the future, this framework will be used to design
individual treatments for patients suffering from a wide range of congenital and
acquired heart diseases. These tools have potential to impact quality of life
for patients, delay the need for a heart transplant, increase exercise tolerance
for children with heart defects, and in some cases reduce mortality. The
application of optimal design tools will bring a paradigm shift to the medical
community by offering the first quantitative and systematic methods for
optimizing surgeries and treatment plans at no risk to the patient. These tools
will have broader use in a range of engineering applications requiring coupling
between optimization and large scale numerical solvers, including turbulence,
combustion, fluid structure interaction, and medical device design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will lead an integrated interdisciplinary education and
outreach plan that will draw high school students, particularly women and
minorities, to the field of engineering and computational science. Our education
plan will address training needs in a new interdisciplinary area by exposing
students to cardiovascular medicine, and doctors to quantitative simulation-
based tools. The outreach program, including an after school science program and
a booth at the San Diego Science Festival, will draw disadvantaged students to
science and engineering by exposing them to emerging research and career
options.