* 1556444
* NSFDEB-NERC: Diversity, Disturbance and Invasion: Using experimental microcosms to illuminate ecological theory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2021
* USD 520,950.00

Invasions by exotic species threaten agriculture, human health, the conservation
of native species, and the maintenance of biological diversity. These threats
have economic and environmental impacts both within the United States and
globally. Attempts to understand the causes of successful invasions are
frustrated by the large number of factors that can affect invasion success. This
project will combine laboratory experiments and theoretical research to examine
how biological diversity and environmental disturbance interact to affect
invasion. Deeper insights into these processes will advance applied research as
human modifications of the environment increase. The research extends a
productive international collaboration and will train early-career US
researchers in experimentation, mathematics, and theory. Freshman undergraduate
students will be offered a research track that begins with a general course in
research methods and is followed by additional seminars and independent research
projects. Middle school students from underserved groups will participate in a
Higher Achievement Program at Pennsylvania State University; this is a non-
profit, academic support program that prepares students to complete high school
and be college-ready.

Because biodiversity and disturbance frequently interact, their net effects on
invasion and invasion resistance are difficult to predict and interpret. Rapid
evolution further complicates these interactions and their effects on invasion
success. This project will combine experimental manipulations with mathematical
models in an iterative approach to study the effect of independent, and
combined, manipulation of disturbance and diversity on invasion success; and the
role of adaptation to disturbance regimes in mediating invasion resistance. The
researchers will independently manipulate disturbance frequency and intensity,
and bacterial diversity, in a factorial design to assess the role that these
factors (and their interactions) play in invasion resistance. They will also
assess the hypothesized importance of adaptation to disturbance regimes by
assessing invasion success following changes to previously established regimes.
Laboratory microbial experiments will generate rapid results, allow iterative
model improvement, and provide ideal opportunities to test rapid evolution. This
combination surpasses research that could be accomplished with natural
communities and promises to develop general ecological theory relevant to
diverse, natural communities. The research will extend a nascent international
collaboration by engaging two researchers with complementary expertise, one in
modeling and the second in experimentation.