* 1556213
* Collaborative Research: IDBR: TYPE A: Development of Squishy Robot  Hands for a Delicate, Effective and Non-Intrusive Approach to Studying  Deep Coral Reefs
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2023
* David Gruber, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 115,683.00

An award is made to Harvard University and the City University of New York to
develop a new instrument for delicate underwater deep sea manipulation of soft
or fragile organisms. Deep coral reefs, and deep sea environments in general,
are hotspots for unique biological diversity and genetic adaptions that have
only recently become accessible to scientists due to advances in remotely
operated vehicle and submersible technology. Yet, while there is increasing
access to these environments, biological collection and the molecular biology
and biochemical analysis of these environments is still highly challenging. One
source of this challenge is the robotic collection arms currently used in these
environments. Commercially-available deep sea manipulation systems are designed
to perform heavy mechanical work (i.e., construction or pipeline maintenance)
and are not geared to perform delicate tasks, such as the collection of fragile
biological specimens. Details for the design and construction of this instrument
will be made available to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument
is based on soft robots and will enable unparalleled sampling in the deep sea
environment. This new instrument will be mounted to remotely operated vehicles
and will mimic the operator's arm and hand motions for quick, nimble, and
delicate interactions. Feedback to the user, integration of soft structures at
multiple scales, and the development of a hair-like feedback and actuator
control system that will prevent damage to fragile samples are key aspects in
this novel robotic arm. The non-traditional bilateral control software and
underwater actuators are innovative, and the modular design with multiple
grippers makes this system extremely flexible for wide range of biological
sampling. The gripping surface will incorporate micro scale surface textures
that minimize damage to delicate biological samples. The long term robustness of
this instrument in such harsh deep sea environments is also an important
feature. By sampling this mostly unknown environment the instrumentation will
benefit the molecular and cellular biology, marine biology, and biochemistry
research communities.