* 1556735
* Collaborative Proposal: Aeolian Processes: An Overlooked Driver of State Change in Drylands?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Gregory Okin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2022
* USD 348,629.00

The conversion of grassland to a desert with sparse shrubs, or desertification,
is occurring in areas across the world. In many cases, desertification replaces
plants that livestock and wildlife prefer to eat with shrubs that are difficult
for them to digest. This problem therefore threatens the livelihood of farmers
and ranchers while also jeopardizing wildlife habitat. Despite the widespread
occurrence of desertification, the exact causes are difficult to pinpoint. Many
scientists suggest that when grazing animals choose to eat grasses over shrubs,
the shrubs take over. However, desertification has often been observed in areas
without livestock, so there may be multiple causes for desertification. This
research intends to discover if desertification in areas with low rainfall
(which tend to be sandier) is due to sand being blown by the wind
(sandblasting). Windblown sand can do two things that might cause
desertification: 1) erode soil and decrease its fertility and 2) damage grass
plants. Because grasses require richer soils and are more fragile than shrubs,
shrubs may be at an advantage where there is more wind and soil fertility is
lower. Through this research, undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher will be trained. Outreach to K-12 teachers and students will be
conducted, and will include individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the following hypotheses: 1)
leaf properties determine the effect of sandblasting on the plant's ability to
regulate water loss and carbon uptake and to maintain an impermeable barrier to
water loss during nighttime and dormant periods; 2) growth form, specifically
plant height and exposure of growing points, determines vulnerability to
sandblasting; 3) seedling water and nitrogen demands differ between grasses and
shrubs, giving shrubs the advantage on wind-eroded soils; 4) vulnerability of
new plants to sandblasting damage differs between grasses and shrubs and this
vulnerability is related to soil nitrogen status; and 5) leaf and plant effects
will lead to long-term changes in plant populations, culminating in a shift from
grass to shrub dominance. Field experiments will be conducted on a wide range of
grass and shrub growth forms. In one series of experiments, established plants
will be placed in a wind tunnel that manipulates levels of sand blasting. In
another, seedling establishment and growth will be quantified on sites with
different soil surface characteristics associated with contrasting long-term
levels of windborne transport. Results from these experiments will be integrated
using models to quantitatively assess the role of these processes in driving
desertification.