* 1556466
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Basis Of Novel Phenotypes Resulting From Interpopulation Hybridization
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Ronald Burton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2020
* USD 600,628.00

Climate change affects the geographic distribution of populations and species
and can result in increased opportunities for hybridization between previously
isolated populations. Hybridization can have a range of outcomes. Most
frequently, hybridization results in loss of fitness (hybrid breakdown),
effectively reducing interbreeding and promoting the formation of new species.
Occasionally, however, novel combinations of genes yield ecological advantages
to hybrids, including adaptation to new ecological niches. What attributes of
parental populations predict the outcome of hybridization? Answering this
question is the focus of this project, and will provide new insights into the
effects of climate and ecological changes on adaptation rates and species
formation. The researchers also will engage in novel public informal education
at the Birch Aquarium and in hands-on experiences in marine biology for 5th
grade students in underserved San Diego neighborhoods.

Predicting hybridization outcomes requires an understanding of the molecular
basis of hybrid phenotypes. This project will conduct genomic analyses of
hybrids produced by crosses between divergent populations of the copepod
Tigriopus californicus. Previous work has shown that energy production by
mitochondria is frequently disrupted in hybrids. Whole genome sequencing will be
used to determine genetic differences between groups of hybrid copepods with
normal versus disrupted mitochondrial performance; differentiation between the
groups will identify candidate genes that are potentially responsible for hybrid
breakdown. Results will address: a) Does hybridization result in widespread
incompatibilities across the genome, or can targeted genes be identified? b) Are
the same genomic regions responsible for hybrid breakdown in different
interpopulation crosses? A similar approach will be used to examine the genomic
basis of improved hybrid thermal tolerance. What genetic interactions allow some
hybrids to survive temperatures that are lethal to both parental populations? Is
hybrid performance predictable from genetic or ecological differences between
parental populations?