* 1556288
* SG:  Collaborative Research:  The Role of Watering Holes in Concentrating Parasites in a Changing Climate
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Charles Nunn, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 30,132.00

Watering points draw together an enormous range of wildlife and domestic
animals, forming a direct interface for disease transmission. Understanding the
degree to which water aggregates animals and their parasites across seasons and
climate gradients is particularly important in light of current climate change
and water instability, particularly in the East African tropical savanna. This
region is home to some of the world's most charismatic wildlife species, but it
is also a disease hotspot that is currently undergoing continued development and
expanded ranching and cattle practices in wildlife zones. This project will seek
to quantify the effect of watering points on parasite density, as mediated by
animal movement, and to understand how climate and host community play a role in
disease risk at water points across the landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project entails four distinct components that integrate extensive observational
surveys, experimental manipulations, and mathematical modelling. The first
component involves a survey of 20 dams and control sites across a steep rainfall
gradient in Laikipia County, central Kenya. Dung surveys, tick drags, camera
trapping, vegetation surveys, and soil and water analyses will be used to
determine the density of animals and their parasites at both watering holes and
control sites over rainfall seasons. The second component will utilize paired
water pans used by wildlife and cattle: one water pan in each pair will be
drained for two rainfall seasons before being refilled, and all surveys listed
above will be repeated for this experiment. The third component will utilize
animal exclosure plots at water sources to determine the effect of large mammal
loss on parasite density in the landscape. Finally, mathematical models
parameterized with field data will be used to simulate the transmission of
fecal-oral parasites over different climates and seasons for a range of hosts.
The effect of water availability and distribution on animal movement and disease
prevalence will be tested, providing valuable insight to both land managers and
scientists on the complex system of water, hosts, and parasites.