* 1556577
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary trends and ecological drivers of eye reduction in bat flies (Hippoboscoidea)
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Gerald Koudelka, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/2021
* USD 353,925.00

Vision is an important sensory mode, and through vision, animals including
humans can detect and process their orientation in space, make out shapes, sense
time, move and navigate, or detect color. Vision is complex, and different
solutions for vision exist across the animal kingdom, such as compound eyes in
insects versus simple eyes in humans. However, many features enabling vision,
such as genes, structures and signaling methods, are similar across animals.
This is why insects are a useful model for our general understanding of the
processes involved in making eyes functional. This project focuses on members of
a group of insects that consistently live at low light levels, in a place where
food and mates are close by and need not be visually recognized over large
distances. The eyes of these insects have been dramatically reduced from the
fully developed daylight version, but they are still functional. In studying the
process of this reduction over evolutionary timeframes, this project aims to
understand the sequence of events and which stimuli led to the reduction (or
loss) of visual structures, and what minimum level of organization and
complexity is required to maintain a functional eye. Results of this
interdisciplinary research will contribute to our understanding of the
robustness and adaptability of complex biological systems. This study is also
directly relevant to the fields of phylogenetics, evolutionary systems biology,
neurobiology and bioengineering. In addition to scientific advancement, this
project will reach and train students from diverse backgrounds at all levels of
education, including middle/high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.
Research results will be integrated into inquiry-based education modules for
middle and high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
phylogenomic, histological, and molecular methods to test several hypotheses
regarding the evolution of reduced, yet functional, eyes in parasitic bat flies.
Bat flies are an ideal system for this type of study because 1) all species have
reduced or lost eyes, and there are variations among species in the degree of
reduction; 2) the group is derived from fully visual, free-living predatory
ancestors, and extant species can be studied for comparative analyses; and 3)
due to life history characteristics of the group, bat flies trace two distinct
ecological niches - the developmental niche (where pupae are deposited) and the
host niche (where adult bat flies occur in association with bats) - that
introduce variations in host proximity and light environments among species.
Comparative studies of the variation in host and developmental niches among
species, and the resulting structural patterns in micro- and macro-eye anatomy
across the phylogeny will allow for the testing of hypotheses related to 1)
which ecological features are driving the evolution of eye reduction and 2) how
different physical domains (e.g. macromorphology, micromorphology, and gene
expression) evolve relative to these driving forces.