* 1556864
* Multidimensional Chronological Analysis of Manuscript Corpora Using Isaac Newton's Chymical Papers as a Test Platform
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Wallace Hooper, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 405,871.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars who work with manuscript
materials encounter numerous difficulties beyond the obvious fact that
handwriting can be difficult and ambiguous to read. The problem of dating the
different stages of composition is often a significant issue, as in the case of
early modern scientific and technological manuscripts, which were often
separated or even dismembered and reassembled after the author?s death, as with
the papers of Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo Galilei, Robert Boyle, and Isaac
Newton, to name just a few. A solution to the problems posed by dating large
manuscript corpora would therefore be of benefit to researchers in many areas
scholarship, not to mention librarians and museum workers. The present proposal
aims to use Isaac Newton?s very large manuscript Nachlass as a platform for
exploring multiple techniques, including computational techniques and others,
for dating manuscripts and for assessing them in combination with one another.
In addition to providing important historical information that will enable
scholars to come to grips with the chronological development of Newton?s
chymical corpus, which is of substantial public interest as well as of scholarly
interest, the tools and approaches that are to be used in this project will be
transportable to all other projects that contain undated manuscript material in
any field of inquiry, not just the history of science. A final impact of the
proposal will be to further public awareness of Newton?s chymical research, an
area that will help to stimulate interest in science in an audience that ranges
from K-12 students up to professionals with widely diverse intellectual
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques that are to be used in this project include comparison of parallel
passages generated automatically by a barrage of computational techniques (e.g.
Latent Semantic Analysis and Topic Modeling), spectro-metric analysis of inks
and papers by Raman spectroscopy, comparison of watermarks by means of the
latest imaging technologies, tracking of developments in orthography and
handwriting, and the systematic study of citations, facilitated by the
production of an authoritative electronic bibliography with hyperlinks to the
citations in texts. In addition to applying these multiple techniques, the
project will follow an integrative approach to assessing the data generated by
them. In order to achieve this result, the project will use network graph
analysis to produce visual clusters of manuscripts and passages whose respective
chronological markers correlate with one another. Correlations generated by
independent test-runs employing different techniques (e.g. ink-analysis and
watermark-analysis) will then be compared to one another, using image graphs. In
cases where a clean overlay of graphs does not result, team members will revisit
the data and determine the cause of the poor ?fit.? Metrical techniques will
also be developed for determining the degree of agreement that constitutes good
versus poor fit. The result will be a model for determining relative chronology
of the parts within large textual corpora that will be transportable to other
projects.