* 1556664
* Ecological Dynamics of the Plant-Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungal Mutualism: Contribution to Plant Species Turnover and Coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* James Bever, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 685,743.00

The iconic tallgrass prairie of the American heartland undergoes a constant
process of renewal following fire and grazing. The renewal consists of a
turnover of species that provides for long-term coexistence and the maintenance
of diversity. Recently, it has been revealed that a type of fungus that
penetrates that roots of prairie plants plays an important role in how they
compete for resources, and these interactions differ among species. The fungi
thus affect how the sequence of turnover takes place. The details of this
interaction, and whether it helps some species and hinders others, is yet
unknown. This project will determine how this interaction affects the renewal
process in unprecedented detail. This research will aid in efforts to restore
natural prairie communities in the Midwest. Additionally, the project will
provide training opportunities for students and contribute to a high school
teacher development program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of work has
identified important roles of soil organisms in plant species coexistence and
turnover during succession. Insight into the potential dynamics of these systems
is limited by a poor understanding of soil organism dynamics. This gap will be
addressed in observational, experimental, and modeling stages. Observations will
span time and space in monitoring changes in arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal
composition and plant growth across multiple plant species of varying life
history. The dynamics of plant populations resulting from these fungal changes
will be examined. Manipulative experiments will be designed and conducted to
differentiate and quantify the impact of allocation of resources by the hosts to
preferred mycorrhizae from fungal competitive ability. A conceptual model,
including simulation, will be developed to produce a new theoretical framework
that integrates plant physiological plasticity and life history trade-offs with
plant-arbuscular mycorrhizal community feedbacks.