* 1556495
* IDBR Type B: Life-long vital rate telemetry in marine homeotherms
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Markus Horning, Alaska SeaLife Center
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2019
* USD 612,854.00

An award is made to the Alaska SeaLife Center (Seward, AK) to develop a
miniaturized, implantable, life-long vital rate monitor for warm-bodied marine
animals. This study will provide one postdoctoral researcher and a technical
research associate the opportunity to participate in the multi-disciplinary
integration of science and technology, and the application of technological
innovation to promoting innovative biological research. Through a custom
education and outreach package, the development efforts and linkages between
technological innovation and biological research will be brought to a broad
public audience including potential users of the new instrument, other
scientists, public people of all ages, as well as grades 6-12 school children.
The outreach package will enhance an existing, standards conforming STEM
curriculum, downloadable from a project-specific website. Through addition of a
geo-referenced data and information portal to this website (under development
via separate funding, to go live in 2016), in combination with regionally
available resources (distributed classroom activities kits) and remotely
accessible training opportunities, modern science and technology learning
opportunities will be brought to under-served rural classrooms in Alaska. The
purpose of the Life History Transmitter (LHX tag) is to determine survival,
causes and locations of mortality of host animals. In female hosts, LHX tags
also determine the age at birth of their first pup and the number of pups born
over their life. Oceans comprise the majority of the Earth's biosphere, and
marine ecosystems are faced with potentially dramatic changes driven by natural
and human factors, including use of natural resources and climate change. Many
linkages between causes of changes, and effects in complex marine ecosystems,
specially those involving top level consumers as well as their predators and
prey, remain poorly understood, largely due to a lack of feasible ways to
observe many marine species that spend most of their life at sea or under water.
To overcome this difficulty, a new monitoring device was developed under
previous IDBR funding that enables the collection of predation, survival and
female reproductive data by a single instrument, no matter where the host might
move to, feed, breed, and die. Building on the success of this new telemetry
device that provided the first direct at-sea determination of predation rates on
a large marine predator from satellite-linked transmissions initiated only after
the death of the host, this project will improve the capabilities and enable the
production of the Life History Transmitter, for collaborative studies on many
top level species of interest and concern. This will enable researchers from a
broad community of potential users to conceive and apply new experimental
designs to provide a major surge in our understanding of marine ecosystems, food
chain linkages, as well as consumer driven and resource driven effects within
the many unresolved knowledge gaps.