* 1556348
* The Betalain Secondary Metabolic Network
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Alan Lloyd, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 663,631.00

Virtually all flowering plants, like roses, maize, and maple trees, make
pigments to color flowers, fruits, and leaves red or purple. And almost all of
these red pigments are "anthocyanins" made from an amino acid called
phenylalanine. There is one glaring exception to this in a group of closely
related flowering plants that includes beets, cactus, and amaranthus, that don't
make anthocyanins, but instead make red and yellow "betalain" pigments from the
amino acid tyrosine. Like anthocyanins, betalains are important dietary
antioxidants that contribute to plant and human health in many ways. This
project is aimed at understanding how plant gene expression and plant cellular
structures coordinate to synthesize the betalain pigments and then deliver them
to the plant cell storage compartment called the vacuole. The red and yellow
betalain pigments can be produced in non-betalain species, like yeast and
anthocyanin producing-plants, through the expression of betalain-synthesizing
genes. So it will be possible to produce modified microbes and crops with
enhanced nutritional value for the benefit of people and animals. In addition,
because this project is so "colorful" it is a natural draw for undergraduate
students who want to pursue molecular biology and biotechnology-based careers.
This project will train a cohort of 35 college freshmen each year in next-
generation molecular-genetic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators recently identified novel, betalain-biosynthetic cytochrome P450
enzymes that function to produce LDOPA and cyclo-DOPA (required intermediates)
from tyrosine, and a MYB-type transcription factor that activates the genes
encoding these enzymes. Remaining critical knowledge gaps include: how gene
regulation impacts betalain pigment patterning and environmental response; how
betalain pigments are trafficked to/across the tonoplast (vacuole membrane); why
and how betalain plants avoid making anthocyanins--this mutual exclusivity being
a fundamental property in this important group of plants. In this project, the
beet MYB will be investigated using loss and gain of function studies to
understand its network of direct and indirect targets in the beet genome.
Nothing is known about how betalains are transported to the central storage
vacuole. The investigators will perform inhibitor studies and tonoplast
proteomic studies to test transport hypotheses, potential mechanisms, and
identify associated proteins. Finally, it is not known why or how betalain
accumulating plants can't or don't make anthocyanins. The tannin pathway is
closely related to the anthocyanins chemically, with common intermediates up
until the very last steps, and they are both regulated by versions of the
combinatorial MYB-bHLH-WD transcription factor complex. Betalain accumulating
plants do make tannins and the investigators will characterize the tannin
pathway in developing beet seed coats, and they will attempt to recreate the
anthocyanin pathway in transgenic beet roots to test hypotheses about which
steps are missing.