* 1556531
* Workshop: Biography in Science, Technology, and Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Evelynn Hammonds, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 04/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports a 4-day workshop that will addresses the historical
experiences of groups under-represented in U.S. scientific, technological,
engineering and mathematical (or, STEM) disciplines in June 2016. During the
workshop the invitees will reflect on the question of how enhanced historical
coverage of biographies in STEM may or may not alter patterns of minority
participation in those fields. This biography-focused workshop will support the
emergence of new historical projects on persons of minority background among
researchers. In addition the workshop activities will include an oral history
project with high school students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will gather post-
doctoral scholars, junior faculty and more senior scholars in the History of
Science, Technology and Medicine (HSTM) to re-frame the historical study of
people historically marginalized in STEM disciplines and in the historical
records of those fields. The workshop will provide an opportunity to inquire
into the nature of perceptions of individual capacity, epistemic commitment, and
institutional aims historically circulating throughout both STEM and HSTM
disciplines. The goal of the workshop is to recast the possible function of
biography as social critique by considering the perpetually low representation
of persons of minority background in organizations such as the History of
Science Society, the Society for the History of Technology, and the American
Association for the History of Medicine. By probing the relational character of
history/history-writing the workshop will identify exclusionary patterns, the
routine marginalization of STEM aspirants, historical subjects and HSTM scholars
of minority identity in order to increase participation and awareness of under-
represented groups in the production of histories of science, technology and
medicine. The results will contribute to an enhanced critical pedagogy and the
testing of the critical potential of biography in confronting inequitable social
relations that will be disseminated at professional societies serving the STS
community.