* 1556556
* Collaborative Research: Ecosystems on the Edge - Tidal wetland-estuary margins as buffers, reactors, and transformers of organic carbon and nitrogen
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* J. Patrick Megonigal, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2022
* USD 553,114.00

Tidal wetlands are among the most productive, diverse and economically important
ecosystems on Earth. They are also especially vulnerable to human pressures and
environmental change. Wetlands contain large reservoirs of soil organic matter,
an important source of carbon and nitrogen to estuaries and coastal oceans, but
very little is known about the processes involved in the translocation of these
nutrients. This project will advance understanding of tidal marsh-estuarine
interactions by linking processes between tidal wetland soils and estuaries, and
assessing where, when, and how dissolved organic compounds are retained,
released and transformed within the marsh soil-estuarine system. Results from
this study will be integrated into enhanced monitoring and management efforts
through partnerships with the Environmental Protection Agency, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Estuarine Research
Reserve System. The project will improve models that predict the influence of
wetlands on estuarine and coastal biology, geochemistry and pollution response.
In collaboration with the Smithsonian Citizen Science program and teachers from
middle schools serving minority students, the team will develop K-12 educational
materials. Specialized training will be extended to undergraduate students, as
well as graduate and postdoctoral researchers, with a particular focus on
underrepresented groups in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test
three key research hypotheses that are critical for understanding the role of
marsh soils and tidal wetland-estuary margins as buffers, reactors, and
transformers of dissolved organic C and N, and that could transform our ability
to predict the influence of wetland ecosystems on estuarine biology,
biogeochemistry, and ecology. An integrative approach will be used to test
hypotheses that combines rich datasets, process-focused experiments, and a novel
coupled hydrodynamic-photo-biogeochemical model to investigate three
understudied aspects of marsh export that likely control the seasonality and
fate of dissolved organic matter in estuaries: (i) soil and porewater organic
matter composition, (ii) adsorption-desorption on soil surfaces, and iii) photo-
and bio- degradation in estuarine waters. Proposed activities incorporate a
system perspective and cover a broad range of marsh environments (i.e.,
different marsh vegetation characteristics, soil type, surface area and salinity
regimes) providing the ability to scale up and assess tidal marsh biogeochemical
fluxes and processes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. Results from
this research will increase understanding of the contributions of wetlands and
estuarine systems to coastal carbon and nitrogen budgets, and improve
predictions of the influences of natural and man-made stresses on ecosystem
processes, biogeochemical cycles and exchanges along the continuum of wetlands,
estuaries and the coastal zone. This information is highly valuable to managing
the coastal zone in the face of accelerated environmental change and continued
human pressures and, in particular, to evaluating the potential for managed
restoration of wetlands to mitigate climate change impacts.