* 1556853
* Multilocus analyses of co-diversification and phylogenetic incongruence between highly coevolved figs and fig wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Edward Herre, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 987,767.00

This project will investigate how interacting species that depend on each other
for their own livelihood cause each other to evolve. A broad goal is to
understand how such interactions influence the diversification of life on Earth.
The researchers will study one of the most ecologically important, highly
diverse systems for studying these interactions: figs, their wasp pollinators,
and the associated group of parasitic wasps that feed on figs but that don't
pollinate them. They plan to test the novel hypothesis that some wasps are able
to move onto new hosts, and that these host shifts ultimately lead to decreased
genetic differences among wasp species, and thus a breakdown of species'
barriers. The project will have important implications for agriculture and food
production because the same processes at work in this fig-fig wasp system also
determine crop-pest and crop-pollinator relationships. Many college students and
young scientists will receive scientific training. A unique educational aspect
of the project is the International Field Trip in Biology course, which will
allow 12 undergraduates per year to conduct international field research in
Panama. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is multidisciplinary,
involving phylogenetics, population genetics, and volatile chemistry. Genomic
sequencing will be used to: 1) obtain well-resolved evolutionary trees of
genetic relatedness among Central American fig and fig wasp species, 2) identify
subsets of fig species that are, unexpectedly, interbreeding (hybridizing) with
each other, and 3) link hybridization of figs to changes in the floral
"perfumes" used to attract pollinators, and which are also exploited by
parasites to locate host plants. Because this project will include numerous fig
and fig wasp species, it will provide the broad frame of reference needed to
gain an in depth understanding of the biological and chemical mechanisms
underlying the pattern and process of co-diversification across interacting fig
and wasp lineages.