* 1556743
* Collaborative Research: Linking predator functional diversity to prey dynamics through the functional response
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Michael McCoy, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 10/31/2021
* USD 548,315.00

Human activities such as habitat modification, harvesting and species
introductions are rapidly changing the type and number of predators in aquatic
and terrestrial ecosystems. These changes in predator communities can have
significant ecological and socio-economic impacts. However, our ability to
predict and manage the effect of predator loss or introduction on prey
populations on ecosystems remains limited. This study will integrate
experimental and mathematical approaches to improve existing tools for
predicting the consequences of predator loss or introduction in aquatic
ecosystems. The investigators will conduct a series of observations and
experiments in rock pools in streams to document the responses of prey to
changes to multiple predator populations. The responses include patterns of prey
mortality, and alterations in prey behavior or morphology. The data generated
from this phase of the study will be used to test the ability of existing and
improved models to predict the long- term consequences of predators on prey
populations and overall ecosystem function. Collectively, the results of this
research will significantly advance our ability to predict the consequences of
predator loss or invasion. The project will also integrate education with
outreach activities in two ways: 1) The investigators will partner with high
school teachers to create teaching modules and field labs focusing on predator-
prey interactions. 2) The investigators will participate as mentors in a
faculty-mentoring network (NSF-Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and
Synthesis project). This network provides support to K-12 teachers and college
faculty around the country seeking to implement more rigorous quantitative
components in their courses. Additionally, the study will provide research
training for post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students. This project
will support an early career investigator, and two investigators at primarily
undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our
ability to predict how predator loss or introduction affect prey populations and
influence other ecosystem functions by focusing on the overall effect of
multiple predators. The study will combine theoretical, statistical and
empirical approaches and will include the following activities: 1) Field surveys
to measure density, size and species composition of predator and prey
communities in rocky pools. 2) Experiments to measure prey survival, fecundity
and growth as functions of prey density and size, predator identity and food
resources. 3) Use of the data and patterns observed in the field and experiments
to develop new models for predicting prevalence and magnitude of emergent
multiple predator effects. 4) Experimentally test predictions of the existing
and improved models to quantify the importance of predator species and
functional diversity on prey population dynamics in rock pool food webs.