* 1556349
* IDBR: Type A: Development of a yeast-based continuous culture system for detecting bioavailable phosphate
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Jennifer Tank, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2021
* USD 436,809.00

An award is made to The University of Notre Dame to develop a remotely
deployable yeast based biosensor that measures the amount of bioavailable
phosphate in water. Eutrophication, pollution of surface water supplies through
excess nutrients, can result in harmful algal blooms and the degradation of the
quality of surface waters throughout the globe. Thus, the Broader Impacts of the
project include helping to reduce the over abundance of nutrients in water
supplies, protecting the environment, drinking water, and property values, and
optimizing fertilizer use (reducing farming costs and conserving the limited
resource phosphate). The education and outreach efforts will include development
of a simplified batch-culture-based assay for use in schools and community
settings, which will broaden environmental participation and awareness of the
need to reduce phosphate waste. In addition, the analytical chemistry and
ecology students involved in the project will each receive cross-disciplinary
training in the other field.

Improving the technology for measuring phosphate is important because
eutrophication (pollution through excess nutrients) is degrading the quality of
surface waters throughout the globe, and monitoring of phosphate is largely
still limited to laborious lab-based, wet chemistry approaches. The goal of the
project is to address this problem by developing a biologically-based phosphate
sensor that is continuous, relatively inexpensive, remotely deployable, able to
test turbid water, and based on monitoring the growth of the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The principle behind the device is that all organisms (including
yeast) need phosphate to grow; yeast are ideal organisms for this work for
reasons including their robustness to environmental perturbation and resistance
to water-borne viruses. Since yeast growth is linear with phosphate
concentration in the relevant phosphate concentration range, changes in the
amount of bioavailable phosphate in water will be measured by monitoring the
growth and respiration of yeast in this continuous culture system under
conditions where the test water is the only source of phosphate. Because this
sensor will measure bioavailable phosphate, not simply dissolved reactive
phosphate (DRP) or total phosphorous (TP) as measured by other standard
approaches, it will represent an important new tool for any environmental or
engineering studies involving freshwater and should provide insight into
previously inaccessible aspects of nutrient dynamics in aquatic systems.