* 1556684
* Collaborative Research: Sediment stabilization by animals in stream ecosystems: consequences for erosion, ecosystem processes, and biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Wyatt Cross, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2020
* USD 465,084.00

Many of the world's environmental problems are exacerbated by changes in both
biological and physical conditions that jointly influence sediment erosion. In
freshwater habitats, major progress toward clearly linking biology and
geomorphology to address environmental problems includes incorporating the role
of the many small animals that live in streams into our understanding of
erosion. This research project investigates how bottom-dwelling invertebrates in
streams influence flood disturbance by regulating the stability of the riverbed.
Sediment erosion is a critical variable in freshwater ecosystems because it
influences freshwater biodiversity, insect and fish egg survival, changes the
composition and activity of algae, and alters carbon and nutrient cycling. An
understanding of sediment erosion that includes the impacts of bottom-dwelling
animals will address a range of practical problems relevant to society,
including informing models to predict erosion in landscapes altered by land use,
predicting the impacts of floods that are being altered worldwide as a result of
changes to water levels caused by climate warming and diversion for agriculture,
and protecting and restoring habitat for threatened freshwater organisms such as
fish. This project will provide research opportunities for one PhD student, two
Master students, and four undergraduate students, develop workshops to teach
concepts related to bottom-dwelling invertebrate influences on sediment erosion
to high school teachers, and produce outreach videos documenting sediment
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how animals in streams influence
physical resistance to flood disturbance with consequences for aquatic benthic
communities and ecosystem processes, the researchers will study common aquatic
ecosystem engineers, web-spinning hydropsychid caddisfly larvae
(Trichoptera:Hydropsychidae). These aquatic insects build silk structures that
can bind riverbed sediment together, increase the force required to move
sediments, and reduce bedload flux. The researchers will quantify sediment
stabilization effects by caddisfly larvae from grain to landscape scales. They
will also document how changes in sediment disturbance due to caddisfly silk
structures influence ecosystem productivity, nutrient cycling, and the recovery
of benthic communities following floods. The researchers will use a combination
of controlled laboratory experiments, caddisfly density manipulations in natural
streams, field surveys, and sediment transport models to identify how caddisfly
ecosystem engineering affects sediment transport regimes across landscapes.
Together, the series of studies will quantify how much these abundant ecosystem
engineers can regulate erosional processes in streams.