* 1556707
* OPUS: The role  seed dispersal in forest ecosystem function: lessons from the oaks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Michael Steele, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2019
* USD 134,204.00

The main goal of this project is to write a book that summarizes more than 25
years of research about how acorns are dispersed and why dispersal is important
for regeneration of forests in eastern North America and many other places.
Curiously, the same animals that disperse acorns (mostly rodents and jays) also
destroy them by eating them. The book will demonstrate how these animals hide
and often forget about acorns, allowing the acorns to germinate, oak seedlings
to take root, and forests to grow. The book will show: (1) how differences among
acorns influence where and when animals disperse them, (2) how acorn dispersal
benefits forests, (3) how year-to-year differences in the size of acorn crops
influence the dispersal process, (4) how acorn dispersal varies with forest
type, and (5) how the activity of top predators in a forest ecosystem can
fundamentally alter the process of acorn dispersal. This project will re-
evaluate some of the traditional views of seed dispersal and will demonstrate
that help of researchers from a variety of scientific disciplines is necessary
for understanding how acorns are dispersed and why dispersal is important for
conservation of oak forests.

The book will reveal new insights into how the underlying relationship between
seeds and seed consumers (seed predators and dispersers) drive numerous
ecological processes in forest ecosystems (e.g., forest structure, masting, the
evolution of seed characteristics, and even predator/prey interactions), and how
many of these processes feed back into the dispersal process. As such, this
project will re-frame and re-evaluate some of the traditional views of seed
dispersal and its influence on forest ecosystem processes. The book will support
and promote improvements in oak forest management and conservation, especially
in the context of climate change. The book will also have important implications
for understanding the lack of oak regeneration, which is a significant problem
in many deciduous forests of the U.S. and beyond (Northwest Canada, Spain,
Portugal, and Scotland). Furthermore, it will be useful in developing plans for
reintroduction of the American chestnut tree into its native range, and the
potential impact of an invasive Asian oak species, now widespread throughout
eastern North America. From an educational perspective, the project will
provide: (1) new insights for students and researchers on the importance of
multidisciplinary approaches for understanding complex ecological processes, (2)
an opportunity for three or more undergraduates interested in scientific
journalism to assist in the research, produce figures, and edit the book, and
(3) dissemination of the book to a network of Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions involved in the NSF-funded Ecological Research Educational Network
initiative, as well as to high schools in northeastern Pennsylvania.