* 1556700
* Perspective-taking in Conversation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Sarah Brown-Schmidt, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 333,989.00

Conversation among members of a group is a basic form of language use. It likely
played a key role as languages evolved and it continues to play important roles
in children's language acquisition and adult communication. Group communication
is typical of a variety of high-stakes settings, including classroom education
and business teams, yet surprisingly little is known about what makes
communication in groups successful. One determinant of success is the ability to
appreciate the perspective of the other person or people in the conversation.
Basic communicative exchanges such as asking a question require calculations
about what other people know. For example, if you want to know the answer to a
question such as "Where is the gas meter?" it is first necessary to determine
who is likely to know the answer in order to ask the appropriate person (e.g., a
plumber is likely to know, but a young child is not). Keeping track of who knows
what also allows us to navigate social relationships effectively. For example,
if you once tell your friend "My son is getting married in June," it is usually
communicating good news. If you repeat the same information to the same friend
several times, it may instead signal anxiety, uncertainty, or disbelief. This
project examines how people take into account the knowledge and perspective of
other people in communicative settings and examines conversations among groups
of three or more individuals, each of whom brings a different set of beliefs and
knowledge to the conversation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students will have opportunities to participate in laboratory research and high
school students and elderly individuals from the community will be involved in
laboratory activities through community outreach programs. The results of
studies on conversation will not only advance understanding of psychological and
linguistic processes but can also be used to advance computer dialog systems
(such as Siri). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work uses methods established
by the principal investigator to examine key open questions regarding language
use in communicative settings. The idea is that conversational partners serve as
contextual memory cues, supporting the partner-specificity of language use. This
people-as-contexts (PAC) idea is used as a framework (1) to evaluate candidate
hypotheses regarding the mechanisms supporting perspective-taking in multiparty
conversation; (2) to test predictions concerning the binding of partners to
language and generalization to new contexts; and (3) to examine how adaptation
scales up to multiparty conversation. Predictions derived from the theory are
tested in the domains of audience design and syntactic adaptation.