* 1556097
* SBIR Phase II:  Single Crystal Group III-Nitride Bulk Acoustic Resonators and Bulk Acoustic Wave Filter Components for Mobile Communications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jeffrey Shealy, Akoustis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2018
* USD 934,570.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to enable the development and
commercialization of single crystal piezoelectric Bulk Acoustic Wave (BAW)
filters targeting the mobile wireless market, providing much needed improvements
over the incumbent poly-crystalline technology in critical components used in
all smartphones and other wireless devices. The technical advantage based upon
this innovation in single crystal piezoelectric material provides improvements
in key parameters that will benefit consumers of the smartphone, of particular
note are component insertion losses which will result in increased battery life
and reducing the complexity of the RF front-end. Additionally, the
commercialization of this technology will address cellular component market
demand not being serviced with the incumbent technology. There is a general lack
of competition around the incumbent technology based on limited access to
existing intellectual property. The technology developed under this SBIR will
enable new participants in this growing market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable the first
comprehensive study of wide bandgap, group III-Nitride single crystal materials
for bulk mode resonator technology. This technology is the fundamental building
block of RF filter technology and addresses a critical need in today's RF
frontends. The need arises from the filter's location (between amplifier and
antenna) and performance (half the power is lost due to inefficiencies). As a
result, components must be over-designed to accommodate for the filter loss. The
excessive losses degrade battery life and drive higher thermal management costs
in the system. To address this need, a more efficient, lower loss Bulk Acoustic
Wave (BAW) filter with lower losses and dramatically improved performance is
proposed and offers high payoff in the end market. The effort continues the
design and simulation of single-crystal piezoelectric resonators to support
resonant frequencies from 1 to 6 GHz. Piezoelectric materials are synthesized on
150-mm silicon substrates and fabricated into resonators and BAW filters using
an experimental fabrication process flow and novel circuit designs.