* 1556412
* Collaborative Research: Diversity and Evolution of Ectomycorrhizal Fungi of the Guineo-Congolian Rainforest
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Mary Aime, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2019
* USD 587,805.00

Some fungi live in close symbiotic association with plants. These
ectomycorrhizal fungi provide resources to the plant host, and in return, the
plant provides nutrition to the fungi. The interactions of fungi and their hosts
provide crucial ecosystem functions including the recycling of nutrients. While
the critical roles that fungi play in the environment are well established,
their importance in tropical systems is not well understood, and this is
especially true for tropical Africa. This project in the Guineo-Congolian
rainforest will provide the first thorough documentation of these fungi and
plant relationships of tropical Africa using modern methods. The huge forest
covering the Congo River basin is one of the last great tropical rainforests of
the world. Current threats to the region include logging, mining, and climate
change. This project will fill a major gap in our knowledge of the important
symbiotic fungi of this ecosystem through expeditionary fieldwork in the
undisturbed rainforests of Cameroon. This project is potentially transformative
in that if the fungi associated with closely related host plants of Africa and
South America are shown to have a common ancient origin, such results would
fundamentally impact understanding of the evolution, global biogeography, and
local adaptation of ectomycorrhizal symbioses. Additionally, application of new
DNA sequencing methods will develop entirely new, phylogenetically informative
data that will transform the field. It is estimated that over 100 fungi will be
discovered that are new to science. Recognition of these species will greatly
inform broader research areas. Key features of the project include student
training, internet-based information sharing, and public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining traditional specimen-based sampling with high
throughput DNA sequencing, this project will provide the most complete diversity
data to date on ectomycorrhizal fungi of Afrotropical forests. Additionally, it
will enable comparison of intercontinental tropical ectomycorrhizal fungal
communities in corresponding ecosystems. The research will enhance understanding
of fungal biogeography in the Gondwana-derived Afrotropical and Neotropical
Guiana Shield regions. Survey plots identical to those used for surveys in the
Guiana Shield of South America will be established in the Dja Biosphere Reserve
and Korup National Park Cameroon and ectomycorrhizal fungi will be sampled using
morphological and molecular methods over multiple years. Replication of sample
design allows for direct comparisons between Africa and South America, allowing
for robust biogeographic analyses to determine the evolutionary histories of
ectomycorrhizal taxa in a global context.