* 1556283
* Ambrosia beetles and fungi: a comprehensive global survey of an increasingly important symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jiri Hulcr, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 08/31/2022
* USD 720,457.00

This project will document the world-wide diversity of ambrosia fungi - the
nutritional symbionts of the wood-boring fungus-farming ambrosia beetles. The
farming of fungi has evolved in at least 12 different bark beetle groups, and
these groups have radiated into more than 3,500 species. Despite the
evolutionary success of this relationship, estimates suggest that the identity
of the fungal symbiont is unknown for over 90% of beetles. Global movement of
wood products has made many ambrosia beetles invasive, and many of the symbiotic
fungi have become pathogens to tree crops. This project will document the
ambrosia beetle-fungal symbiosis and characterize the fungal community for each
ambrosia beetle genus using new molecular and culturing techniques. Two graduate
students will be trained in field and laboratory techniques. The project will
also disseminate research findings through an exhibit of beetle calligraphy at
the Harn Museum of Modern Art in Gainesville, FL, and a national citizen science
project entitled 'Backyard Bark Beetles'. Researchers will also enhance
international collaboration and infrastructure by running an ambrosia beetle
identification workshop in tropical Asia to help inspectors identify the most
invasive species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of this project is to
comprehensively sample ambrosia beetle-fungal symbioses to investigate the level
of symbiont specificity. Three globally-invasive ambrosia beetle-fungus
complexes will then be sampled to investigate how the fungal symbiont community
has changed over time following vector dispersal, invasion, and contact with new
communities. The third and ultimate goal of the project is to use phylogenetic
and comparative methods to reconstruct the pattern of ambrosia beetle-fungus
coevolution. With new data on fungus communities, it will be possible to compare
the influence of beetle phylogeny, geographic origin, latitude and other factors
on beetle-fungus relationships. This project will implement a series of methods
to achieve the research goals, including high-throughput DNA metabarcoding, a
new 'RNA metabarcoding' approach to investigate fungal metabolic prominence, and
a RADseq-based approach to reconstruct population genetic history, Together,
this research will produce a comprehensive dataset on the identity and movements
of ambrosia and their fungal symbionts in both their native and invaded regions
that will provide essential baseline data to help control the global impact of
both ambrosia beetles and ambrosia fungi.