* 1556434
* SBIR Phase II:  Porous Conductive Polymer Nanostructures as Antistatic Additives for Coatings and Plastics
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Volha Hrechka, PolyDrop
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,176,123.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to continue the
development of a family of new nanostructured conductive additives for use in
high-performance coatings and composite resins. Static charge buildup from the
environment is a critical problem in a number of vehicular applications, which
increasingly utilize lightweight components constructed from non-conductive
plastic or composite materials. Static charge buildup interferes with electronic
components, such as distributed sensors, so that mitigation of this effect is
essential for safe vehicle operation. The design of lightweight vehicles using
composite materials, which requires high-performing antistatic coatings, will
lead to large reductions in fuel consumption and carbon emissions in
transportation. In 2011, emissions from transportation accounted for 28% of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions. Modern aircraft designs, utilizing composite
materials, show more than 20% reduction in fuel consumption compared to
traditional vehicles. Imminent increases in fuel efficiency standards in
automobiles will also drive manufacturers to adopt the use of composite
materials. The development of the proposed antistatic coatings is essential to
enabling these new lightweight material technologies.

The new additives are based on the synthesis of self-assembling nanostructures
from conductive polymers and structure-directing agents. When successfully
incorporated in commercial paints and primers, the conductive properties of the
coating are enhanced without compromising adhesion and durability. In this Phase
II effort, we will further optimize these additives, based on key customer
requirements, and develop a plan to scale up their production tenfold with
reduced waste and production time. Corrosion properties for marine applications
will also be evaluated, and the product portfolio will be expanded to address
follow-on applications.