* 1556565
* Collaborative Research: A Paleogenetic Survey of Late Quaternary Mammal Biodiversity in Southeast Alaska
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Charlotte Lindqvist, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

The Pleistocene Epoch began approximately 1.8 million years before present and
lasted until about 12 milennia ago, when the last Ice Age ended. Many large
mammals succumbed to the harsh climatic conditions of this period, while others
were confined to habitable ice-free areas, or refugia. During the peak of the
last Ice Age, sheets of ice divided the Old and New Worlds, restricting movement
of organisms across the Bering Land Bridge for thousands of years. Geological
and biological evidence have suggested, however, that refugia along the North
Pacific Coast may have played crucial roles as "stepping stones" for movements
of species between the Old and New Worlds, forming an early postglacial corridor
for the recolonization of North America. Building on an unparalleled vertebrate
bone collection excavated from limestone caves in Southeast (SE) Alaska, this
project will perform genetic analyses and radiocarbon dating of black and brown
bear specimens from throughout the last 50,000 years to directly test if these
caves were occupied by bears at the peak of the last Ice Age. By ensuring
precise species determinations of these keystone mammal species in SE Alaska,
and providing evolutionary links to extant populations, this research will
elucidate species' responses to climate change and help circumscribe the extent
and timing of viable coastal refugia in SE Alaska. As such, results from this
project will provide important data for a deeper comprehension of the dynamic
changes in trans-Beringian biota during the Late Pleistocene, the diversity and
biogeographic history of the region, and its importance as a corridor for
exchange between continents during and after the last Ice
Age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important outcome of this research is to recover
genetic information from bear specimens that occupied SE Alaska during the late
Wisconsin glaciation and into the Holocene, and provide calibrations for precise
timings of demographic events. Focusing on brown bears (Ursus arctos) and black
bears (Ursus americanus), which have developed into well-established systems for
studies of Northern Hemisphere phylogeography, the project will test if the same
bear populations inhabited this region continuously for the last 50,000 years,
or if they were recolonized following the Last Glacial Maximum, and if they
contributed to postglacial (modern) mainland populations. The project will take
a highly integrative approach that leverages state-of-the-art ancient DNA
analysis (including a targeted hybridization enrichment approach using custom-
made biotinylated RNA baits designed from whole mitochondrial genome sequences),
radiocarbon and molecular dating, reconstruction of paleodiets, and phylogenetic
reconstruction. This research will have broad significance toward understanding
past and present North American mammal diversity and for assessing the impact of
late Pleistocene climate change on biotic diversification, colonization, and the
historical biogeography of the region.