* 1556995
* SG: Combining phylogenetic and network analyses for the study of symbiotic systems: a case study using lichens
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Jolanta Miadlikowska, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/28/2019
* USD 149,943.00

Symbioses, which are physically close associations of species including positive
(mutualism) and negative (parasitism) interactions, are more the rule than the
exception in nature. Virtually all species, including humans, have been and
continue to be strongly influenced by symbioses. Ultimately, a comprehensive
understanding of the history of life on Earth requires the detailed
understanding of the evolutionary and ecological forces shaping species
symbioses. The over-arching goal of this research project is to integrate
evolutionary (genealogical) and ecological (species interactions) network
analyses to test hypotheses about the origins and control of symbiotic
associations. This work will focus on the evolution of specificity between
symbiotic partners (generalists vs. specialists) using lichen symbioses as a
model system. The project builds on a great deal of prior genetic analyses,
which have been conducted on over 700 symbiotic associations between fungal and
algal species, which give rise to lichens. This project will also provide
opportunities for postdoc and undergraduate student training, and will develop
non-technical web pages outlining the project to be made available to the
public. There will also be professional symposia on the development of novel
computational methods for studying symbioses. High school students will be
invited to participate in this project based on their interest in a general
workshop on lichen symbioses that will be organized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
datasets and phylogenetic results generated by previous studies, provide a
unique opportunity to address the following objectives of this study: (1)
conduct a network analysis to reveal the association trends of the two
mutualistic partners giving rise to lichens, and to infer the most important
contributing factors to those associations; (2) compare these results from
lichens with other fungal-photoautotrophic systems (e.g., mycorrhizae,
endophytes); and (3) design new phylogenetic methods to study the evolution of
specificity of interacting fungi and cyanobacteria or algae, and to identify
factors correlated with shifts in specificity toward lower or higher specificity
in species associations (generalists or specialists). This project is expected
to advance the field by coupling the inferential power of phylogenetics with
ecological network theory to study symbiotic associations among species within
lichens. This new approach for what may be called eco-phylogenetic analysis will
estimate, for the first time, the contribution of biotic and abiotic factors
through time that best explain the patterns of symbiotic associations observed
in nature. The methods developed will be applicable to other symbioses, beyond
lichens.