* 1556370
* IDBR: TYPE A:   Instrument to extract and quantify soil-borne, parasitic nematode pests of agricultural crops
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Gregory Tylka, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 12/31/2021
* USD 587,248.00

An award is made to Iowa State University (ISU) to develop an automated
instrument that can extract and quantify nematodes (roundworms) from soil
samples. Identifying crop nematode infestation with a quick and reliable soil
analysis technique is possibly the Holy Grail in plant nematology. In this
context, an automated instrument to determine cyst nematode egg numbers will be
truly appealing for farmers, plant scientists, and agribusinesses. Knowing the
nature and level of cyst nematode infestation in a field will help the farmer
monitor the effectiveness of and plan for better pest management strategies,
thereby improving soybean productivity. The instrument technology will be
disseminated through extension talks to Iowa farmers and agribusiness personnel,
online newsletters, videos on educational websites, and demonstrations at
scientific and farmer conferences. Outreach will be conducted to stakeholders in
the seed industry and universities to convince them to test the new instrument
and provide feedback. In addition, programs will be developed to train minority
and female life science students in programming and engaging third grade Iowa
students through a unique NSF STEM-C project called
Trinect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-parasitic nematodes, such as the Soybean
Cyst Nematode (SCN), are microscopic worms that damage plants and reduce crop
yields worldwide. The only definite way to accurately identify SCN infestations
and predict future crop damage in fields is by extracting and counting the
number of SCN worms, cysts, and eggs in the soil. Current nematode extraction
procedures and instruments are very old and labor intensive, and it is
challenging to automate methods of soil processing and analysis. This project is
to build a modern, automated instrument to perform all the mechanical functions
involved in current nematode extraction procedures. Also, a smartphone-based
microscope with custom software will be realized for the counting of SCN worms,
cysts, and eggs. This automation will improve data consistency and reliability,
reduce labor costs, and increase SCN testing of fields. The new instrument is
designed to be flexible in operation for extracting different types of plant-
parasitic nematodes, soil-borne fungal spores, and weed seeds.