* 1557177
* Collaborative Research: Do ecological feedbacks across trophic levels affect alternate stable states and restoration of tropical forests?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Carla D'Antonio, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2022
* USD 815,531.00

A substantial portion of the Earth's wildlands have been degraded by past land
use, species extinctions and invasion by non-native species. Degraded ecosystems
often do not provide the same important services to humans as intact systems -
including such services as erosion prevention, flood control, and support for
wildlife. This research addresses tropical forest ecosystems that have been
degraded by past forest clearing and the loss of native fruit-dispersing birds
and asks why these forests are not returning to native species dominance despite
the cessation of the original disturbances that caused their degradation. It
evaluates the interacting roles of widespread invasive pasture grasses, high
levels of soil nitrogen, and loss of important native species (birds, a
previously dominant native tree, and soil microorganisms) in stalling forest
recovery. The work also addresses why the common restoration method of mass
replanting of a single native tree species does not lead to recovery of native
tropical forest. This research will provide badly needed information on growth
requirements for endemic Hawaiian forest species and will help direct
restoration actions to insure better success in recreating diverse native
forests, which may result in cost savings for future restoration projects. This
project will also train local students who will become the future stewards of
these ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insight into the theory of alternative
stable states, which has come to dominate discussions of ecosystem degradation
and restoration, will be gained with this research. A key assumption of this
theory is that current conditions create feedbacks or priority effects that
stall change, thus hindering recovery of ecosystems that exist in a degraded
state. Most research on this topic focuses on the role of particular individual
feedbacks in slowing ecosystem change. Using degraded montane tropical forests
in Hawaii as a study system, this research addresses the role of multiple
feedbacks, including cross-trophic level ones, in interfering with, or
conversely allowing, community development away from a seemingly non-transient
degraded state. An interdisciplinary team will address the importance and
interactions of avian seed dispersal, overstory tree composition, understory
grass competition with dispersing seedlings, and plant-soil and mycorrhizal
feedbacks in maintaining persistent degraded conditions. The research tests
specific interactions between birds, plants, nitrogen availability and
mycorrhizae using manipulative field experiments, greenhouse feedback studies
and ecological modeling. Together the team will work to determine what
combinations of management actions are needed to accelerate ecosystem change in
the direction desired by land managers.