* 1557906
* Integrated Adaptations to Moisture Supply and Cross-over in Whole-plant Growth among Eucalyptus Species Along an Australian Rainfall Gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Mark Adams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2022
* USD 979,319.00

Land plants face a fundamental tradeoff: to acquire the carbon dioxide needed to
photosynthesize and grow, they must expose their moist, living cells to a dry
atmosphere, which causes enormous losses of water. Any adjustment to minimize
water loss comes at the price of slower intake of carbon. Theory suggests that
roughly 20 traits involving plant morphology, physiology, and leaf structure
should vary with moisture supply in order to maximize whole-plant height growth
and survival. This study will examine all these traits in ten species of
Eucalyptus (one of the most widely planted genera of trees on Earth) that differ
in their distribution across a rainfall gradient from temperate rain forest to
semi-desert in Victoria, Australia. Plants will be grown in four common gardens
that span this gradient. Measurements of photosynthetic and water transport
capacity will be made regularly and periodic harvests will be used to assess
morphology and rates of growth. This project is pioneering for understanding
adaptation to moisture supply, because it combines a novel theoretical approach
with the use of common gardens to test for potential forces shaping species
distributions. This project will train a postdoc, at least one graduate student,
and multiple undergraduates. The results will help to understand plant response
to prolonged and severe droughts, and distribution in arid regions. A multimedia
presentation on Eucalyptus adaptation to moisture supply will be made for public
television, and a capstone field course will be offered through UW-Madison and U
Sydney that will focus on plant adaptation and community
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant survival, growth, adaptation, and
integration of roughly 20 traits involving photosynthesis, hydraulics, and
resource allocation will be studied in ten Eucalyptus species, stratified
phylogenetically and by dominance of successive bands of annual rainfall in
Victoria, Australia. Measurements will be made over two 2-year experiments at
four common gardens spanning this gradient. Phylogenetically structured tests of
adaptation and functional integration will be conducted, asking whether the
observed shifts tend to maximize rates of height growth, whether patterns of
plasticity within species in response to moisture supply conflict with those
seen across species, and whether species show evidence of adaptive cross-over,
with taxa having an advantage in height growth or survival only under conditions
similar to those they dominate in nature. A direct experimental test of
competitive success at each common garden will be compared with expectations
based on growth rates of uncrowded monocultures and theoretical predictions
based on plant traits. The proposed research is novel for studying plant
adaptation to moisture supply, in terms of the range of traits whose adaptation
and integration will be examined, the use of common gardens to test for cross-
over in height growth as support for adaptation and a potential force shaping
species distributions, and the use of growth models to identify key traits and
trait aggregates that affect plant growth.