* 1557211
* Preparing Highly Qualified Women STEM Majors to Become Successful Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Carol Johnston, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,182,982.00

Studies show that there is a significant positive relationship between the
presence of minority teachers in primary and secondary schools, and minority
student performance. This issue is critically important to California schools,
which enroll about 72% minority students but only employ about 29% minority
teachers. Mount Saint Mary's University (MSMU) Noyce program will address the
need for highly qualified teachers in the STEM disciplines, decrease the
minority and female gender gap, and ultimately increase underrepresented groups
participation in STEM. The goal of the program is to enable low-income, high-
achieving, first generation women from underrepresented groups who have a
passion for STEM to pursue teaching careers in middle and secondary high-need
schools in Southern California. This program will recruit, prepare and support
17 women majoring in mathematics, biochemistry, biological sciences, or
chemistry, who will concurrently pursue a teaching credential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSMU is implementing the project in collaboration with the
Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) and other high-need schools in the
Los Angeles area. Project activities include intensive on- and off-campus
recruitment as well as program modifications and add-ons, such as Noyce program
orientation, STEM-based internships with the campus Math Lab and the California
Science Center, a supportive cohort environment, continuing faculty mentoring
and quarterly meetings, mini-grants to enhance scholars' classroom resources,
and a new course that combines mathematics, pedagogy and California Subject
Examinations for Teachers (CSET) preparation. A unique aspect of the program
will be training that will provide the pre-service teacher with a certificate in
inclusive and responsive teaching (CIRT), which will prepare them to provide
successful learning experiences for students in high need schools. The project
will contribute to the body of knowledge by providing a model of effective
practices in recruiting, retaining, and preparing a population that is
especially absent in STEM education -- women from minority and low-income
backgrounds. The project's activities and strategies for fostering greater
interest in teaching mathematics and science among these students will be
tracked and evaluated. Particular attention will be paid to strategies for
attracting high-achieving women who have not previously considered a career in
teaching. The evaluation of the project will carefully track the impact of each
program component on the students' teaching practice, satisfaction and
persistence in the profession.