* 1557022
* Pathogen invasion and persistence in an establishing host population: Leptospirosis in the endangered island fox
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Katherine Prager, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 420,256.00

Pathogens are tiny organisms that cause disease and sometimes death in a "host"
species. Because invasion of pathogens into new host populations can have
dramatic effects on hosts, including humans, ecologists have long studied the
causes and consequences of pathogen invasion. Previous work has focused on
situations in which pathogens invade host populations that are stable and
already established. That work does not help us understand infectious disease in
two other situations that are important: when a new host species is spreading
across a landscape (where disease might help slow its spread) and when a rare
host species is deliberately reintroduced as part of a conservation program
(where disease is a threat to conservation goals). This project will be the
first in-depth study of the second situation. It will explore how a rare host
and common pathogen interact from the initial reintroduction of the host and
invasion of the pathogen to their long-term persistence or die-out. The
investigators will study an endangered Island Fox population, recently
reintroduced to a California island. The foxes are now experiencing a major
outbreak of a disease called leptospirosis, which causes major health problems
for humans and wildlife around the world. This project will build understanding
of how leptospirosis spreads in wildlife and eventually can infect humans and
livestock. Island foxes are a rare success story in which Endangered Species Act
protections have enabled the fox population to recover; this work will guide
future management of Island Foxes. More generally, this work will inform risk
assessment and disease control in other reintroduction programs. The project
includes outreach efforts to inform the public, including southern California
school-children, about conservation and disease issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study system is the Island Fox (Urocyon littoralis) on Santa Rosa Island,
California. After a population crash in the late 1990s, all 14 remaining foxes
on Santa Rosa were taken into captivity. A reintroduction program, beginning in
2004, reestablished foxes on the island, but an outbreak of Leptospira
interrogans (the agent of leptospirosis) was discovered in 2010. Analysis of
banked serum samples showed that the outbreak was already widespread on the
island by 2009-10, and the pathogen likely invaded the fox population as it re-
colonized the island after fox reintroduction. The island spotted skunk
(Spilogale gracilis) was also found to be infected, and genetic analyses
indicate a close link to a Leptospira strain circulating in California sea lions
(Zalophus californianus) that frequent the island. Extensive sample banks and
population monitoring data provide a unique opportunity to reconstruct the
history of this pathogen invasion. This project will integrate field,
laboratory, genomic and modeling approaches. Its goals are to determine the
source of Leptospira in the Santa Rosa outbreak, characterize transmission
dynamics in the island community throughout the establishment process, predict
whether Leptospira will persist on the island, and assess the impact of
Leptospira on fox health and conservation. The investigators will generalize the
findings to extract lessons and tools to be applied to other disease systems.