* 1557855
* I-Corps:  Local Ladybugs: An Effective, Environmentally Sound Pest Management Alternative
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* John Losey, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed I-Corps project will explore the commercial feasibility of raising
and selling native lady beetles (also known as ladybugs and ladybird beetles) to
provide an alternative tool for gardeners and farmers to control the insect
pests that eat their plants. Lady beetles are one of the main groups of insects
that can control these pests. Currently, farmers and gardeners purchase live
lady beetles which have been collected from mountains in California. Over 3
billion beetles are sold annually for approximately $3 million and increasing
concerns about pesticides and the rapid growth of the organic agriculture sector
are expected to make biological controls increasingly attractive. There are
several reasons why a new product could successfully break into the lady beetle
portion of the biological control market including; 1)released convergent lady
beetles fly away and do not control pests, 2)convergent lady beetles collected
from one small area in California might spread disease across the country [the
spread of disease is a leading theory of why honey bees declined], and 3)drought
in California which is driving availability down and price up. Clearly this
market is ripe for an alternative that actually performs. The alternative lady
beetles this team will supply will be more effective (as locally adapted beetles
have consistently proven to be)and they are formerly common native species that
have recently become rare and are in dire need of conservation.

The proposed approach will be to produce laboratory-reared native lady beetles
as an alternative field-collected beetles or pesticides for the suppression of
insect pests. It has been generally accepted for some time that the currently
available lady beetles are ineffective and had potentially necgative
environmental consequences but attempts to make alternative species available
through rearing (as opposed to collecting) have failed. With the proposed
rearing technique, the team expects to produce beetles that would far outperform
the currently sold product in terms of pest suppression, without the potential
for negative environmental impacts, and could reasonably expect to command a
premium for these incremental benefits. The team currently produces 100's of
beetles per week and has the capacity to potentially produce 10s of 1000s per
week. The greater efficacy, availability and positive environmental impact
should lead many current and new consumers to the proposeded product.
Environmentally concerned farmers and gardeners have already contacted the Lost
Ladybug Project (a citizen science project with thousands of participants across
the country) in search of sources of alternatives to the convergent lady beetle.
In addition, large land-owners with interests in lady beetle diversity and
conservation have contacted the team wishing to release threatened natives on
their land indicating the potential for a "green lady beetle" market in addition
to the pest suppression.