* 1557964
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Evolution of Peptidoglycan in the Bacterial Symbiont Vibrio Fischeri
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Eric Stabb, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2020
* USD 478,312.00

Bacterial cell walls are usually composed of an interconnected mesh made of
peptidoglycan (PG). PG is unique to these microorganisms. It is essential for
bacterial survival, and has a remarkably conserved structure throughout diverse
bacterial groups. PG is not found in plants and animals, and given its
essentialness and conservation in bacteria, it is an excellent target for
antibiotics and innate immunity. Thus, PG is a focus of strategies for bacterial
detection and control. Blocking the ability of bacteria to make a normal PG
structure is generally lethal, yet in rare instances bacteria with novel PG have
evolved naturally. This project uses the model animal-associated bacterium
Vibrio fischeri to explore what happens when PG is experimentally forced to
evolve. The results will shed light on the natural evolution of peptidoglycan,
on the constraints of its function in bacteria, and on the limits of targeting
PG as a means of controlling bacteria. Moreover, V. fischeri is a natural
symbiotic bacterium that colonizes a Hawaiian squid, and PG is a key signaling
molecule in this symbiosis. Thus, it offers the opportunity to examine how
peptidoglycan structure affects the ability of host animal tissue to detect and
respond to its resident bacteria (i.e., its microbiome). The broader impacts of
this work for society include interdisciplinary graduate and undergraduate
student training, outreach to community K-12 schools, and contributions to a
book on bacterial symbionts geared for use in the classroom.

This project will elucidate how unusual changes to bacterial cell-wall
peptidoglycan (PG) structure can evolve, and it will help define constraints on
PG evolution. This project will examine how the tractable bacterium Vibrio
fischeri can evolve new PG structure(s) using a strategy of iteratively blocking
both normal and alternative pathways to PG biosynthesis. Viable mutants
generating novel PG will be selected. Such mutants are likely to have distinctly
non-wild-type properties of growth, cell shape, motility, etc.; however, rounds
of growth in culture will lead to evolved strains that have accommodated the new
PG. A combination of phenotypic testing and whole-genome resequencing will
underpin a systems-type analysis of these evolved strains. The integrated
analysis of genetic and phenotypic data will improve our understanding of how
the cell wall is coordinated with other cellular components and processes, and
it will lead to the discovery of new phenotypically important interconnections
in bacterial cells. The results will inform our understanding of the natural
evolution of PG and lead to a more predictive understanding of how PG might
evolve in the future, e.g. under selective pressure from antibiotic use. V.
fischeri is a symbiont in a model squid symbiosis, in which symbiont PG triggers
developmental changes in the host. This study will provide insight into the
relationship between PG structure and its function in this symbiosis, with
broader implications for understanding innate immunity in higher organisms.