* 1557962
* Discovery of a Novel Signal that Enhances Germination and Seedling Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,05/31/2017
* David Nelson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* philip becraft
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Plant hormones control how and when plants grow, and how plants react to their
environment. Manipulating plant hormones with chemical and genetic tools has
been instrumental in the green revolution; a deeper understanding of how
hormones control plant growth will likely fuel future advances in agriculture.
In this project, biological sensors will be developed to detect a recently
recognized plant hormone called strigolactone, and an unknown molecule in plants
(KL) that controls seed germination, seedling growth, and leaf shape. The
biological sensors will be used in this project to purify KL, which may be a
novel hormone, and to identify genes that produce it. Discovery of KL may lead
to the development of new agrichemicals or genetic modifications that promote
uniform seed germination and seedling vigor, thus increasing crop yields.
Strigolactone sensors will be useful tools for plant breeders to more easily
develop crops with altered strigolactone levels, which can in turn influence the
fertilizer requirements of crops and their susceptibility to weeds.
Undergraduate students and a postdoctoral researcher will be trained in research
skills and scientific communication, leading to enhancement of the scientific
workforce. Research discoveries will be communicated to the public through
journal publications, press releases, news articles, and local speaking
opportunities.

Karrikins are compounds found in smoke that promote seed germination after fire
and enhance seedling vigor. The karrikin signaling pathway is highly similar to
the strigolactone signaling pathway, suggesting common ancestry. A receptor that
is necessary for karrikin responses, KARRIKIN INSENSITIVE 2 (KAI2), has been
identified, but karrikins are unlikely to be its native ligand. The aims of this
project are to (1) develop sensitive and specific biological assays to detect
the unknown KAI2 ligand (KL) and strigolactones, (2) identify genes involved in
KL biosynthesis, and (3) highly purify KL from plant extracts as a steppingstone
toward its identification. Biological sensors for karrikins/KL and
strigolactones based on transcriptional or proteolytic responses will be
engineered. These bioassays will be used in genetic screens to identify KL-
deficient mutants. Finally, bioassay-guided fractionation will be used to
isolate KL in small molecule extracts from plants. The discovery of KL and KL
biosynthesis genes will catalyze a new field of research in plant biology that
impacts the understanding of seed dormancy, seedling photomorphogenesis, and
leaf development. It will also provide insights into the ancestral function of
the KAI2 signaling mechanism in basal land plants, which later duplicated and
evolved to mediate growth control by strigolactones.