* 1557722
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Advancing mHealth using Big Data Analytics: Statistical and Dynamical Systems Modeling of Real-Time Adaptive m-Intervention for Pain
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Daniel Abrams, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 33,760.00

With the growing popularity of mobile phone technology, new opportunities have
arisen for real-time adaptive medical intervention. The simultaneous growth of
multiple "big data" sources (e.g., mobile health data, electronic health
records, lab test results, genomic data) allows for the development of
personalized recommendations. This award supports initiation of a collaborative
research project that will generate a new mathematical model for changes in
subjective pain over time in patients with chronic conditions. The model will be
combined with statistical techniques to ultimately obtain optimized,
continuously-updated treatment plans balancing competing demands of pain
reduction and medication minimization. Those resulting personalized treatment
plans will be incorporated into a currently active pilot study on mobile
intervention in patients living with chronic pain due to sickle cell disease
(SCD). Since nearly a quarter of patient visits to the emergency room are for
conditions that could have been managed as outpatients, it is crucial to improve
mobile health technologies to allow these patients to quickly recognize and
receive appropriate health care information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
currently is no standard algorithm or analytical method for real-time adaptive
treatment recommendations for chronic conditions like pain. Furthermore, current
state-of-the-art methods have difficulty in handling continuous-time decision
optimization using big data. The proposed model will consist of a dynamical
systems approach using differential equations to forecast future pain levels, as
well as a statistical approach tying system parameters to patient data
(including reported pain levels, medication history, personal characteristics
and other health records). A third key component will be the development and
pilot study of a new control and optimization strategy to balance the competing
demands of pain reduction and drug dosage minimization. This award is supported
by the National Institutes of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in
partnership with the National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical
Sciences.