* 1557761
* QuBBD: Classification and clustering of medical time series data: the example of syncope
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2018
* Pierre Gremaud, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 92,000.00

Syncope or, more colloquially, fainting, is a surprisingly common and little
understood condition. The long term goal of the proposed line of work is the
identification of the root causes of syncope. Fainting can result from the
failure of one or more internal control mechanisms. There are currently no clear
causal links between these controls and the observed symptoms. In order to
understand the involved mechanisms, this project will start by analyzing
clinical data to determine the number and characterization of the different
types of syncope. A better understanding hinges on the analysis of clinical
data, here time series, and the ability to infer from these, patient
classification. Various scenarios will be tested through mathematical modeling
to confirm both the soundness of the obtained classification and the nature and
source of the pathology for each identified class. The ability to identify
subjects as members of a class or group also makes it possible to leverage
information about the other members of that group for individual diagnosis
purposes. The methodology developed here will contribute to the implementation
of this approach, sometimes referred to as "bringing cohort studies to the
bedside". This approach will also be applicable to the study of other diseases
where similar clinical data are being collected such as epilepsy.

Time series data are ubiquitous. In fact, the development of an ever increasing
number of applications depends on their analysis, from stock market and
economics to weather predictions. Practical issues include signal matching,
classification, pattern detection and early prediction. Signals of interest are
often high dimensional and noisy and the underlying dynamics are generally
unknown. This award supports initiation of a collaborative research project that
addresses all the above issues in the context of medical times series data and,
more specifically, for syncope. To do so, a novel paradigm combining non-
parametric statistics, machine learning, and applied mathematics is proposed.
The first objective is to design and compute features in multivariate time
series that are well adapted to classification and clustering. The proposed
approach relies on recent advances in the evaluation of variable importance for
scattered data. The second objective is to facilitate calibration of
mathematical models by extending machine-learning concepts to this new realm.
The goal is to determine how much data is necessary to "learn" biomathematics
models and increasing their predictive power. This award is supported by the
National Institutes of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in
partnership with the National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical
Sciences.