* 1557428
* CSBR: Natural History: Preservation of Carnegie Museum of Natural History's Herpetology Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Lauren Giarratani, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,224.00

This project will improve the security, preservation, and accessibility of the
Carnegie Museum of Natural History Herpetological Collection, a world-class
resource of over 235,000 specimens. This collection includes large historical
holdings from areas that have undergone drastic environmental change or may face
important change in the future. Recent research citing the collection
exemplifies how new and unpredicted scientific paradigms, environmental issues,
and technological advances require the existence of extensive and accessible
historical scientific collections. Genetics, molecular phylogenetics, museomics,
biomechanics, global change, emerging diseases, and invasive species are
research areas for which specimens from this collection have recently been used.
Based on recommendations from recent assessments that identified a number of
urgent challenges affecting the collection and its related data, Carnegie Museum
of Natural History has developed an extensive plan to preserve and increase
access to the collection, ensuring that this important resource is sustained and
able to support research for generations to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ranking
tenth among US collections of its kind, the Herpetology Collection at Carnegie
Museum of Natural History spans more than 100 years of scientific collecting in
170 countries. It includes 148 holotypes and 2,007 paratypes (specimens of
special scientific and historic significance used in the original species
descriptions), specimens of six extinct and 78 critically endangered species,
and one of the world's largest turtle collections. Through this award, Carnegie
Museum of Natural History will: a) optimize storage space to improve curation
and access and mitigate preservation risks due to overcrowding and suboptimal
containers; b) digitize vouchered archival data related to specific specimens,
providing vital context for the collection; c) accession and catalog ca. 12,000
specimens, georeference locality data, and make data and images of holotypes and
paratypes digitally accessible; d) update taxonomy throughout the Section and
reorganize the collection accordingly; e) enhance the public's appreciation of
the value of collections and research by developing new collections-based
programs and exhibits. Ensuring the long-term preservation and availability of
the Section's specimens and related data is key for supporting future research
efforts. Likewise, digitizing important archival records will expand the
relevance of the collection for studies in ecology, systematics, conservation,
and the history of natural history collections. Updating taxonomy and
georeferencing additional records will enhance the precision of biodiversity
data, improving usefulness to the global research community. In addition,
collaborative planning will lead to the implementation of new educational
programming and two new museum exhibits designed to enhance the public's
appreciation of the value of collections for research and increase understanding
of the collection's importance in the public's day-to-day life. Project results
are available on line (www.carnegiemnh.org/projects/alcohol-house), and data
will be shared and made available through iDigBio (www.idigbio.org), VertNet,
and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF).