* 1557244
* CI-P: Planning Simulation Infrastructure Evaluation for Parallel/Distributed Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/21/2015,05/31/2019
* Nam Sung Kim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2019
* USD 99,999.00

The importance of running one or more applications on a computer system
comprised of many connected computers such as data centers and supercomputers in
a parallel/distributed manner has continued to increase because of the
proliferation of valuable and essential applications including various Internet-
based services provided by Google, Facebook, Amazon etc. The evaluation of
performance and power efficiency of parallel/distributed computer systems
running such applications prove to be critical when the high impact of these
applications on our society, economy and environment is considered. This
necessitates a flexible, detailed, and open-source full-system simulation
infrastructure, which is lacking at present. The goal of this project is to lay
the groundwork for developing such an evaluation infrastructure for increased
computing performance, so as to assure the leading position of the US academia
and industry in large-scale parallel/distributed
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will enable developing a
system simulator augmented with rudimentary features and models to support
simulation of a simple parallel/distributed computer system. It will be
distributed to the computer architecture and operating system research
communities with the expectation that such a simulator will lay the foundation
for developing a more advanced full-system simulation infrastructure that can
quickly but precisely simulate more representative parallel/distributed computer
system in the future. A tutorial will be arranged to foster the use of the
system simulator, and a workshop, which will involve students, researchers from
academic institutions and leading industrial/national research labs, will be
organized to identify various requirements and desirable features needed by a
full blown system simulation infrastructure.