* 1557097
* The role of production processes in determining word duration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Duane Watson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2021
* USD 317,099.00

The rhythm and timing of our speech plays an important role in communication.
For example, speakers tend to say the word nine more quickly in the sentence A
stitch in time saves nine than in the sentence The number I am thinking of is
nine. Some of these differences in timing are driven by our desire to help the
listener understand us: the word nine is less predictable in the second sentence
than it is in the first, so we lengthen it to give our listeners extra time to
understand it. Alternatively, speakers may shorten nine in the first sentence
because it is easier to say. Slowing down and speeding up during speaking may
give the production system the time it needs to plan and produce accurate,
continuous speech. This project examines the types of planning that occur during
speech and the different ways they may affect our speaking rate. The results of
this project may eventually lead to better interventions for individuals with
speech disorders and to advances in designing artificial speech systems that
sound more natural.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A puzzle for language researchers is
understanding the factors that affect how speakers actualize specific words. For
example, the length of a given word is driven, at least in part, by how
informative the word is in the discourse (e.g., how predictable it is, how much
new information it provides, etc?). What is less well understood are the
specific factors and mechanisms that underlie the timing and duration of each
word. This project tests the hypothesis that different levels of linguistic
planning have differential effects on time to articulation and word duration, a
theory the investigator calls the ?two-domain hypothesis.? Under this
hypothesis, lexical and conceptual planning influence the time to begin
articulating a word, while planning processes related to phonological ordering
affect the timing of producing the word itself. Preliminary work suggests that
when the process of encoding the order of a word?s sounds is complex, the word
is lengthened. On the other hand, when this phonological encoding proceeds
smoothly, the word is shorter. Preliminary experiments also suggest that lexical
priming affects the time to begin a word?s articulation, but not the word?s
duration. The proposed experiments use an event-description paradigm to test the
predictions of the two-domain hypothesis and will lead to a better understanding
of which aspects of planning influence word duration.