* 1557651
* Collaborative Proposal: No Brainer: Cognitive-like Behaviors in a Unicellular Slime Mold
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Gregory Weber, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 06/30/2020
* USD 245,000.00

Most of life is brainless and the vast majority of organisms on Earth lack
neurons altogether. These organisms include plants, fungi, and bacteria (both
non-pathogenic and disease-causing types), who all must cope with the same
problem as humans - make the best choices in an ever changing world or risk
dying - but without the help of a brain or even a simple nervous system. This
project will explore the decision-making abilities of one of these neuron-less
organisms, the slime mold Physarum polycephalum. Of particular interest is (1)
how P. polycephalum integrates noisy and sometimes contradictory information
when selecting a food source; and (2) the role of its past experiences (e.g. the
resources it has previously visited) on the outcome of its future choices.
Because P. polycephalum is a macroscopic unicellular organism, it can be easily
manipulated and observed, while retaining similar characteristics to other
neuron-less, microscopic creatures. It is therefore a perfect model system to
understand how most living beings integrate complex and dynamical information.
The project will train 2 graduate students and at least 15 undergraduate and
high school students in integrative research at one of the most diverse campuses
in the US (Rutgers-Newark and NJIT, both located in Newark, NJ) and at a
collaborating lab in Sydney, Australia. "Hands-on", open sourced demonstration
kits for K-12 classes to experiment with slime mold locomotion and decision-
making will be developed to encourage the study of cognitive processes in
neuron-less organisms and other non-traditional model organisms.

The proposed project will set up a comprehensive experimental and theoretical
framework that can be used beyond the scope of this project to study decision-
making in other neuron-less organisms and to establish comparisons with brained
animals, thereby advancing our comprehension of the emergence of cognitive
processes in biological systems. Cell micromanipulation and calcium imaging
combined with analytical tools from neurophysiology and statistical physics will
be used to first investigate the role of contractile oscillations of P.
polycephalum's cellular plasma membrane in its decision-making process. In
particular, the transfer and integration of information from different stimuli
will be examined. The efficiency of the slime mold decision-making mechanism
when the available information is noisy or contradictory will also be tested.
Finally, whether the slime mold's natural positive geotaxis (motion in the
direction of gravity) can be conditioned (i.e., reversed here) if food is always
present uphill will be determined. This would indicate that the slime mold is
capable of spatial associative learning (a first in the slime mold), and that
its decision-making process is capable of adapting to the characteristics of the
environment through which it moves. All methods, results and software developed
during this project will be made freely available on a repository hosted by the
Open Science Framework.