* 1557431
* Evolution of GRN for Novelty
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Veronica Hinman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 698,388.00

This proposal seeks to understand how genomes (the total DNA sequences of a
creature) evolve to generate diversity in animal shapes. Prior to the analysis
of genomes of many animals, it was assumed that animals developed differently
because they had different protein-coding genes. It is now realized that even
very different animals have similar sets of genes, and it is not the genes
themselves, but how they are used during embryonic development, that lead to
differences. How those genes are used differently during development is poorly
understood, however, and is important for understanding the types of changes in
animal shape that can occur during evolution. This proposal takes advantage of a
clear example of a set of genes that have evolved a new function, i.e. to make a
larval skeleton in the sea urchin, while most echinoderms (the group that
includes the sea urchins) make a skeleton only in the adult animal. What changes
in gene regulation led to this basic new ability? Many community resources will
be generated including DNA sequences that will be shared on publically available
databases such as NCBI and Echinobase. This proposal will also train
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates, including those
from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science. The broader
public will also be engaged in this research through a series of public lectures
in Carnegie Mellon's Osher Lifelong Learning Institute and through outreach
programs with local K-12 public schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gene
regulatory network (GRN) for the development of the sea urchin larval skeleton
is very well known. Other out-group echinoderm larvae have no or very reduced
larval skeletons, yet all echinoderms make a skeleton after metamorphosis. Prior
evidence suggests that the sea urchin larval skeleton was co-opted from the GRN
for the formation of this adult skeleton. The first objective of this proposal
is to determine the set of genes that have been co-opted from the adult
skeletogenic program, and are differently expressed in the sea star mesoderm,
which does not form a skeleton. Differential RNA-Seq will be used to screen for
potential genes in sea urchin, sea cucumbers, and a sea star. Whole-mount in
situ hybridization will be used to determine their spatial location. The next
objective is to understand how cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) can function in the
new larval context and to understand the function of the subcircuits of the co-
opted genes in larval sea urchins. ChIP-Seq will identify CRMs and their
associated genes. Functional dissection of CRMs and perturbation of identified
target genes that are shared targets will determine how these CRMs can function
in both the original and new circuit, and also the types of trans environments,
and subcircuit topologies that permit cooption. This work will contribute to an
understanding of the plasticity and evolvability of GRNs.