* 1557820
* Collaborative Research-RUI: The Role of Extracellular H+ in Processing Visual Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Richard Chappell, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 11/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Proper signaling by neurons in the central nervous system is essential in
enabling organisms to perceive the world around them and to respond
appropriately and adeptly to challenges in their environment. Glial cells
(support cells that wrap and envelop nerve cells and are at least as numerous as
the neurons themselves) are known to modulate neuronal signaling, but the
molecular mechanism(s) by which they exert their effects is largely unknown.
This work will test the hypothesis that glial cells modify neuronal signaling by
altering levels of extracellular acidity, decreasing neurotransmitter release
from neurons. The research program will be conducted in the context of a unique
research and teaching collaboration in which undergraduates and faculty from a
primarily undergraduate institution are active participants in testing important
fundamental questions in neurobiology in conjunction with students and faculty
at several research-intensive universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
vertebrate retina as a model system, the study will employ ultra-sensitive self-
referencing H+-selective microelectrodes in conjunction with newly developed
H+-imaging technologies to measure levels of extracellular H+ from isolated
cells and within the intact retina. The ionic and molecular mechanisms that
mediate glial cell-induced extracellular acidifications will be examined.
Electrophysiological methods will be used to monitor how glial cell activation
alters the flow of neuronal information processing in retinal slices. The
research will help to resolve a current controversy regarding the potential role
that changes in extracellular acidity play in retinal function. These findings
also have the potential to answer a long-standing mystery of retinal function -
why tonic depolarization of photoreceptors, which occurs in darkness, does not
lead to excess release of neurotransmitter and consequent death of neurons by
glutamate-induced excitotoxicity. The results of these studies are likely to
have broad implications for neuroscience generally: glial modulation of
neurotransmitter release via increases in extracellular H+ may be a widely used
mechanism to regulate synaptic strength and prevent glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity throughout the nervous system.