* 1557754
* Collaborative Research: Structural and Functional Connectivity of Squid Chromatophores
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2024
* William Gilly, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 614,622.00

Squid and their relatives (other cephalopods such as octopuses) have the ability
to change skin color with chromatophores, microscopic muscular organs that are
under control of the nervous system. All work on the cellular mechanisms of
chromatophore control in squid has focused on three related species that inhabit
relatively shallow coastal areas that have prominent features like seaweed,
rocks and coral on the ocean floor. Skin-color changes in these species are
associated with camouflage, signaling between individuals of the same species
and threat displays with other species. The deeper open ocean presents a
radically different environment that is also inhabited by many squids, primarily
of different taxonomic families from the one commonly inhabiting coastal waters.
An important open-ocean family includes the Humboldt squid (Dosidicus gigas).
There is little light in the ocean at depths inhabited by these squid during
daytime, and visual features such as coral and rocks are non-existent. Novel
color-change behaviors in Dosidicus include repetitive whole-body "flashing,"
used for signaling between individuals of this species, and chaotic "flickering"
that may underlie camouflage in the open ocean. Although these dynamic behaviors
contrast with the more static patterns typical of coastal species, squids of
both families employ temporal and spatial patterning to varying degrees. It is
therefore likely that basic mechanisms for controlling the chromatophore network
are the same in most, if not all, squids. "Vertical" control from the brain to
the chromatophore muscles is known in the coastal squids, and may account for
most chromatophore-based behaviors in those species, but behaviors like
flickering in deeper-water species may be more influenced by processes within
the skin itself that permit changes in chromatophores to spread from one to
another without directly involving the nervous system. This hypothetical pathway
would define a "horizontal" or distributed control system in the periphery that
would permit autonomous behavior within the chromatophore network. This issue is
the primary significance of the project. Understanding the fundamentals of
horizontal control of chromatophores has the potential of being transformative
to the field, because the current paradigm is that all control is directly
exerted by the brain. Horizontal control is relevant to blood delivery to local
tissues by circulatory systems, gut function and nervous system micro-circuits
in vertebrates. Therefore, results from this project would also influence
understanding of local control more broadly. From a wider perspective, results
of this project will provide insight into the interactions of distributed
(horizontal) and top-down (vertical) control mechanisms, a subject relevant to
the general ability of complex systems to generate non-predictable, emergent
phenomena. This concept is of fundamental interest to a broad sector of society,
ranging from engineering to economics to politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
integrated approach will permit testing the hypothesis that control of the
chromatophore network in squid involves peripheral mechanisms that are distinct
from the neuronal motor-control pathway that descends from the brain.
Spontaneous chromatophore activity that is independent of canonical neural
control will be isolated by experimental manipulations in coastal loliginid
squid (Doryteuthis opalescens), including chronic denervation and
pharmacological block of neuronal activity with tetrodotoxin. In addition, a
comparative approach will take advantage of an oceanic ommastrephid species,
Dosidicus gigas, in which spontaneous, tetrodotoxin-resistant chromatophore
activity is extremely prominent. Relevant methods involve molecular
transcriptomics, cellular electrophysiology, immunohistochemistry with confocal
microscopy and high-resolution electron microscopy. Specific aims are: 1)
identify molecular and physiological properties of relevant ion channels and
receptors that control excitability in the radial muscle fibers that operate
individual chromatophore organs; 2) define structural, molecular and
physiological features of coupling mechanisms between muscle fibers of
neighboring chromatophores that define an excitatory transmission pathway within
the skin; 3) elucidate the inhibitory role in controlling spontaneous
chromatophore activity played by serotonin; 4) carry out parallel experiments in
Dosidicus, a member of a family of ecologically important squid in which
cellular studies of chromatophores have never been carried out. This project
will support undergraduate and graduate student training, and includes
significant efforts to involve students from groups underrepresented in STEM.