* 1557085
* Nitrogen fixation and carbon storage by herbivore-grass-mutualist interaction webs in the Serengeti
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Mark Ritchie, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 963,491.00

Grasslands are critical in sustaining human livelihoods, such as farming and
livestock grazing, and storing greenhouse gases as soil carbon across vast areas
of the earth surface. Many of these areas have very poor soils that are low in
nutrients for plants, like nitrogen and phosphorus, but the growth of the
grasses is often higher than expected. A key process in maintaining unexpectedly
high grass growth is called nitrogen fixation, where plants acquire their
nitrogen from the air. In previous work in Serengeti National Park in east
Africa, it was discovered that grass roots, like more familiar legumes or
members of the bean family, host abundant, active bacteria that can fix large
amounts of nitrogen. The result is a complex web of various nitrogen-fixing
bacteria, other associated soil microbes, the host grasses, and a diversity of
grazing animals. This project builds on a long history of ecological research in
Serengeti National Park and will explore how grazing, rainfall and the
availability of other soil nutrients combine to affect nitrogen fixation. The
work will also explore if mycorrhizal fungi, which also live in association with
grass roots and benefit plants in other ways, compete with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria for sugars and other forms of carbon supplied by their host plants and
thus reduce bacterial nitrogen-fixation. Nitrogen limits productivity and
ecosystem services in most terrestrial ecosystems, and nitrogen-fixation by
bacteria associated with grass roots may prove to be the most important source
of nitrogen and driver of productivity, ecosystem services, and rural human
livelihoods in many tropical and subtropical grasslands and savannas. The
results will be used in an ongoing collaboration with The Nature Conservancy and
other non-government organizations to help more than 40 local human communities
in Tanzania and Kenya adopt new livestock and fire management practices that
sequester soil carbon, improve sustainable livestock production, and potentially
generate the sale of carbon credits on voluntary markets. This project will also
employ and train undergraduate and graduate students through summer field
courses and participation in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will explore, for the first time, the key interactions among grazing animals,
plants, and beneficial soil microbes centered on nitrogen fixation. It has four
parts: (1) to determine the occurrence and magnitude of nitrogen fixation by
many different grass species across a range of soil, grazing, and rainfall
conditions, (2) to conduct experiments that will test if grazing and water,
nitrogen, and phosphorus affect nitrogen-fixation by grasses differently than
legumes under the same conditions, (3) to conduct experiments in large pots
where AM fungi and bacteria are controlled to test for competition between these
different groups of microbes, and (4) to develop and test a simple computer
model that integrates how rainfall, grazing, competition with mycorrhizal fungi,
or nutrient limitation interact to control nitrogen-fixation and grass
productivity. This new modeling will show how the abundance of nitrogen-fixing
bacteria and beneficial fungi changes the storage of carbon as soil organic
matter and leads to the development of herbivore-plant-mutualist webs that
ultimately produce the key carbon inputs of above- and belowground plant litter,
dung, and AM fungal hyphae to soil organic carbon. These model outcomes will be
linked with recently validated modeling of soil carbon dynamics in the Serengeti
to understand how nitrogen-fixation links to possible soil carbon sequestration
and removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere.