* 1557945
* Functional Analyses of the Neural Circuits Underlying Vocal Production in Xenopus Laevis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ayako Yamaguchi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2020
* USD 642,643.00

The most salient output of brain function is behavior. However, how the nervous
system produces behavior is not well understood, largely because most of the
neural pathways underlying behavior are complicated. In this research project,
vocal behavior of African clawed frogs is used as a model because their vocal
neural pathways are simple and straight forward, and the pathways in action can
be studied using techniques that were previously developed in the PI's
laboratory. In addition to their simplicity and accessibility, the frog vocal
pathways provide a unique opportunity to study how female and male brains
function differently; male and female frogs produce sex-specific vocalizations
during the breeding season, and the injection of male-specific hormones into an
adult female results in male-like vocalizations within thirteen weeks. In this
study, the focus is placed on one group of cells that are known to play a
critical role in the operation of the pathways. A variety of experimental
techniques will be used to understand where these neurons are, how these neurons
function, and how they respond to male-specific hormones. The results of the
study will not only provide us with the understanding of how behaviors are
generated in the two sexes, but also provide us with an insight into how human
brains generates rhythmic activity such as alpha and gamma waves, many of which
are known to underlie cognitive processes, and known to be disrupted in diseased
states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamentally important question in neuroscience
is how neural networks function to generate motor programs that underlie
behavior. Although analyses of a complete neural network that generates behavior
is a formidable task, the relative simplicity of the Xenopus vocal network
combined with the development of the fictive preparation (a "singing brain in a
dish" preparation) and the application of behavioral, electrophysiological,
anatomical, and newly developed optogenetic techniques allows detailed
investigation of the dynamic organization of brain in action. The results of the
proposed study will not only provide insight into the structure, function, and
plasticity of the rhythm-generating neural network at the cellular levels, but
also allow us to understand the logic of how a feedback loop should be
engineered into a network to generate stable rhythms. Rhythmic neuronal activity
is not limited to motor systems, but is prevalent across the entire CNS and is
considered to underlie important functions such as perception and cognition.
Thus, understanding the biophysical principles that govern rhythm generation
using a simple neural network has a potential to elucidate mechanisms underlying
neuronal oscillations in general. On a technical level, successful application
of optogenetic tools to the Xenopus fictive preparation in vitro fills an
important gap between research efforts conducted on genetic vs non-genetic model
organisms. There are many non-genetic model organisms that present unique
questions. The ability to express genetically encoded tools in non-model
organisms represents a revolutionary change in the field of comparative
neuroscience.