* 1557679
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: SMART -- Spatial-Nonspatial Multidimensional Adaptive Radiotherapy Treatment
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Clifton Fuller, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,994.00

This project designs a novel approach for adaptive radiotherapy treatment of
head and neck cancer. Statistical and computational methods are applied to Big
Data, collected from cohorts of patients, to tailor precise treatment for a new
patient who has similar characteristics to a specific cohort. This award
supports initiation of a collaborative research project between four
complementary domains: clinical, image analysis and visualization, high-
dimensional data management, and statistical learning. The empirically-derived
treatment rules developed in this project have the potential to improve the
standard of care.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project defines novel reinforcement
learning techniques which account for multidimensional outcomes and patient
preferences. The project extends the state of the art by taking into account
both spatial data (such as medical images) and nonspatial data (such as
demographics and toxicity) in the development of the treatment rules. The
approach further takes into account the patient's preference with regard to side
effects. The methods developed may be used to derive optimal treatment
strategies across not only a variety of cancer diagnoses, but other chronic
conditions that require making multiple decisions that must weigh the tradeoffs
between efficacy and toxicity, including mental health disorders, substance
abuse diseases, and diabetes. This award is supported by the National Institutes
of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in partnership with the
National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical Sciences.