* 1557358
* Recruiting and Preparing STEM Majors as Secondary Teachers for High-Need School Districts in New Jersey
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Gunhan Caglayan, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,444,698.00

The need for teachers of STEM disciplines with considerable depth of content and
pedagogical skill, as well as strategies for engaging students from diverse
backgrounds to achieve success, is well documented. This project, in which the
New Jersey City University (NJCU) engages Hudson County Community College,
Bergen Community College, and Middlesex County College, will recruit, prepare,
and support a minimum of 20 undergraduate STEM majors in their junior and senior
year and 7 STEM professionals who are committed to teach in high-need school
districts. The Noyce scholars will be supported by an organized program of
supplemental instruction, hands-on experiential learning, mentoring, social and
academic networking, professional development, and community building activities
that will enhance and strengthen the content and pedagogical knowledge of the
scholarship recipients, provide them with a skill set to serve students from
diverse backgrounds, and increase the retention of these highly qualified
teachers in high-need districts. As a minority serving institution, NJCU is
well-positioned to prepare individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM to
become teachers. This will provide role models to classrooms with diverse
students and will strengthen the teaching and learning of STEM courses in high-
need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have multi-layered
recruitment efforts that target several groups of potential students: NJCU STEM
majors, community college STEM majors, and undecided majors. Recruitment will
start early when freshman and sophomore students are offered summer internships
to expose them to what it means to teach STEM. Community college STEM majors
will be recruited through partnerships with three local community colleges.
Participation in early field experience and mentoring by NJCU faculty and K-12
teachers will provide Noyce Scholars with a strong foundation for developing
their pedagogical and discipline specific knowledge. In addition to providing
opportunities for learning from experts in the different STEM and education
fields, the project will develop communities of practice among the different
cohorts of Noyce scholars through workshops which create a venue for interaction
of the pre-service scholarship recipients learning from and with the in-service
scholarship recipients. Noyce Scholars as professionals will have the
opportunity to participate in regional and national educational conferences and
site visits to high-need schools, further engaging them in authentic teaching-
related experience. Noyce Scholars will continue their development during their
student teaching course in which they will at one point take full responsibility
for a classroom. They will benefit from three different types of mentors: STEM
faculty mentors, Education faculty mentors, and in-service teacher mentors. In
order to affect persistence of the Noyce Scholars as effective teachers in high-
need school districts, the project will provide professional development
activities offered by the NJCU College of Education through the first four years
of the last cohort of Noyce Scholars' teaching careers. Ultimately, New Jersey
public schools will benefit from 27 new committed, confident, and well-prepared
STEM teachers who have a major in a STEM discipline and who are equipped with
pedagogical approaches specifically designed to provide learning experiences to
students from diverse backgrounds which lead to success.