* 1557638
* Collaborative Research: The Proximate Basis of Individual Variation in Phenotypic Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Alexander Shingleton, Lake Forest College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 11/30/2018
* USD 394,000.00

In all animals, changes in access to food during growth affects final adult
size; greater nutrition produces larger adults. However, not all parts of an
organism grow at the same rate, and so changes in access to nutrition during
growth can affect the ultimate size of different parts of the body differently.
Although the effects of nutritional variation on relative trait size are well
documented, only recently have the tools become available to (i) enable study of
how genetic and developmental mechanisms manage the growth of traits to produce
a properly proportioned adult and to (ii) enable study of how these mechanisms
change to alter growth patterns to produce size diversity among species. Here,
the investigators will take a novel approach by changing diet in lines of fruit
flies, each possessing their own unique and known genetic code, to identify the
specific genes underlying the regulation and integration of growth among various
parts of the body. This research will be coupled with a new, fun elementary
school computer-based learning activity where students will alter the relative
growth of structures in virtual creatures, transforming young humans into
fantastical beings.

Phenotypic plasticity is the ability of a genotype to express different
phenotypes across environments. It is well studied on a phenomenological level,
particularly for morphological traits; phenotypic plasticity can hinder or
promote adaptation, lead to the genesis of evolutionary novelties or serve as an
adaptation itself. A lack of experimental tools has meant that two components
central to the evolution of morphological plasticity - the variation among
individuals in the expression of plastic responses and the proximate bases of
this variation - are essentially unknown. Nutritionally-induced size variation
is common to all metazoans: nutritional limitation during ontogeny generally
produces smaller individuals than does a nutritionally rich diet, although the
degree of nutritionally-induced size plasticity can vary dramatically among
morphological traits. Such differences in relative trait plasticity are rooted
in recently identified developmental genetic mechanisms that regulate and
integrate the growth of traits in response to nutritional variation. Frankino
(PI) and Shingleton (co-PI) hypothesize that variation in these same mechanisms
underlies the evolutionarily important variation among genotypes in trait
plasticity. Here, they propose to test this hypothesis by: (i) applying new
methods to create and quantify the among-individual variation in nutritionally-
induced trait and body size plasticities; (ii) using genome-wide association
mapping to identify genes that contribute to this variation, and; (iii)
employing a series of developmental assays to confirm the role of these genes in
producing among-individual variation in nutritionally induced size plasticity.