* 1557922
* EAGER: Investigations of pulsed focused ultrasound for increasing the average pore size in brain tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Victor Frenkel, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 04/30/2017
* USD 154,000.00

CBET - 1557922&lt;br/&gt;PI: Frenkel, Victor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to determine whether exposure of brain tissue to pulsed focused
ultrasound increases the spaces between cells, which could enhance the motion of
therapeutic compounds and nanoparticle drug carriers through the brain. The
motion of therapeutic compounds such as proteins, small molecule drugs,
antibodies, and drug carriers is usually restricted, owing to the limited space
between cells and the extracellular matrix that fills this space. Therefore, a
method to increase the average pore size in brain tissue, without causing cell
damage, could improve drug delivery methods to treat a variety of neurological
disorders. The investigators will design nanoparticles that are coated with
polymers to promote their motion, and they will track the motion of the
nanoparticles with and without exposure of the tissue to ultrasound. Results of
the study will improve knowledge of the extracellular space in the brain and
provide guidance in the design of more effective drug delivery strategies. The
project will enlist high school students and undergraduates, including
underrepresented students from West Baltimore City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EAGER award will support experiments to study pulsed ultrasound exposure as a
means of effectively altering the microstructure of the extracellular space with
the goal of improving the dispersion of nanometer-sized therapeutic agents in
the brain. Previous studies have shown that pulsed focused ultrasound increases
penetration of nanoparticles, antibodies, and proteins in a variety of tissue
types. This project will extend these studies to brain tissue. The average pore
size will be quantified using high-resolution multiple particle tracking
methods. The motion of polystyrene nanoparticles, densely coated to prevent
their adhesion and ranging in diameter from 40 to 500 nanometers, will be
examined in thin brain slices. Effects of the ultrasound on tissue
microstructure will be evaluated using transmission electron microscopy and
tissue histology. Results of the project will be useful for improving
interstitial drug delivery to the brain by methods such as convection-enhanced
delivery.