* 1557387
* Expert Clinically-Based Teacher Educators (ECBTE)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Eugene Rutz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,732,528.00

This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship (MTF) project invests in master teachers
and enhances their growth opportunities by supporting them to become educators
who will close the gap between university teacher preparation programs and high-
needs school districts in the greater Cincinnati area. The goals of this project
are to (a) retain 18 experienced STEM teachers and develop their capacity to
become expert clinical educators, (b) enhance the preparation and support for
pre-service and new STEM teachers and, (c) provide access to high quality STEM
instruction for local secondary students. The partnership between the University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati Public Schools, and Cincinnati State Technical
Community College is particularly strong. Each partner institution will take a
leadership role in providing teachers with a menu of professional development
activities that are related to each of the project's goals. Thus, this plan will
provide an exemplary model for creating synergy between high-needs school
districts and institutions of higher learning as well as for master teacher
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an emerging body of research that
shows that opportunities for professional growth for teachers tend to diminish
by the time they are beginning to be recognized as master teachers; a time when
they are also likely to want to consider career trajectories in administration
or higher education. This ambitious plan is based on the hypothesis that if
master teachers are provided with options to create new career paths they will
be more likely to remain in the classroom. Therefore, the project provides
master teachers with a variety of options to advance their careers such as,
learning how to teach dual credit or AP courses, serving as adjunct faculty,
receiving certification to teach English Language Learners, participating in
curriculum revision for pre-service teachers, or instructing and devising
curricula for blended STEM e-learning. The project's core activities, which
include advanced content coursework, mentor training, and advanced pedagogical
training is grounded in the literature on emerging instructional practices that
have been shown to be effective. Formative and summative evaluation will be
performed using a mixed-methods approach to monitor progress toward the project
goals for retention, master teacher development, and overall project
effectiveness. Classroom observations, surveys, and focus group interviews will
be collected and analyzed to provide insight into whether or not master teachers
are using their experiences to provide high-quality learning experiences,
strengthening teaching networks through mentoring and other leadership
activities, and developing action research plans. Project results will be
disseminated at national meetings held by the American Educational Research
Association and in the journals such as, Educational Action Research, Innovative
Higher Education, the Journal of STEM Education, and the Journal of Research in
STEM Education.