* 1557934
* Collaborative Research: Scents of Self: How Trade-offs Shape Self/Non-self Recognition Cues in a Supercolonial Insect
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Neil Tsutsui, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2020
* USD 605,477.00

Insects live in a world of chemical signals. Chemicals are used as defensive
weapons, to signal danger, to mark resources for later foraging or for
avoidance, and to identify mates of the correct species and assess their
quality. The social insects take this chemically-oriented lifestyle to an
extreme. The sophisticated division of labor in social insect colonies requires
exquisite regulation of individual behaviors, and chemical pheromones are
crucial for organizing work within the colony. Despite these important and
diverse roles, we have only a rudimentary understanding of how pheromones
originate and evolve. In this project genetic manipulations, pheromone analyses,
and behavioral tests will be combined to clarify how various forces of natural
selection shape chemical communication in a social insect. This research will be
performed using the invasive Argentine ant (Linepithema humile) as a model
system. This ant, a globally widespread invader, is considered one of the 100
worst invasive species in the world, and is a significant agricultural and
structural pest. The research is likely to reveal pheromonal and behavioral
processes that can be targeted in the development of new control techniques,
thus contributing to greater ecological resilience, enhanced food quality and
security, and reduced degradation of soil and water by conventional
insecticides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self/non-self recognition systems have
played a central role in many of the major evolutionary transitions. Because
components of these recognition systems are often co-opted from existing
systems, they can experience conflicting forms of selection after acquiring
their new functions. The societies of eusocial insects are an ideal system in
which to study the evolutionary trade-offs associated with the evolution of
self/non-self recognition systems. In many eusocial insects, cuticular
hydrocarbons (CHCs) are used to distinguish colony mates (self) from non-colony
members (non-self). However, CHCs have also retained their original function as
barriers to desiccation. These two distinct roles of CHCs - as both desiccation
barriers and recognition pheromones - are expected to produce different forms of
selection, as the optimal molecular properties for the two functions are quite
different. In this project functional genomics, chemical ecology, and behavioral
ecology will be combined to test the overarching hypothesis that evolutionary
trade-offs shape the recognition system of social insects. The results of this
research will illuminate how genetic and chemical changes lead to changes in
individual behavior and, in turn, alter the structure of complex societies.