* 1557806
* Mechanism of Asymmetric Growth of the Bacterial Plant Pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Pamela Brown, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 06/30/2023
* USD 729,165.00

Bacterial cells grow through expansion of their cell walls. Since the bacterial
cell wall is an important antibiotic target and triggers immune responses,
understanding bacterial growth is of broad fundamental interest. The proposed
work will reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying growth of the plant
pathogen, Agrobacterium tumefaciens. A. tumefaciens is the causative agent of
crown gall disease in hundreds of flowering plants and is a particular problem
for nursery plants such as apple, plum, and cherry. Remarkably, A. tumefaciens
exhibits an atypical form of bacterial growth, in which new growth is restricted
to one end of the cell (asymmetric growth). Asymmetric bacterial cell growth is
relatively poorly understood, but has been observed frequently in diverse soil
dwelling bacteria. Thus, the proposed scientific work is expected to provide key
insights regarding mechanisms of bacterial growth, which may lead to important
applications such as limiting crown gall disease. Finally, in collaboration with
experts in science education, a hands-on, inquiry based lab module on the
emergence of antibiotic resistance in bacteria will be developed. This module
will provide high school students with an opportunity to participate in research
and will provide an understanding of evolutionary
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important questions remain about the
mechanism and regulation of cell wall biogenesis. How is cell wall biogenesis
controlled in time and space? How are cell lengths and widths maintained? These
questions have been primarily addressed in model bacteria, such as Escherichia
coli and Bacillus subtilis, which utilize a dispersed mode of cell wall growth.
Expanding the analysis of bacterial cell growth into organisms with asymmetric
growth will reveal new mechanisms for the biosynthesis, assembly, and regulation
of cell wall biogenesis. In this project, the objective is to elucidate the
mechanisms underlying unipolar growth of bacteria belonging to the Rhizobiales
clade of Alphaproteobacteria using A. tumefaciens as a model. The following
questions will be used to guide this work. How is cell wall biogenesis
restricted to the new pole during elongation? How is cell wall biogenesis
redirected to mid-cell to enable cell division and prime the new poles to serve
as active sites for cell wall biogenesis? Recent advances in imaging cell wall
biogenesis will be used to probe the mechanism of unipolar growth. Using a
systematic approach, the role of candidate proteins in the biosynthesis,
assembly, or regulation of cell wall biogenesis will be characterized. Genetic
screens will be utilized to reveal additional proteins involved in bacterial
cell growth processes. The proposed studies will improve the current
understanding of how cell wall biogenesis is spatially and temporally regulated
and will provide key insights into a relatively unexplored, but prevalent mode
of bacterial cell growth.