* 1557851
* 2016 Colloidal, Macromolecular, and Polyelectrolyte Solutions GRC/GRS: Non-Equilibrium and Bio-Inspired Systems, February 6-12, 2016, Ventura, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Maria Santore, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

1557851&lt;br/&gt;PI: Santore, Maria M. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide support for a technical conference entitled 2016 Colloidal,
Macromolecular and Polyelectrolyte Solutions GRC/GRS: Non-equilibrium and Bio-
Inspired Systems. The conference, which will be held February 6-12, 2016 in
Ventura, California, will bring together up to 200 leading academic, industrial,
and governmental researchers, postdoctoral students and graduate students to
present their research in colloid and polymer science. The theme of the
conference is non-equilibrium and bio-inspired systems, which is a field that is
currently seeing rapid advances and significant translational potential for
innovative products in the energy, food, construction, and healthcare sectors.
The conference will be preceded by a Gordon Research Seminar, which is intended
for doctoral and postdoctoral students in a variety of academic disciplines. The
seminar will include presentations by leading scientists on early career
development, poster sessions for student researchers, and informal opportunities
for students to meet peers and established leaders in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference, which is held every other year, has a
strong interdisciplinary tradition and will include researchers from physics,
materials science, chemical and mechanical engineering, and chemistry. The
conference will feature presentations and discussions on colloidal,
macromolecular, and polyelectrolyte solutions. Topical sessions will include
colloidal and nanoparticle assembly, interfacial deformations in colloidal and
macromolecular interactions, nanoparticle-cell and virus-cell interactions,
similarities and differences in nanoparticle and viral assembly, effects of
external forces on colloidal assembly and new materials synthesis, glassy and
constrained phases, and rheology in concentrated suspensions.