* 1557437
* The Guard Cell as a Paradigm to Dissect the Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Plant Immunity
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Plants respond to the environment by utilizing a number of preformed and
inducible signaling processes; interestingly, many of these responses share a
number of common features. For example, plants respond to stresses imposed by
limitations in water availability and pathogen infection by closing stomata-
specialized pores on the leaf surface that not only function in gas exchange,
but also are primary points of entry to many pathogens. Thus, in closing stomata
plants restrict water loss as well as entry to potentially pathogenic
microorganisms. Much in the same way that hormones regulate human cellular
processes, plant hormones have been demonstrated to control plant response to
changes in the environment, including the above noted response to environmental
and pathogenic stressors. The long range goal of this project is to define how
plant stress signals are regulated and transduced to elicit the plant immune
response. To do this, the current work will use the plant stomata as a tractable
marker to understand how chemical changes in a cell are perceived and ultimately
transduced to regulate physical and mechanical changes in cellular movement,
architecture, and shape. With this knowledge, the investigators will define the
principle components that plants use to monitor their environments for potential
threats, and moreover, to rapidly respond to these changes. The ultimate goal of
this research is to uncover mechanisms that plants use to survive, and through
dissemination of the Broader Impacts, to communicate these data to society to
educate general public in the area of food production and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actin is well known for its roles in defining cell shape
and powering movement of organelles and macromolecules in all eukaryotic
organisms. Additionally, as a component of the immune system of both plants and
animals, the actin cytoskeleton has been demonstrated to respond to a variety of
pathogen-derived elicitors. However, the mechanism(s) underpinning the role of
actin in plant immunity is lacking. This study will leverage recently developed
methods and resources in the PIs' laboratories to define, using the stomatal
guard cell as an experimental paradigm and a series of quantitative cell biology
and genetic approaches, the contribution and role of actin as a key component of
the plant immune network. Plant stomatal guard cells are an attractive,
amenable, and biologically relevant cell type for further dissecting the role of
actin dynamics in plant immunity. The work described herein will define the
relationships that link basic physiological processes (e.g., hormone signaling,
pathogen perception) to the host immune response. Anticipated impacts of this
project are: 1) the elucidation of the processes that dynamically respond to and
function as cellular switches between, pathogen, immunity, and hormone
signaling; 2) the phospho-regulation and pathogen targeting of a key plant
regulatory node that controls cytoskeletal organization and stomatal guard cell
dynamics; and 3) a demonstration of a role for actin in critical stomatal-based
signaling pathways.