* 1557466
* QuBBD: Estimating drug-drug and drug-disease interactions for nursing homes residents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Roee Gutman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,998.00

Drug-drug interaction (DDI) is a situation in which one drug affects the
activity of another. Drug-disease interaction (DDSI) is a situation where
prescribed medication has the potential to exacerbate a preexisting disease.
Both DDI and DDSI are major causes of adverse drug effects (ADEs) and represent
a considerable threat to public health. Frail elderly patients have a higher
prevalence of multiple morbidities and they are often prescribed a wide range of
drugs to treat these morbidities. Thus, they are at increased risk for adverse
effects from DDI and DDSI. Other than hospitalization, re-hospitalization and
emergency room visits, little is known about the contribution of DDI and DDSI to
other important outcomes, such as functional status, institutionalization, and
mortality. In addition, some DDIs and DDSIs are unknown and require evidence-
based updates. This award supports initiation of a collaborative research
project with the long-term goal of developing methods that efficiently identify
ADEs caused by DDIs and DDSIs by combining electronic health records with
precise clinical data (such as gene sequencing). These findings will enable the
updating of current guidelines, generate alerts, identify possible chemical
compounds that may interact and result in ADEs, and propose new genetic drug
pathways. The current objective, which is a step toward the long-term goal, is
composed of two aims. The first aim is to combine current methods in machine
learning and statistical causal inference to accurately identify DDI and DDSI.
The second aim is to develop statistically valid methods that will impute
missing patient level data in large detailed datasets.

The project will exploit the availability of current datasets that could be
augmented in the future to include precise clinical data. The Minimum Data Set
is part of the U.S. federally mandated process for clinical assessment of all
residents in Medicare or Medicaid certified nursing homes. It includes data on
cognitive and functional abilities, disease diagnosis, psychological well-being,
and medication use. The dataset comprises millions of patients, thus enabling
the discovery of DDIs and DDSIs that occur in a small fraction of the
population. The first aim comprises a combination of state-of-the-art supervised
learning approaches such as LASSO, random forests, SVM, and Ensemble methods
with efficient statistical causal inference approaches such as optimal matching,
weighting, targeted learning, and multiple imputation. The approach is
innovative because it combines causal inference methods with supervised learning
methods to generate accurate and precise methods that have statistically valid
operating characteristics when providing estimates for a specific patient. The
second aim includes development of methods that rely on dimension reduction of
the observed covariates to impute missing data. When imputing missing data, the
rule of thumb is to use all of the available data, so that the missing at random
assumption (MAR) is plausible. Dimension reduction aims to reduce the number of
covariates that are used for prediction. Thus, development of an imputation
algorithm with many missing covariates requires striking a balance between
dimension reduction and plausibility of the MAR assumption. This award is
supported by the National Institutes of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K)
Initiative in partnership with the National Science Foundation Division of
Mathematical Sciences.