* 1557357
* Preparing Highly Qualified Physics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Nathan Magee, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project, which will produce thirty new physics teachers over five years, is
addressing a major problem facing high schools in the United States, a crisis of
availability of well-qualified high school physics teachers. For every three
national openings, only one qualified teacher is trained each year. More than
60% of high school physics classes are now taught by teachers who do not have
appropriate training in physics content, and this problem is even more acute at
high-need schools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program in Physics at
The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) is designed to increase the number of
outstanding physics students who are being recruited and certified to become new
secondary physics teachers. The TCNJ School of Education and School of Science
is collaborating with public secondary schools within the established
18-district TCNJ Professional Development School Network (PDSN), with
concentrated training occurring within five local high-need school districts.
The project will provide outstanding training and support to new physics
teachers, while increasing the number and diversity of physics teacher
graduates. The number of new physics teachers directly supported by this project
will be regionally significant, and includes a commitment to service in high-
need schools. Furthermore, the project will establish a model that is feasible
to reproduce at other institutions across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
TCNJ project is motivated by a dire shortage of highly qualified physics
teachers in New Jersey and nationally, and by a severe lack of diversity and
lack of access to physics teacher expertise in high-need schools. In response to
these needs, the major goals of the project are to: a) attract, retain, and
sustain a minimum of six physics-certified graduates per year through the period
of support and beyond; b) substantially improve science education in the region,
especially by increasing teacher diversity and availability of expert physics
teachers to high-need local schools; and c) contribute new knowledge to physics
education research through faculty research, enabled by novel programming linked
to systematic assessment of student outcomes. Benefits include the preparation
of highly qualified physics majors that will become the thirty new physics
teachers. With respect to propagating the outcomes broadly, this project will:
a) provide a compelling model for growth, especially for primarily undergraduate
institutions, which is where most physics majors train; b) disseminate gained
knowledge in physics teacher education research through publications and
presentations; and c) substantially increase physics expertise, diversity, and
resources to high-need schools. Statistics on physics teacher demand and average
physics teacher preparation are very worrying. This shortage is still growing
because many new state standards are requiring greater numbers of high school
students to take physics. Only ~40% of HS physics teachers have a physics degree
(lowest of any HS subject). This project is tackling this challenge head-on by
starting to recruit in high schools and every step along the academic
curriculum. There will not only be the immediate benefit of the thirty new
physics teachers, but other institutions may learn from the model being
established at TCNJ.