* 1557405
* Responsive, Attentive, Dialogic, and InterActive Noyce Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Debra Feakes, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,254,627.00

The Texas State University Noyce project, also known as Responsive, Attentive,
Dialogic, and InterActive Noyce Scholars (RADIANS) project, will focus its
recruitment efforts on physics, chemistry, and engineering majors, disciplines
which are underrepresented in its large teacher preparation program and also
represent areas of teacher shortage in US public schools. The RADIANS Project
will provide scholarship support to STEM majors who seek teacher certification,
resulting in 50-60 teachers over the five-year life of the project. Scholars
will participate in a field-based teacher preparation program that is research-
based and is collaboratively delivered by STEM and Education faculty members.
The first semester of this program will be delivered onsite at an area high
school that operates an innovative STEM Academy, while the second semester will
consist of a full 16-week student teaching experience supervised by science
education faculty from the College of Science and Engineering. During this
program, faculty from the Colleges of Education and Science &amp; Engineering
will also design and deliver monthly full-day Saturday Seminars for the scholars
to enhance their content knowledge and content-specific pedagogical skills, and
to increase their knowledge of the latest research on STEM identity and their
ability to support K-12 students' STEM identity development. Project staff will
use strong partnerships with area school districts to facilitate certified
scholars' employment in high-needs schools, and will coordinate with districts
to provide two years of induction and mentoring. Finally, the RADIANS Project's
emphasis on diversity of representation in the Learning Assistant (LA) program
will result in a more diverse teaching force that can serve as advocates and
positive role models for minority and economically disadvantaged students, and
encourage them to pursue educational opportunities in science and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RADIANS Project will provide scholarship support to
STEM majors seeking teacher certification, and will continue to operate the
Learning Assistant (LA) initiative, one pool from which prospective teacher
candidates will be recruited, launched with previous NSF support. RADIANS will
support 10 to 12 scholars each year. It will investigate the long-term impact of
several related interventions on the recruitment, development, and retention of
science teachers and will contribute to the growing knowledge base related to
STEM teacher development. The research area of STEM identity development figures
into the project in two ways: (a) teacher education candidates will be taught
about the latest research on high school students' STEM identity development,
and (b) project personnel will study STEM teacher identity development of the
teacher candidates. This will allow researchers to investigate the impact of
these early experiences on the identity development of teacher candidates as
they enter a teacher preparation program, progress through their teacher
training, and experience their first years of classroom teaching. Potential
benefits include: the recruitment of STEM majors who are experienced with
research-based instruction into teaching programs will result in improved K-12
science instruction, which will lead to increases in student science achievement
during the high school years and improved college and career readiness among
students. Finally, the RADIANS Project's emphasis on diversity of representation
has the potential to produce a more diverse teaching workforce that can serve as
positive role models for students underrepresented in STEM. Proactive
encouragement of young diverse learners by a cadre of well-prepared, STEM
confident, diverse teachers will positively impact participation and pursuit of
STEM degrees and thus contribute to a more competitive, competent, and confident
workforce.