* 1557348
* CAREER: Towards a stem cell-derived 3D human liver array for high-throughput screening
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2020
* Salman Khetani, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2020
* USD 367,916.00

1351909 &lt;br/&gt;Khetani, Salman R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drug-induced liver
injury (DILI) is a leading cause of acute liver failures and liver transplants
in humans that can lead to restrictions on drug use, black-box warnings on
drugs, and the pre-launch and post-market attrition of pharmaceuticals. In
addition to its impact on the well-being of patients, the economic impact of
DILI is significant (~$1B and 12-15 years to bring 1 successful drug to market).
Animal testing that is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is not
fully representative of the human condition due to significant and evolutionary
differences between animals and humans in liver functions. Therefore,
preclinical screening of compounds for potential toxicity using human cells now
constitutes a critical part of the drug development pipeline. Induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived human liver cells, called hepatocytes (iHeps), can
not only provide a near unlimited source of cells for screening millions of
compounds, but also enable personalized (patient-specific) drug screening and
therapeutic applications in the future. However, iHeps created to date are not
as functionally mature as adult primary hepatocytes (isolated from donor livers)
which is required to adequately predict clinical outcomes before the drugs are
tested on live patients in clinical trials. To address this technology gap, the
investigator will utilize microfabrication tools adapted from the semiconductor
(microchip) industry to engineer a miniaturized 3D human liver mimic using iHeps
and other liver supportive cell types that displays functional maturity and
stability for several weeks in vitro (outside the body). This liver mimic will
be characterized using several important markers for its functional maturity
relative to adult primary hepatocytes. Additionally, the liver mimic will be
probed for its ability to provide clinically meaningful information on DILI due
to single drug and multiple drug treatments in attempts to model clinical drug
dosing regimens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will integrate his
research with educational programs designed to build a continuum of mentorship
and scientific community in the nascent biomedical engineering (BME)
undergraduate program at Colorado State University (CSU) and in the Northern
Colorado region. In particular, the investigator will design and implement: a) a
new course that exposes CSU BME college students to mentored research
experiences in a formal research laboratory setting; b) a step-wise program that
exposes high school students to career options in BME and culminates in hands-on
summer research experiences in CSU BME laboratories; and, c) recurrent learning
modules that expose K-6 students in an after-school program to advances in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iHep-based 3D human liver
mimic that will be developed could ultimately lead to the development of
efficacious and safe therapeutics earlier in drug development towards increasing
the likelihood of clinical success and limiting patient exposure to unsafe
drugs. This platform may also be applicable for evaluating the injury potential
of industrial chemicals that contaminate the environment, in promoting a better
cellular/molecular understanding of diseases of the liver, and in helping to
design and implement personalized medicine strategies. More broadly, the
engineered device could ultimately be integrated with other tissue models into a
single integrated system that provides a multi-organ (i.e. 'whole body') level
of understanding of various exogenous insults. The aforementioned educational
efforts will develop a robust mechanism to get students of different age groups
interested in science and engineering education and to get each other involved
in teaching and implementing programs for younger
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the
project, this CAREER award by the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass
Engineering Program of the CBET Division is co-funded by the Instrument
Development for Biological Research Program of the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.