* 1557760
* Regulation of Abiotic Stress Responses in Plants by the Ubiquitin Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Judy Callis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 499,027.00

This project aims to understand how plants respond to a stressful environment in
order to survive. While it is known that plants synthesize a novel chemical when
exposed to conditions such as cold, drought and high salinity, what is not
understood is how the plant "cleans house", that is, how the stress signal is
removed so that the plant can begin normal growth once the stress is gone. Both
genetic and biochemical approaches will be taken to determine exactly how these
changes happen. This research will provide training of multiple UC-Davis
undergraduates through research projects and support a graduate student and a
post-doctoral scholar. These individuals will learn scientific methodology and
how to present scientific data to colleagues and the greater community. They
will learn analytical skills and improve their speaking and writing abilities.
The graduate student will have the opportunity to interact with K-12 schools in
neighboring communities with large Hispanic populations. The researcher will
interact with representatives of the California seed/agricultural biotechnology
industries through the Seed Institute at UC-Davis. The researcher has
established a connection with a local Sacramento high school teacher and will
continue this collaboration. The high school students will learn experimental
design and data analysis, and participate in scientific discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants respond to environmentally stressful
conditions by upregulating expression of genes that help them cope. One family
of transcription factors required for stress responses are called ABRE BINDING
PROTEINS (ABFs), and are regulated at the protein level. Under stress they are
activated to promote transcription and at the same time their degradation is
stopped and protein levels increase. How stress causes these two changes in ABFs
and their relationship to biological function are not understood. ABF amino
acids responsible for regulating constitutive ABF proteolysis under normal
growth conditions and for stress-induced protein stabilization will be
determined through in vitro and in vivo degradation assays. DNA sequences
encoding ABF proteins will be changed so they translate ABF proteins with
deletions and/or amino acid substitutions. ABF segments will also be fused with
coding regions of marker enzymes and stability of the fusion determined in rapid
and quantitative assays. Altered proteins will be expressed and purified from
bacteria and stability measured in plant lysates. Sequences will be introduced
into plants, multiple stable lines expressing these proteins produced and the in
vivo protein stability measured. The role of phosphorylation status will be
assessed by measuring the stability of proteins with substituted predicted or
possible phosphorylation sites with either alanine, which cannot be modified, or
with aspartate, which mimics modification. Transgenic plants expressing ABF
proteins with differences in degradation rates will be assessed for their growth
phenotypes under normal and stress conditions to determine if modulation of
degradation provides greater stress resistance without compromising normal
growth.