* 1557179
* Impacts of polyandry and mate limitation on female fecundity and the population dynamics of the aspen leaf miner
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Patricia Doak, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 139,017.00

Populations of some species can persist at low numbers for long periods of time
and then quickly rise to very high numbers. When these species inflict damage on
human resources, their population "explosions" become a practical concern. It is
often difficult to study populations when they are very small because
individuals are so rare and hard to find. Yet, understanding what keeps a
species rare and what happens to shift populations into periods of rapid growth
is important for predicting and controlling outbreaks of many kinds. This
research examines possible reasons for dramatic cycles of abundance in the aspen
leaf miner, a tiny species of moth that is usually rare but can outbreak and
cause extensive damage to aspen trees. In particular, investigators will test
whether females in small populations are unable to mate as often and lay as many
eggs as females in large populations. If confirmed, low mating success in small
populations may be important in controlling other forest pests and slowing the
spread of invasive species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its high level of
polyandry and sustained low and high population phases, the aspen leaf miner
(Phyllocnistis populiella) feeding on quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides)
provides an excellent system for exploring potential demographic impacts of
mate-finding Allee effects on large amplitude population fluctuations. This
project will use a combination of experimental and observational approaches to
address whether mate-finding Allee effects and polyandry contribute to
sustaining low phases of the aspen leaf miner. Specifically it will employ: 1)
mating experiments to examine whether multiple mating increases female
fecundity, and 2) observational studies across populations with varying
densities to address whether potential and realized polyandry increases with
population density. A better understanding of the mechanisms keeping populations
at low density or releasing them into growth phases will aid predictions of
where and when outbreaks are likely to occur.