* 1557125
* Macroevolutionary Analyses of Cranial Morphology and Function in Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Adam Hartstone-Rose, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Swartz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 672,702.00

Mammals comprise over 5,400 species, and exhibit extraordinary anatomical and
dietary diversity. It is hypothesized that the great diversity of mammalian
species resulted from the evolution of structures associated with an ability to
access, consume and process new food resources. However, this hypothesis has not
been tested for the majority of mammal groups, and therefore the question of how
mammalian diversity arose remains an important, unanswered one. This project
will employ a suite of modern tools in the study of anatomy and physical forces
associated with feeding (such as skull or cranial anatomy, and chewing or
masticatory muscles) to test this hypothesis in three of the most species-rich
and ecologically diverse mammal groups: bats, carnivores and primates. The
research will generate unprecedented quantitative datasets on the masticatory
muscles and the three-dimensional skull anatomy of over 100 species. The
researchers will explore the links between these anatomical and functional
(internal) factors with external factors (such as food characteristics and
diversity) as a way to understand patterns of species diversification. Through
this work, the project will create a large public database of mammal 3D cranial
morphology, train a diverse group of students, disseminate results through a
public museum exhibit, and establish cross-disciplinary collaborations among
several young investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morphological and functional
adaptations are important drivers of ecological diversification across the Tree
of Life. Within mammals, it is hypothesized that many radiations were enabled by
the evolution of morphological and functional traits that provided access to new
dietary adaptive zones, but quantitative tests of this hypothesis are lacking
for the broad diversity of mammals. This gap is partly rooted on the extensive
lack of comparative datasets that integrate both the osteological and myological
components of the feeding apparatus. These data, which currently exist for less
than 2% of mammalian taxa, are critically needed both for an understanding of
mammalian masticatory physiology and for the application of diversification
analyses that contrast the relative influences of intrinsic versus extrinsic
drivers of mammalian radiation. The proposed work will test macroevolutionary
hypotheses about ecological diversification by generating the largest
comparative datasets to date on the three-dimensional morphology, function and
performance of the mammalian feeding apparatus. The team will couple micro-
Computed Tomography, gross dissections, geometric morphometric analyses and
biomechanical modeling to produce these data across three species-rich and
ecologically diverse mammal clades (bats, carnivorans and primates).
Phylogenetic comparative analyses will be used to test hypotheses about the
influence of dietary selective regimes on the evolution of cranial morphology,
function and performance, and their association with lineage diversification.
The organismal aspect of the research will illuminate the biomechanics and
ecomorphological diversity in mammal groups that are of broad scientific
interest. This study will help elucidate the potential drivers of
diversification in these groups while creating a foundation for further research
on the physiology, biomechanics and evolution of mammal feeding.