* 1557943
* Molecular Mechanisms Connecting Plant Defense Suppression with Magnaporthe oryzae Growth in Rice Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Richard Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2020
* USD 570,000.00

Blast, caused by the fungus Magnaporthe oryzae, is the most serious disease of
cultivated rice and a global food security threat that annually results in a
10-30% reduction in worldwide rice yields. M. oryzae is also emerging as a major
pathogen of wheat. During rice infection, dome-shaped fungal cells called
appressoria form on the surface of the rice leaf and access the underlying
epidermal cells. Remarkably, fungal growth in living rice cells, called
biotrophy, occurs for the first days of infection without activating the robust
plant defenses that normally work to keep the host plant disease-free. Yet,
despite the fundamental importance of this biotrophic growth stage to crop
health, little is known about how plant defense suppression and fungal growth is
integrated in host cells. To address these knowledge gaps, this proposal asks:
How do fungal cells thrive in rice cells? To answer this, research will be
directed towards characterizing mutants of M. oryzae that are impaired in their
ability to colonize rice cells in order to unlock the fundamental cellular,
biochemical, and genetic regulatory mechanisms that govern the rice-fungus
interaction. This work could point to much needed robust and sustainable
mitigation strategies and shed light on fundamental growth processes in fungi.
The proposed work will foster the molecular training of postdoctoral, graduate
and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds through active participation
in tackling the real-world problem of rice blast
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By addressing the fundamental question "What
molecular mechanisms coordinate sustained fungal growth and plant defense
suppression in the host cell?" This project aims to resolve substantial issues
in plant pathology regarding the processes by which fungal pathogens thrive in
plant cells. The stated objectives will use forward and reverse genetics,
genome-wide proteomic and metabolic approaches, and live-cell imaging to define
key exploitable differences in the metabolism of M. oryzae compared to host rice
cells. This could lead to the development of novel crop protection strategies
targeting molecular pathways that are critical for the biotrophic growth of the
fungus but are not required for the normal function of the host cell, and could
shed new light on the basic principles of cell growth. The educational objective
will expand scientific education by stimulating undergraduates' science
learning, preparing graduate students for scientific life beyond the university,
and inspiring scientific interest in minority high school students.