* 1557834
* Endangered species as food; interdisciplinary approaches to stemming biodiversity loss and food insecurity
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Cortni Borgerson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 194,028.00

The Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences offers postdoctoral
research fellowships to provide opportunities for recent doctoral graduates to
obtain additional training, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden their scientific horizons beyond their
undergraduate and graduate training. Postdoctoral fellowships are further
designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across
traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research
resources, sites, and facilities, including at foreign locations. This
postdoctoral fellowship supports a rising scientist in the interdisciplinary
area of food security and biodiversity. Although biodiversity and poverty are
intimately related, surprisingly few scientists have quantitatively investigated
how ecosystem health and human health affect each other. An integrated approach
to studying humans and their environment can strengthen both conservation and
public health policy to align goals and create potential scenarios of co-
benefits from interventions. This postdoctoral fellowship will provide funds to
expand the disciplinary breadth of a trained anthropologist to explore
interdisciplinary approaches to stem biodiversity loss and stabilize food
security in a UNESCO World Heritage site. In addition to training a female
scientist from the United States, this project creates educational opportunities
for a doctoral student from Madagascar and several local Malagasy research
assistants. This project has the potential to directly improve child health and
the future of endangered species in one of the most threatened and food insecure
habitats on earth. It advances the progress of science by informing the decision
making of conservation and public health policy-makers by providing much needed
information on the dynamic interactions between ecosystems and human health, and
the human incentives that drive the illegal hunting of endangered species.
Further, it translates these interdisciplinary scientific findings into applied
integrated conservation and public health action on the Masoala to advance the
health and welfare of both people and forests.

During this project, the research team is designing, applying, and testing the
effects of an interdisciplinary conservation and human health action plan in on
the Masoala Peninsula of Madagascar, a UNESCO world heritage site. The three-
phase multi-disciplinary project aims specifically to integrate quantitative and
qualitative methods from anthropology, political economy, conservation biology,
ecology, and public health to complete a rigorous interdisciplinary study of
human incentives, human health, hunting behavior (including illegal harvest),
ecosystem characteristics, and wildlife population dynamics (including five
endangered species). Over 24 months at 14 sites, this research team is
quantifying the dynamic interactions between the health of forests, people, and
endangered species by: interviewing members of over 400 households about their
health, resource use, and livelihoods; measuring the health of over 2,000 people
through anthropometry and hemoglobin sampling; monitoring the daily behavior of
five focal hunters; monitoring forest ecology at 150 habitat plots; and
surveying ten lemur species in 140 regional transects and across a trans-
peninsula transect of over 110 aerial kilometers. Using these data the team is
building a system dynamics model of human-forest-lemur interactions to design
and simulate the effects of an integrated human-health and conservation action
plan. This action plan is being implemented in 7 test communities to attempt to
solve issues of increasing human-wildlife conflict and to determine whether
there are possibilities for co-beneficial objectives of conservation and public
health intervention.