* 1557343
* The local Langlands correspondence via endoscopy, geometry, type theory, and their interplay
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Tasho Kaletha, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 41,749.00

The aim of this project is to investigate the local Langlands correspondence for
p-adic groups using the tools of type-theory, algebraic and rigid geometry, and
spectral theory. The local Langands correspondence is a mysterious conjectural
relationship between two kinds of symmetries -- a geometric one, offered by
groups of matrices with coefficients in real, complex, or p-adic fields, and an
arithmetic one, offered by the Galois group of the real or a p-adic field. The
last decade has seen a tremendous progress in this area, but the theory is still
largely conjectural. The PI and his collaborators will attempt to establish new
cases of the conjectural correspondence through the use of type-theory, as well
as to elucidate the connection between types and the cohomology of Rapoport-Zink
spaces, in particular in the case of low-rank unitary groups. The already
existing constructions will be investigated more deeply using the theory of
endoscopy. Furthermore, the PI and his collaborators will study both the local
and the global Langlands correspondences for unitary groups of arbitrary rank,
using the trace-formula techniques developed by Arthur.

The Langlands program brings together several areas of mathematics, including
arithmetic, geometry, analysis, and symmetry. By establishing deep and
surprising ties between them, it provides the means for answering very hard
questions about the arithmetic of numbers, as exemplified by the recent proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem. A sophisticated understanding of the arithmetic of
numbers is in turn fundamental to many recent technological developments,
including error-correcting codes, compression, encryption and secure
communication. This project aims at deepening our understanding of the Langlands
program by exploring connections between several approaches to it, as well as by
exploiting techniques which have only recently become available.