* 1557320
* A Model NSF Teaching Fellowship Program to Improve STEM Teacher Recruitment, Preparation, Professional Development, and Retention in Rural High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Susan McKay, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,950,034.00

This Noyce Teaching Fellows project will provide teacher certification for 22
recent STEM degree recipients and STEM professionals. The project will implement
and test a model for recruitment, preparation, and support for new mathematics
and science teachers in high-needs, rural districts and create a strong
community of new and experienced teachers. In their first two years, fellows
will receive individual mentoring and classroom coaching along with community-
based professional development opportunities. In the last two years of the
fellowship, they will begin to develop leadership skills by working with
teachers in their schools and assisting in pre-service teacher preparation. A
unique feature of the project is the opportunity that fellows will have to
observe university faculty and then advise them on teaching strategies through
the NSF-supported University Course Observation Program. This partnership
between the University of Maine and school districts across that state, was
established through a Noyce capacity Building award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the mathematics and science teacher crisis faced by remote,
high-needs schools in the state of Maine by training and developing new teachers
through a rigorous course of study and extending some of the project activities
to include mentors and content area coaches, chosen among teacher-leaders who
have been recognized for their expertise. Throughout the project mentor teachers
from high-needs schools will collaborate with, advise, and support the fellows.
The coaches will partner with the fellows to develop strategies for teaching in
the discipline and deliver professional development workshops to propagate
exemplary instructional practices across the state. By the end of the induction
period, the teaching fellows will have the training and experience to take on
the roles of mentors and coaches themselves. Formative and summative evaluation
will focus on interviews that will examine the fellows' perceptions and
experiences related to their engagement with teacher-leaders and their
development as such. Findings from this work will be presented broadly at
conferences of the American Association of Colleges of Teacher Education,
American Educational Research Association, and the National Association of Rural
Education. Manuscripts will be prepared for the Journal of Chemical Education,
the Journal of Science Education and Technology, CBE-Life Science Education and
other STEM education publications.