* 1557151
* Elucidating and detecting adaptive introgression
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Emilia Huerta-Sanchez, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 555,267.00

Humans have adapted to many challenging environments during our evolution. For
example, different temperatures, diets, pathogens and altitudes have led to
local adaptations. Adaptations occur through the selection and increase of
beneficial mutations in genes in a population, which can arise spontaneously by
random mutation or can be acquired through admixture with another population.
Analysis of human genomes has shown that some of our beneficial mutations have
come from archaic human populations like the Neanderthals and Denisovans,
facilitated by interbreeding between modern humans and those groups tens of
thousands of years ago. This process is referred to as adaptive introgression.
While there are a few examples of beneficial mutations in genes arising from
adaptive introgression, in this project tools will be built to scan human
genomes to identify more candidate genes for adaptive introgression and to fully
characterize the importance of this process in many human populations.
Importantly, the project will involve training of undergraduate and graduate
students in computational science and genomics, and the tools created will be
freely accessible for others to use. In addition, a new interdisciplinary course
that bridges data analysis of human genetic variation, programming, statistics
and biology will be offered to undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting and characterizing adaptation has mostly been
approached through two models: selection on de novo mutations (SDN) or selection
on standing variation (SSV). Therefore it is assumed that a population either
has to wait for a beneficial mutation to arise de novo or it harbors enough
neutral standing variation that can become beneficial under a change in
environment. However, most populations do not live in isolation and have
exchanged genetic variants with other populations through admixture (gene-flow
from a donor population to a recipient population). This process is an
evolutionary force that may accelerate adaptation in the recipient population.
The PI will model positive selection and gene-flow jointly to investigate the
patterns of genetic variation under this model, to compare and contrast to the
two other models of positive selection (SDN, SSV), to determine what summaries
of the data accurately distinguishes adaptive gene flow from SDN and SSV, to
develop novel statistics that accurately detect this type of selection and to
develop statistical and computational tools to scan genomes to identify
candidate regions. These tools will be applied to real data sets in humans and
in other organisms. The broader impacts include training a postdoc, students,
building a project-oriented course that integrates multiple disciplines
(programming, statistics and modeling) that will teach students to visualize
biological data sets for exploratory analyses, to test hypothesis and to fit
models to the data, and bringing science to high school students through a
series of lectures. Finally, all computational tools developed under this grant
will be made freely available to the scientific community.