* 1557831
* The Influence of the Prey Physiological Stress Response on Predator-prey Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Barney Luttbeg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 652,556.00

Predator-prey interactions are a common feature of ecological systems and have
been shown to drive their structure, function, and dynamics. Even so, critical
knowledge gaps exist with respect to the mechanisms that underlie the prey's
behavioral, physiological, and morphological response to predation risk,
including how those responses influence the performance of predator. This study
will use a model system (predatory larval dragonflies and tadpole prey) to
understand how predation risk and food availability modulate the anti-predator
response. This study will build upon a large body of experimental research that
shows that the fear response of the tadpoles governs both their behavioral
(e.g., activity) and morphological (e.g., tail growth) responses to predators.
The approach taken will be integrative and interdisciplinary, with endocrinology
measurements used in conjunction with laboratory experiments and computational
models of optimal prey responses. This study will include K-12 classroom visits,
the development of new college courses, and the provision of student research
opportunities all aimed at improving the preparedness of students, especially
under-represented groups, for entering and succeeding in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this research are to
determine: 1) how the prey neuroendocrine stress response operates over time and
is shaped by complex predation environments and trade-offs; 2) how stress
hormones govern the expression and integration of the prey phenotypic response
(i.e., behavior, morphology) in an ecological context; and 3) how the prey
phenotype influences predator-prey interactions. The intellectual merit of this
proposal centers on our use of a model ecological system, novel experiments, and
novel optimality modeling to shed insight into how physiology and development
regulate plasticity in adaptive traits and what the ecological impacts of this
regulation are. Identifying the proximate physiological mechanisms that govern
phenotypic expression will enhance the general understanding of the phenotypic
range that prey are capable of achieving in response to predators, the tradeoffs
that influence costs and benefits of particular phenotypes, and how predators
induce prey phenotypes. Identifying the mechanisms underlying prey phenoptypic
plasticity also will help clarify the role of nonconsumptive effects in
ecological communities. Ultimately, the findings generated herein will provide
important insight into the linkages that exist among the environment, an
organism's physiological response and its resulting phenotypic plasticity, and
the fitness consequences to both prey and predator.