* 1557451
* The Role of Parturition in Brain Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Geert DeVries, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/28/2022
* USD 658,970.00

This project addresses a deceptively simple question, yet one that has so far
been largely overlooked: What are the consequences of birth (parturition) for
brain development? Most mammals enter the world in a fairly dramatic fashion. A
vaginal birth is accompanied by marked hormonal changes, mechanical stimuli
associated with labor and delivery, and a transition from the sterile
environment of the womb to one teeming with microorganisms. The fetus makes many
physiological adjustments to survive outside the womb, and labor and delivery
are the most reliable predictors of the upcoming challenges. This project
examines the effect of birth on brain development, using mice as a model
species. The investigators will look at effects of the timing of birth (within
the normal range) and mode of birth (vaginal versus cesarean birth) on measures
such as cell death and brain inflammation. Birth triggers major developmental
switches for the lungs, heart, and other peripheral organs, and may play a
similar role in brain development. If so, results from this project could
fundamentally change the way we think about the role of birth in neural
development. Both principal investigators are unusually active in education and
outreach at the local, national, and international levels, and the project will
involve undergraduates and graduate students. The home institution is ranked
first in the nation among not-for-profit institutions in awarding bachelor's
degrees to African-American and disadvantaged students, and the investigators'
laboratories reflect this diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of
investigators will test the idea that birth alters brain development by varying
the timing or mode of birth and examining effects on the patterning of neuronal
cell death, and colonization of the brain by microglia. About 50% of the neurons
that are initially produced are eliminated by apoptosis. The investigators
recently found that cell death peaks just after birth in most forebrain regions
of mice. In Aim 1, the investigators will vary the timing of parturition to test
whether the association of birth with cell death is causal. Parturition also
abruptly activates the peripheral immune system. The investigators hypothesize
that this immune activation extends to the brain and will test that here.
Microglia, the resident immune cells of the brain, are in an activated state
perinatally, and increase in number soon after birth, but whether birth causes
changes in microglia is unknown. The peripheral immune activation after delivery
also varies by mode of birth: vaginal birth is associated with a greater
increase of many immune markers compared to cesarean delivery. Interestingly,
the investigators' preliminary data show that mode of birth affects cell death
in several brain regions. Thus, to identify aspects of "birth" that influence
brain development, Aim 2 will contrast effects of vaginal and cesarean delivery
on cell death and neuroimmune activation. In Aim 3, the investigators will
interfere with immune activation to determine whether effects of birth on
microglia and cell death occur in parallel or are related (i.e., microglia may
promote cell death).