* 1557162
* Collaborative Research: Testing the fungal loop hypothesis for Carbon and Nitrogen cycling in dryland ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Anthony Darrouzet-Nardi, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2022
* USD 786,407.00

In forests and grasslands, decaying vegetation accumulates on the soil surface
and is digested by communities of decomposer microorganisms. The end-products of
decomposition serve as nutrients in the soil that, along with water, can be
taken up by plants directly through their root systems. By contrast, deserts and
other arid ecosystems have to play by a different set of rules. The lack of
water means that plants are far more patchy in their distribution and grow in
brief spurts following rare precipitation events. Between plant patches, a crust
often forms consisting of surface-layer bacteria, fungi, lichens, and mosses.
Soil crust fungi have extensions called hyphae that can make connections between
crusted areas and plants. This project will examine implications of the "fungal
loop hypothesis", which posits that subsurface fungal hyphae provide a network
between plants and soil crusts that conserves and transports water and nutrients
to plants. To test aspects of this hypothesis, researchers on this project will
conduct field research at three different sites: the Chihuahuan Desert near El
Paso, TX, the Colorado Plateau near Moab, UT, and a site between those, near
Albuquerque, NM. At these sites, they will study the movement of water and
nutrients through fungal hyphae and develop a framework for understanding when
and where the fungal loop is most important. Drylands cover about 40% of Earth's
surface and play essential roles in the planet's overall response to
environmental change. The multi-site, field-intensive design of this project
will also enable research and training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students at two diverse institutions: the University of Texas at El
Paso (UTEP) and the University of New Mexico (UNM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this study is to test the fungal loop hypothesis by
studying C and N translocation and retention across representative dryland
sites. Using a set of field experiments at three sites, this project will
address three questions: (1) How do translocation rates (i.e. transfer of C and
N between plants and biocrusts through fungal hyphae) vary among dryland sites,
plant species, and biocrust types? (2) Does translocation improve growth,
productivity and retention of C and N for plants and biocrusts? (3) Are
translocation rates determined by the stoichiometric requirements of plants and
biocrusts? The proposed work will generate a predictive framework for when and
where translocation of C and N between plants and biocrusts is greatest by
examining translocation rates using isotopic tracers in a variety of plant and
biocrust functional groups at each site (e.g., C3 vs. C4 grasses) and
incorporating seasonal variation, especially to contrast spring and monsoonal
growing seasons. The work will also examine the importance of translocation by
experimentally severing hyphal connections and measuring the effects on plant
and biocrust health as well as retention of C and N in the ecosystem. Finally,
to address the mechanism of translocation, the investigators will test the
hypothesis that stoichiometric gradients drive C and N movement through fungal
hyphae by experimentally manipulating C and N gradients and observing the
effects on the horizontal movement of C and N, also with the use of isotopic
tracers. This research approach will allow for an unprecedented evaluation of
the extent to which fungi are the key regulators of C and N cycling in dryland
soils as suggested by the fungal loop hypothesis.