* 1557988
* I-Corps Teams: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Guided Active Robotic Catheter
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* M. Cenk Cavusoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Catheter-based atrial fibrillation (AF) ablation is a minimally invasive
technique used in the treatment of AF. In this procedure, a catheter under
fluoroscopy guidance is used to apply radiofrequency energy to build ablation
barriers in the left atrium to prevent the spread of the irregular electrical
signals, which cause the arrhythmia. The major problems with the state-of-the-
art AF ablation procedure entail creating too small or too large of a lesion.
These result from difficulties in accurately controlling the catheter tip,
difficulties in keeping appropriate electrode contact pressure with the
endocardium, and lack of real-time feedback regarding the size and depth of the
lesion created. The proposed real-time magnetic resonance imaging-guided robotic
active catheter technology has the potential to revolutionize the treatment AF
by significantly improving the accuracy and repeatability of AF ablation
therapy, and by potentially reducing the cost of the procedure.

The proposed paradigm has several advantages over the state-of-the-art
techniques and technologies for cardiac ablation therapy, as it would allow a
more tailored treatment to be performed. Specifically, intra-operative real-time
availability of magnetic resonance imaging, with its superior tissue
discrimination capabilities, would allow immediate evaluation of the substrate
depth and lesion created by ablation. Remote steering and high accuracy catheter
tip position control would allow for precise ablation. The operator would have
improved situational awareness, as the intra-operative information, including
the electrophysiological map, catheter trajectories, and tissue measurements
obtained from real-time magnetic resonance imaging, can be mapped back and
displayed to the operating physician on the 3D static reference visualization of
the cardiac anatomy. And, finally, the patient will not be exposed to ionizing
radiation during the procedure, as fluoroscopy will not be used. If the
commercialization feasibility study performed through the I-Corps program yields
a positive result, the team is planning to establish a start-up company that
will license the technology from Case Western Reserve University and pursue its
commercialization.