* 1557432
* Using Water Bears to Investigate Adaptations to Extreme Stresses
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Robert Goldstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 973,848.00

Certain animals can survive environmental extremes that are beyond those at
which purified DNA, protein, and membranes typically degrade; suggesting that
mechanisms exist that protect and/or rapidly repair multiple cellular
components. Some protectants have been identified, but the mechanisms that can
allow animals to survive such extremes are in general not yet well understood,
despite being of wide interest. The long-term goal of this work is to contribute
to understanding the mechanisms by which animals and animal tissues can survive
extremes. This project addresses this issue using tardigrades, which are
microscopic, 8-legged invertebrates that can survive a remarkable range of
environmental extremes: desiccation for years, ionizing radiation 1000 times
what humans can survive, temperatures from below 1 degree Kelvin to more than
150 degrees Celsius, and extremes of pressure including even the vacuum of
space. The project also involves several efforts with potential to have broader
impacts, including making educational materials for children and teachers,
contributing to museum exhibits and events, providing images and videos to
television and print journalists and for textbooks, and sharing of newly
developed methods with other scientists seeking to make use of this emerging
model system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Tardigrades and other organisms have
acquired certain genes by horizontal gene transfer from other organisms
including bacteria. Recent studies have revealed the roles of certain
horizontally transferred genes in the ability of tardigrades to survive some
extreme conditions. This project will more thoroughly identify mechanisms that
contribute to survival of extreme conditions by examining functional roles for a
set of horizontally transferred genes whose expression is induced by an
environmental extreme. The hypothesis that products of certain foreign genes can
perform key biochemical functions under extreme conditions will be tested, and
the mechanisms by which these genes entered tardigrade genomes will be
investigated. Methods to be shared through this project include lab culture
methods, methods for examining tardigrade gene expression and disrupting gene
functions, and methods newly developed in the course of the research. The
research in this project and its efforts to make tardigrades easier for other
scientists to study may contribute, in the long run, toward suggesting new
avenues for the development of protectants for biomaterials.