* 1557094
* Integrating species traits into species pools: A multi-scale approach to understanding community assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Marko Spasojevic, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2022
* USD 764,175.00

Human activities are profoundly altering ecosystems worldwide through changes to
natural disturbance regimes and the availability of nutrients. The ability to
predict the effects of human activities on biodiversity remains poor because
biodiversity responds differently to similar changes in environmental
conditions. This project tackles an unexplored mechanism for observed highly
variable responses among communities, which is the diversity of species traits
in a region. The project will contribute new insights into the responses of
biodiversity to human perturbations. It will simultaneously advance
conservation, management, and restoration of human-altered ecosystems both
through application of research results and through new educational and training
programs. Activities will include a workshop to bring together land managers and
scientists from local, state, and federal institutions to identify and discuss
key challenges in conservation and restoration; training of high school
students, teachers, and undergraduate students in science and field research;
and dissemination of a classroom module to high school teachers focused on
environmental restoration and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will conduct a landscape-scale field experiment to examine why the
diversity and composition of plant communities change in response to fire and
nutrient availability in Ozark forest ecosystems. Within this large-scale
experiment, plant communities will be assembled from pools of species that vary
in diversity of seed, root, stem, and leaf traits. Experimental data will be
combined with spatial analyses and simulation models to test how trait diversity
influences the relative importance of ecological processes underlying plant
community assembly. This multi-scale approach will advance our understanding of
how regional variation in species-trait diversity, landscape-scale disturbances,
and local variation in environmental conditions independently and interactively
shape patterns of biodiversity.