* 1557951
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral Syndromes as Evolutionary Constraints: the Role of Genetic Architecture
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Ned Dochtermann, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 590,000.00

In this project, the Drs. Dochtermann and Hedrick will study the evolutionary
causes and consequences of correlations among behaviors. It is now well
understood that the behaviors of individual animals are often correlated, and
most previous research has focused on characterizing these correlations. Much
less attention has been paid to understanding why behaviors are correlated.
There are generally two explanations for why behaviors might be correlated.
First, correlations might be present because particular combinations of
behaviors have been evolutionarily favored (i.e. selection). Second, underlying
molecular mechanisms,such as a single gene affecting multiple behaviors,might
produce correlations. By comparing genetic correlations among populations, the
PIs will attempt to see if selection has shaped correlations or not. Following
this, the researchers will conduct an artificial selection experiment with the
aim of breaking apart behavioral correlations. This artificial selection
experiment will provide additional evidence regarding the degree to which either
of the above explanations might produce behavioral correlations. Moreover, this
experiment will illustrate the degree to which behavioral correlations affect
and constrain evolutionary outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Behavioral
Syndromes, among-individual behavioral correlations, are now well described
across taxa, the evolutionary causes and consequences of syndromes are still
poorly understood. The evolutionary causes of syndromes can generally be grouped
into two classes of mechanisms: selection-induced linkage disequilibrium (SILD)
wherein particular combinations of behaviors have been favored, and molecular
mechanisms such as pleiotropy. These two classes of mechanisms have very
different evolutionary implications. If molecular mechanisms such as pleiotropy
underlie syndromes, then constraints may be placed on evolutionary outcomes
which are not present with SILD (importantly, these mechanisms are not mutually
exclusive, as both may jointly influence the expression of syndromes). In this
project, the researchers will conduct population comparisons and artificial
selection experiments to distinguish between these two classes of mechanisms.
Specifically, genetic correlations and heritabilities of multiple populations
will be estimated and compared relative to ecological variables. These
comparisons can allow the detection of SILD if the populations differ such that
selective pressures might favor different combinations of behaviors among
populations. Follow up artificial selection experiments designed to break apart
behavioral correlations will estimate the constraining effect of syndromes, and
the ability of populations to respond to artificial selection will distinguish
between SILD and molecular mechanisms.