* 1557378
* Energizing STEM Teaching Across Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2022
* James White, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,009,374.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Juniata College Energizing STEM Teaching Across Rural
Schools (E-STARS) program recruits undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry,
geology, math and physics, to additionally earn their secondary teaching
certification to teach science or mathematics in grades 7 to 12, focusing on
underserved, and underperforming rural schools. The project is funding a minimum
of 20 scholarships over five years. Juniata College is collaborating with
Huntingdon Area School District, Juniata Valley School District, Mount Union
Area School District, and Southern Huntingdon Area School District. The E-STARS
Scholarship program will bring together Juniata science, mathematics, and
education faculty, and Juniata's Science in Motion (SIM) educators in
partnerships with neighboring rural school districts, to graduate more engaged
educators who have experience in and are equipped with tools to negotiate the
challenging rural teaching environment. Upon graduation, E-STARS Scholars will
have developed a solid foundation in their respective STEM fields, have a
plethora of high quality curricular resources, and will also have completed a
training program that is enriched with hands-on, inquiry based teaching
experiences highlighting the uniqueness of populations in underserved rural
middle and high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scholarships
in the junior and senior years, the project will fund summer opportunities for
freshmen and sophomore STEM students to explore the educational field in a 5
week summer course which will include three college credits of course material
over three weeks on the foundational structure of education systems and an
additional credit for 70 field placement hours in schools including: 40 hours
with an in-service teacher in his/her rural math or science classroom and 30
additional hours traveling and presenting science labs with the Juniata College
SIM outreach program. E-STARS scholars will also fully participate each summer
in STEM focused workshops for in-service teachers. In addition, each E-STARS
scholar will receive a summer stipend for working on research or an internship
that is STEM education focused. All scholars will participate in state and
national professional organizations, attending and presenting at their
respective conferences. The E-STARS Leadership Team will work with an external
evaluator to understand the effectiveness of the program. The evaluation will be
used to develop evidence-based recommendations for enhancing the training of
rural STEM educators at other mid-sized liberal-arts institutions of higher
education, which will be disseminated by the Leadership Team at state and
national scientific and mathematical professional conferences.