* 1557255
* Preparation of Mathematics Majors to Become Highly Qualified Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Marta Civil, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,199,998.00

The Noyce Arizona Mathematics Teaching (AZ MaTh) Program will bring together
partnerships between the Department of Mathematics and the Department of
Teaching, Learning, and Sociocultural Studies at the University of Arizona, two
high-need local educational agencies and a magnet middle school in Tucson. The
goal of this program is to recruit mathematics majors that will become 30 highly
qualified mathematics teachers in Arizona. The program will offer a head-on
response to the shortage of highly qualified mathematics teachers through
multifaceted and innovative recruitment activities, and by implementing a
teacher preparation program that develops and strengthens prospective teachers'
abilities to work with diverse students across Arizona and the rest of the
nation. The program is characterized by involving a community of mathematics and
mathematics education faculty, undergraduates, teachers, secondary mathematics
students and their families in a collective effort to prepare high-quality
mathematics teachers. While the program is designed for University of Arizona
students to work with students from local school districts, it has the potential
to become a model for other programs across the country; especially in the way
prospective teachers interact with the local community and learn to incorporate
their culture and language as educational assets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AZ MaTh
will prepare secondary mathematics teachers with strong content and pedagogical
knowledge as well as a deep understanding of cultural and linguistic aspects in
the teaching and learning of mathematics to diverse students. The overall goals
of the AZ Noyce MaTh Program will be to: (1) promote secondary mathematics
teaching as a viable and engaging career choice for talented undergraduate
students in mathematics, (2) recruit undergraduate students into the STEM
teacher pipeline, with an emphasis on academic merit, and to increase the number
of Secondary Mathematics Education Program graduates in the Department of
Mathematics, (3) create a sustainable recruitment program for future mathematics
teachers that includes significant and substantial experiences to work with
middle and high school students, and (4) enhance our Secondary Mathematics
Education Program to prepare future mathematics teachers for excellence in
teaching and working with ethnically and linguistically diverse students in
Arizona and nationwide. The AZ MaTh program provides high quality experiences
for the potential teachers to work with students and families in local area
schools, and with other undergraduate students enrolled in mathematics courses
at various levels. These experiences include serving as (1) tutors in local
secondary schools, (2) undergraduate teaching assistants in mathematics courses
for elementary teachers, (3) teacher assistants in summer internships with
partner schools, and (4) interns in an afterschool program at a partner
bilingual school. Course materials and the outcomes and experiences of the Noyce
scholars in the afterschool program will be made available to other mathematics
educators and teacher preparation programs. The project takes advantage of
ongoing and planned collaborations between mathematicians and mathematics
educators to improve undergraduate course curricula for prospective teachers.
The project team's research efforts also have the potential to contribute to a
broad understanding of how intentional cultural sensitivity and attentiveness to
language barriers during pre-service training of math teachers can lead to
student success and a diversity in the types of teachers recruited to the
program.