* 1557398
* A Community-Based Approach to Building the Capacity of Physics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Gilbert Naizer, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2017
* USD 74,981.00

A scientifically literate population and workforce is essential for the future
health of the country, and continual efforts must be made to ensure high school
education in STEM fields is of the highest quality. There is a dramatic shortage
of high school physics teachers who have a degree in physics and count
themselves as physics specialists. This problem is more acute in poorer and
rural areas of the country. This project will address this issue in rural North-
East Texas by building a community of physics students and teachers from local
high schools, and community colleges. This community would provide support for
students in the physics education degree. The community will focus on a shared
activity; development of teaching materials to address physics concepts most
students find difficult. These materials will be made freely available, and will
help support both physics education majors and high school physics teachers, and
lead to increased production of physics teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project will be to create a community of practice from participants in a
number of recently implemented projects related to teacher education in the
Department of Physics and Astronomy and the Department of Curriculum and
Instruction. The projects will include the switch of calculus-based physics
courses to studio mode and the creation of a learning assistant program in those
classes, a new Master's program in Physics for in-service high school physics
teachers, and the Texas Teacher Residency Program which provides stipends for
students to be placed in STEM classrooms with mentor teachers while obtaining an
education Masters. A Teacher-in-Residence (TIR) will help the project team build
the community from students and teachers involved in these projects, and will
base the community around the creation of educational materials for high school
physics and college introductory physics courses which address areas of
conceptual difficulty, provide communal teaching resources, and provide
opportunities for participants to perform action research in their classrooms to
measure the learning outcomes of those modules. This project will also continue
the ongoing reformation the physics teacher preparation program at Texas
A&amp;M-Commerce to allow physics teachers to efficiently complete the program
via courses that use best practice pedagogy, and to lower barriers to
recruitment. The ultimate goal will be to develop a community of teachers and
students informed by physics education research with access to free teaching
materials, and ultimately increase the supply of physics-degree holding teachers
in the state of Texas.