* 1557207
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moving, Making, and Saving: The Science of Seed Banking
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Mario Biagioli, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 15,107.00

General Audience Summary

This dissertation project uses a combination of archival and ethnographic
research to examine the entangled processes of moving, making and saving plants
at the Millennium Seed Bank of the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew. The project
asks how seed banking practices in a post-colonial era differ from movement of
botanical specimens during earlier eras of science and governance. It will study
the changes in laboratory and visualization techniques, through ten months of
archival and ethnographic fieldwork in England and the United States. It will
use theories from the fields of STS, environmental humanities, and visual
culture, to contribute new concepts concerning agricultural innovation, food
security, biodiversity preservation, and to challenge the frontiers on basic
genetic science. The results of this research will be published in scholarly
articles in peer-reviewed journals, and as part of a book project with an
academic press; in addition, they will be disseminated to specific target
communities via workshops and seminars. The results of this study will also be
used to develop undergraduate curriculum that will bridge gaps between the
humanities, the social sciences, and the biological sciences. In addition, new
primary material such as the high resolution scans of plant patent drawings will
be made available to scholars and the public via the web.

Technical Summary

The primary site of this project is Kew Garden's Millennium Seed Bank, the
largest repository of cryogenically preserved plant genetics resources in the
world. This project will bring to light how seed science is made at seed banks
with the aim of adding value to the process and showing how it can be done
better. It will do so by giving acute attention to the Seed Bank's relationship
to the historical movement of plant bodies, debates around biodiversity,
intellectual property, and agricultural applications. It will also examine
various types of collaboration across many scales of activity, among different
professions, disciplines, and scientific specialties that make seeds such widely
shared objects of knowledge capable of transcending boundaries of major
departments of formal scientific inquiry. The results of this project will
contribute pertinent insights for important policy decisions about the fates of
biodiversity, food security, and agribusiness, which all depend on the science
of seeds. They will also serve in addressing pivotal questions being posed by
scholars of agricultural and plant history, twentieth century US agricultural
policy, intellectual property of biological materials, advocacy over rights to
seeds, and visual culture.