* 1557801
* Collaborative Research: Genetic and Physiological Mechanisms of Local Climatic Adaptation in a Widespread Perennial Plant Species
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Felix Fritschi, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2021
* USD 214,326.00

Some plant species are able to thrive across a wide range of climates, and the
mechanisms by which this occurs are poorly understood. Characterizing the
genetic and physiological basis of local climatic adaptation is especially
critical for assessing whether and how plant species, including crops, can
persist through periods of environmental change. Using the widely-adapted
species white clover, this project examines the factors that allow this plant to
thrive in climates as dramatically different as northern Minnesota and central
Florida. The production of cyanide-containing compounds appears to play a role
in this process, particularly for adaptation to heat and drought. These
compounds are also found in several important crop species, and their importance
for drought adaptation will be examined in detail for the first time. Other
aspects of natural genetic and physiological variation in climate tolerance will
be assessed through field experiments. The project will provide classroom
materials and curricular activities for an ongoing and highly successful
inquiry-based educational outreach program developed by the principle
investigator, which has already engaged more than 8000 students and 100 teachers
nationwide. Students sample and analyze their local clover populations and
contribute data to an online database, where they can compare observations with
classes from other climates. Scientific training will be provided to
undergraduates, including those from minority backgrounds, as well as two
graduate students and two postdoctoral
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptation to local environments plays a key
role in the ability of plant species to survive and persist through
environmental change, yet the genetic and physiological mechanisms that underlie
this process are largely unknown. Through work that integrates QTL mapping of
fitness traits, candidate gene analyses of two well-characterized biochemical
polymorphisms, and physiological assessments of their fitness impacts, the
following questions are addressed, using white clover (Trifolium repens) as a
study system: 1) What is the genetic architecture of local climatic adaptation?
Specifically, to what extent does it arise through fitness tradeoffs for
alternate alleles of individual genes (antagonistic pleiotropy), or through
combinations of loci where individual genes provide a fitness benefit in one
environment and are selectively neutral in others (conditional neutrality)? 2)
What are the physiological mechanisms by which cyanogenic glycosides function in
abiotic stress adaptation? 3) What is the role of gene copy number variation
(CNVs) in local adaptation? This work will rigorously test the function of
cyanogenic glycosides, which are found in &gt;3,000 plant species including many
crops, in abiotic stress adaptation. CNVs are abundant in the genomes of many
taxa, and the project will directly assess their role in local climatic
adaptation, which has not previously been done. The project will also engage
high school students and teachers nationwide in hands-on, inquiry-based learning
through an ongoing and highly successful outreach program based on clover
cyanogenesis, and it will provide training for undergraduates, graduate students
and postdoctoral associates.