* 1557312
* Active Dynamic Continuum Tails for Maneuvering and Stabilizing Legged Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/29/2015,08/31/2017
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2017
* USD 208,140.00

Results of this research will provide an opportunity to create robotic tails
that are capable of augmenting a legged robot's ability for agile and robust
terrain traversal in unstructured hazardous environments. The research will
impact applications from search and rescue to reconnaissance to exploring
hazardous and dangerous environments, in which robots must move effectively in
unstructured terrains. Legged robots can better traverse these unstructured
environments compared to wheeled or tracked systems due to the legs' use of
discrete ground contact points. This project's primary impact stems from the
tail's improvements to a legged robot's stability and maneuverability. This will
lead to faster search and rescue or exploration of dangerous environments,
allowing these legged robots to augment and exceed human capabilities. In terms
of educational impact, this research will: (1) provide support for engineering
graduate and undergraduate students, (2) be developed into case studies for
university-level courses, and (3) be used in demonstrations for K-12 students.
Minorities and underrepresented groups will be targeted for outreach and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this award is to
study how biomimetic continuum tails can dynamically stabilize and maneuver
legged mobile robots moving at high speeds. Field robots are limited in how they
may respond to unforeseen dynamic disturbances in unstructured hazardous
environments and how they may change their direction without modifying gait and
slowing down. With a continuum tail, the required forces and moments to
stabilize and maneuver the robot can be applied by dynamic tail motions instead
of using the legs, torso or arms. This research will study algorithms to map the
required forces and moments into continuum tail control inputs to stabilize and
maneuver a legged robot, and derive dynamic models to predict the tail's dynamic
forces and moments to enable task planning. Deliverables include dynamic
modeling, task planning algorithms and design paradigms of intelligent robotic
tails, an experimental validation with a test platform of the tail mechanism and
simulations of legged locomotion, dissemination of research results, engineering
student education, engineering research experiences for students and science
teachers, and new engineering curriculum development.