* 1557440
* Understanding the Gender Performance Gap among Star Performers in STEM Fields
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2016
* Herman Aguinis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
understand the potential gender performance gap among star performers, who are
those individuals who produce output and results many times greater than the
rest of the individuals holding the same job or position. A gender gap among
star performers is more damaging in terms of precluding the advancement of women
than a gender gap regarding average performers because stars are mentors and
role models for others. Moreover, interventions aimed at reducing the
performance gender gap among star performers are likely to trickle down to those
lower in the performance distribution. We currently do not know whether the
distributions of female and male star performers differ, which is a critical
knowledge gap because such differences would be indicative of different
generative mechanisms and organizational and contextual factors that lead to
those differences. The proposed research agenda uses conceptual frameworks and
methodological tools originally developed in other fields (e.g., physics,
zoology, biology, computer science) to investigate the shape of the distribution
of female and male star performers in STEM fields. Three studies will be
conducted, including star researchers who are in the fields of Mathematics,
Material Sciences, and Genetics. This three-study research agenda will make
manifold contributions to the scientific literature concerning the science of
organizations and the science of broadening participation. The findings will be
used to help inform and stimulate ways in which participation in STEM fields can
be broadened in general and ways to advance the careers of women. Moreover,
because scripts and programs to measure the shape of the distributions will be
produced, the findings of this project will pave the way for future research
streams examining the shape of the performance distribution for women and men in
other industries and occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Star performers are those individuals who produce output
and results many times greater than the rest of the individuals holding the same
job or position. The presence of stars negates the long-held assumption that
individual performance follows a normal distribution. This project proposes a
research program involving three studies whose goal is to understand the
potential gender performance gaps among star performers. The studies will use a
methodological approach that is novel in science of organizations research, but
has been used in the field of physics. The first step in the analysis will
include determining for each gender-based distribution the best-fit model among
the following theoretical distributions: (a) normal, (a) exponential, (c)
lognormal, (d) pure power law, (e) power law with exponential cutoff, (f)
Weibull, and (g) Poisson. Objective measures of performance (i.e., number of
articles published in scientific journals in STEM fields) will be used. Star
performers are particularly visible and influential. Thus, understanding
differences in the distribution of female and male star performers, and linking
those differences to underlying generative factors that produce them, will offer
important insights into how and why gender-based differences emerge. Findings
from the three-study research agenda using theoretical frameworks and
methodological tools developed in fields outside of the science of organizations
will allow gaining unique insights into the factors influencing the performance
of female and male star performers in STEM fields. Expected outcomes include a
theory-based understanding of generative mechanisms associated with each type of
distribution for female and male star performers and differential mechanisms
responsible for producing female and male star performers. Results will also
include new methodological tools to facilitate future research in other
industries and performance domains.