* 1557149
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI: SINK OR SWIM: PHENOMIC AND TRANSCRIPTOMIC DIVERSIFICATION OF SCULPINS (TELEOSTEI: COTTIDAE) ENDEMIC TO LAKE BAIKAL, RUSSIA
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Andres Aguilar, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 193,693.00

Ancient lakes are biodiversity hotspots, home to thousands of unique species
with an extraordinary diversity of body forms and functions. With more than
1,500 species found nowhere else on the planet, Lake Baikal is an ideal
environment to study the processes that resulted in creation of new species. The
Baikal biodiversity hotspot is also a geographical anomaly, because global
species diversity normally declines near polar regions. Despite Baikal's renown
as the world's oldest, deepest, and largest lake, the evolutionary history of
its unique species diversity remains poorly understood. This project examines
the evolutionary history of sculpins, a group of primarily bottom-dwelling cold
water fishes that colonized Baikal within a relatively short period of the
lake's history. Baikal sculpins are uniquely adapted to life in an ancient lake,
having evolved multiple open-water and deep-water forms. This project is focused
on identifying the molecular basis for such variation, including gene sequences
that evolve through generations and gene-expression changes that occur during
development. New information gained from this study can be compared to ongoing
research on fishes from other ancient lakes, in order to identify unifying
processes that explain adaptation in these unique
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Baikal sculpins represent the world's
northernmost vertebrate radiation within an ancient lake ecosystem, with at
least 33 species estimated to have evolved within the past two million years.
Rapid diversification of skeletal morphology and body composition suggests that
this clade has undergone ecological release from a stream-living ancestor, but
phylogenetic analysis has thus far been limited to a single genetic locus. A
genomic inventory of Baikal sculpins will be generated through systematic
surveys of all lake habitats and the surrounding watershed. Tributaries to
Baikal will also be sampled in the search for a putative ancestral sculpin
population. A time-calibrated species tree will be generated from sequence
variants at presumed neutral (RADseq) and functional (RNAseq) loci. Gene
expression phenotypes will be mapped on the phylogeny to infer relative rates of
phenotypic and ecological change. If a putative ancestral population is
discovered in the tributaries to Lake Baikal, this system will offer an
unprecedented opportunity to understand the genetic factors that predispose
certain groups to adaptive radiation.