* 1557326
* Penn State University Secondary Mathematics Noyce Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2022
* M. Kathleen Heid, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,161,079.00

This Noyce Teacher Scholarship and Stipend project will prepare 15
undergraduates with interest and ability in mathematics to teach in high-needs
rural or urban-centered school districts. Each student who completes the
program, will graduate with a bachelor's degree in mathematics as well as with a
bachelor's degree in secondary education (mathematics) or a master's degree in
mathematics education. The scholars will be provided with opportunities to (a)
tutor students in an Upward Bound or a second-language learning program, (b)
design and teach lessons, (c) do a variety of field placements, and (d)
participate in seminars that focus on place-based teaching in high-needs
schools. The project will be conducted in partnership with a variety of
Pennsylvania schools in Bald Eagle, McKeesport Area, Moshannon Valley, Penns
Valley, West Branch, West Mifflin Area, Woodland Hills, and in Pittsburgh City
Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key features of the project (multiple field
placements, place-based pedagogy, and high school to college connections) are
grounded on emerging research in the training of pre-service teachers.
Throughout the project, students will be given the opportunity to participate in
field experiences such as the Philadelphia Urban Seminar, a placement during
which students, will be immersed in an urban high-needs community. The
coursework related to linking high school and college mathematics should enable
the new teachers to help their students become college-ready. Formative and
summative evaluation will address the success of the program in reaching its
retention, graduation, placement, and educational goals. Assessment will be
performed through a series of interviews, focus groups, and classroom
observations. Project results will be presented at meetings of the Association
of Mathematics Teacher Educators and the Mathematics Association of America
group on Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education. Manuscripts will be
submitted to the Journal of Teacher Education, the Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, and the Mathematics Teacher Educator.