* 1557233
* The Biology and Mathematics Educator Scholarship Project to Prepare Future Secondary Education STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Mark Beekey, Sacred Heart University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,199,108.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Biology and Mathematics Educator Scholarship Project to
Prepare Future Secondary Education STEM Teachers will recruit undergraduate
majors in biology or mathematics and prepare them to become secondary biology or
mathematics teachers. The project will fund 18 scholarships over five years. In
this project, Sacred Heart University will collaborate with two high-need school
districts to offer preparation that will increase the number of undergraduate
biology and mathematics majors entering secondary education. Project activities
will include new STEM-specific teacher education curricula and supports that
will enable STEM teachers to be effective in a high-need, multicultural
classroom. These exceptionally qualified biology and mathematics majors will
receive scholarships during their junior and senior years as a STEM major and
during one post-baccalaureate year while they earn a Master of Arts in Teaching.
The project's objectives are to recruit, retain, and graduate the Noyce
scholars; to have them fulfill their teaching commitment; to ensure they benefit
from current and innovative best practices that prepare them to teach in high-
need STEM classrooms; to provide them with inquiry-based research experiences
that improve their understanding and ability to teach the nature of science and
research; and to prepare them as effective teachers as evidenced by their
students' success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will implement enhanced
curricular and extracurricular activities to achieve the project goals of
increasing both the number and effectiveness of highly qualified biology and
mathematics teachers graduating from Sacred Heart University who subsequently
teach in high-need secondary school districts. Project activities will develop
undergraduate and graduate courses integrating mathematics and science within
the framework of STEM education, create research and service-learning
opportunities, provide mentoring, and foster the development of a professional
teaching identity to increase persistence and avoid the high teacher turnover
currently experienced by partnering districts. The institution will develop two
new courses to prepare the scholars to break down silos between science and
mathematics and to better prepare their secondary students to understand
knowledge transfer between settings. This will particularly benefit students in
multicultural and high-need classrooms who need multiple perspectives and
reinforcement to improve both mathematics and science skills. Additional foci of
these courses will be on teaching project-based inquiry learning and grounding
instruction in relevant, community-based applications. Participation in STEM
research with peer support will improve the scholars' understanding of science
and mathematics practices and their ability to communicate and teach inquiry-
based activities, and service learning will promote community engagement. A
long-term mentoring relationship and additional professional identity
development will cement the scholars' self-confidence and help them persist in a
challenging position. The project evaluation and research will generate evidence
in support of the new curriculum, as well as scholar participation in STEM
research, service learning, mentoring, and professional identity development.