* 1557110
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenomics and evolutionary history of the anaerobic fungal group, Neocallimastigomycota
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jason Stajich, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2020
* USD 317,605.00

The anaerobic gut fungi (AGF) differ from all other groups of fungi by having a
restricted habitat (the rumen and alimentary tract of herbivores), and by
growing in the absence of atmospheric oxygen. They have evolved hundreds of
millions of years ago and represent one of the oldest fungal groups. However,
the evolutionary history of anaerobic fungi is currently unclear. Specifically,
the exact relationship between anaerobic fungi and other fungal groups, as well
as the timing and sequence of events that lead to their sequestration into the
herbivorous gut remain unclear. Further, it is not exactly known how the
retention of anaerobic fungi in the herbivorous gut has affected their genomes
and evolution. This project will tackle these questions by sequencing the
genomes of a large, diverse collection of anaerobic fungi, and analyzing the
data produced using a wide range of computational procedures. The project will
engage multiple high school and undergraduate students in research, with special
effort to engage minority (especially Native American) students to advance the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.
&amp;#8232;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall research progress on anaerobic fungi
has been slow, and sequencing of AGF genomes has been hampered by their
extremely high AT content and the proliferation of intergenic repeats in their
genomes. This project will utilize a new approach that combines multiple
sequencing technologies to sequence the genomes and transcriptomes of a large
and diverse collection of anaerobic fungal isolates. This research will utilize
the data generated to conduct an extensive phylogenomic analysis, aiming to
resolve their evolutionary history within the fungal tree of life, correlate the
timing of AGF diversification events to the evolution of their herbivorous
hosts, resolve the diversification pattern of anaerobic fungal genera, and
investigate the impact of the unique habitat and evolutionary trajectory on
their genomic architecture. The proposed efforts will lead to significant
advances in the understanding of the history of this peculiar group of fungi and
factors driving their evolution. Further, the genomic and transcriptomic data
obtained would be of extreme interest to a broader group of scientists working
in the areas of biofuel research, animal nutrition, and molecular biology of
fungi.