* 1557860
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Physiological Adaptation to Extreme Environments: Genes, Function, and Evolutionary Patterns
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Michael Tobler, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 418,249.00

Extreme environments allow for the investigation of life's capacity and
limitations to cope with far-from-average environmental conditions. Springs rich
in hydrogen sulfide represent some of the most extreme freshwater environments,
because hydrogen sulfide halts energy production in animal cells. Nonetheless,
some fish have colonized sulfide springs throughout the Americas, and it remains
unknown how they can tolerate conditions so toxic that most other organisms
perish. This project will compare closely related populations that live in
adjacent sulfidic or nonsulfidic habitats to identify differences in genetic,
biochemical, and physiological traits that underlie tolerance to this noxious
chemical. It involves the identification of genetic differences between hydrogen
sulfide-tolerant and susceptible populations, particularly in genes associated
with pathways affected by hydrogen sulfide toxicity or detoxification. In
addition, the tolerance and the susceptibility of fish populations will be
measured in the presence or absence of hydrogen sulfide. This project will yield
new insights into mechanisms underlying physiological tolerance to hydrogen
sulfide and the workings of animals in the presence of physiochemical stressors.
Given hydrogen sulfide's role in cellular processes and disease formation, this
also has implications for biomedical applications. This project provides
training opportunities in integrative biology for participants at all levels of
higher education. It will also contribute to science education and public
outreach through the generation of an exhibit at a local zoo and the involvement
of high school teachers that will generate lesson plans implementing next
generation science education standards for K-12 education in STEM fields.

Leveraging knowledge from toxicological and biomedical studies, this project
addresses hypotheses about mechanisms of physiological adaptation to naturally
H2S-rich environments and focuses on components of and associated with the
oxidative phosphorylation pathway (OXPHOS) in mitochondria. These components
include targets of H2S toxicity as well as enzymes involved in H2S
detoxification. It is predicted that focal components are modulated or modified
in sulfide spring populations, such that individuals have an increased ability
to withstand elevated H2S concentrations, an increased ability to detoxify H2S
enzymatically, and an ability to maintain or even increase mitochondrial energy
production by using H2S a substrate to fuel metabolism. Furthermore, it is
anticipated that modification of OXPHOS components has occurred repeatedly
across independent lineages that have colonized sulfide springs. To test these
predictions, this project focuses on an established model system (Poecilia
mexicana) for the investigation of H2S adaptation and has three major empirical
components: (1) Characterization of transcriptional and coding variation in
candidate genes by use of high-throughput sequencing techniques and subsequent
validation of effects on protein concentrations and structure. (2)
Quantification of functional consequences of transcriptional and coding
variation for H2S detoxification and bioenergetics both in vitro and in vivo.
(3) Comparison of gene sequence and expression variation across a dozen
independent population pairs from sulfidic and non-sulfidic habitats to test for
convergence.