* 1557917
* Collaborative Research: Structure and Function of Whole-tree 3D Xylem Networks in Response to Past, Present, and Future Drought
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Craig Brodersen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/29/2020
* USD 463,788.00

Forest productivity is linked to the growth and maintenance of plant vascular
systems that transport water from the soil to the leaves. These vascular systems
are made up of a network of thousands of interconnected conduits smaller than
the diameter of a human hair, collectively known as xylem. As plants are exposed
to drought, this transport system can become dysfunctional, leading to reduced
growth, and ultimately plant death. Current knowledge of the overall
connectivity of the xylem network is limited, and this prevents a complete
understanding of how water and nutrients are distributed through plants, and
also limits the ability to predict how different species will adapt to limited
water availability. The overarching goal of this project is to characterize the
relationship between the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the xylem network
and its function during drought in northeastern hardwood trees. The research
will determine which tree species are most resilient under changing
environmental conditions, establish tipping points beyond which species cannot
recover from water deficits, and develop a model to predict widespread tree
mortality under droughts of varying length and intensity. These data will inform
conservation and timber production management by predicting shifts in tree
mortality given environmental change scenarios. An online database will be
created where 3D xylem models can be downloaded and then 3D-printed for use in
biology and plant science classes, providing a unique, hands-on approach to
learning plant functional anatomy. The project involves close collaboration
between a major research university and a primarily undergraduate institution,
thereby increasing undergraduate exposure to a research environment and
education in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xylem network connectivity is
one of the least understood areas of plant anatomy, primarily due to a lack of
suitable visualization tools to study the complex, three-dimensional (3D)
organization of the microscopic tissues that make up xylem. Plasticity in 3D
xylem network anatomy is understood even less, yet it could have significant
impacts on the movement of water, nutrients, pathogens, or drought and freeze-
thaw induced embolisms. Furthermore, xylem network organization should influence
commonly measured xylem vulnerability curves, but a mechanistic model that
describes how these curves arise does not exist. Here, the aim is to use
physiological and anatomical measurements of existing adult and juvenile trees,
as well as juvenile trees in a common garden drought experiment, to explicitly
test a range of hypotheses regarding the influence of xylem network connectivity
in four dominant northeastern hardwood tree species. Using X-ray micro-
tomography, wood samples from roots, trunks, and stems will be analyzed in 3D to
explore the responses of trees to environmental changes over the past 15 years
within close proximity to the Long Term Ecological Research site tower at
Harvard Forest. A mechanistic model will then be developed to predict xylem
vulnerability and physiological tipping points for each species at two life
history stages to help understand how community dynamics will shift given
changed environmental conditions. This project will support the career
development of a postdoctoral associate, a beginning investigator, and provide
opportunities for undergraduate research, including positions in the Harvard
Forest Research Experiences for Undergraduates program.