* 1557634
* Collaborative Research: Host and Pathogen Interactions in the Amphibian Disease, Chytridiomycosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2020
* USD 596,693.00

Amphibians (frogs, toads, salamanders) are central members of many biological
communities. As tadpoles, they consume vegetation in streams and ponds, and as
adults, they consume large numbers of insect prey. They, in turn, are eaten by
snakes, birds and small mammals. Thus, the balance of many ecosystems depends on
amphibians. Currently, nearly one third of amphibian species worldwide are at
risk for development of a fungal skin disease that has driven more than 150
species into extinction. Fungi that cause disease have complex interactions with
their hosts, and host immune defenses generally keep them in check. However,
many pathogenic fungi have developed immune evasion strategies. This project
will investigate the mechanisms used by a pathogenic fungus to impair the immune
system. It will examine the chemical nature of factors released by the fungus
that inhibit lymphocytes. If the factors are novel, they may be developed as
therapeutic agents to control immune disorders. Success in this investigation
will greatly advance our understanding of the specific mechanisms that are used
by this fungus to evade immune clearance and may suggest novel virulence
mechanisms used by other pathogenic fungi that affect humans.

Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is a skin fungus that is one cause of
worldwide declines and extinctions of amphibians. Fungi that infect vertebrates
have complex interactions with their hosts, and host immune defenses generally
keep them in check. However, many pathogenic fungi have developed immune evasion
strategies. This project will investigate the mechanisms by which Bd inhibits
lymphocyte functions. Investigators and students at Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Villanova University, and Gwynedd Mercy University will investigate
the immunotoxic molecules produced by Bd and a second amphibian fungus,
Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans. The objectives are to isolate and
characterize immunomodulatory and cytotoxic molecules produced by pathogenic Bd
strains responsible for chytridiomycosis; (2) to further examine the mechanisms
of immune system evasion by Bd, the subsets of lymphoid cells affected, and to
determine whether other non-lymphoid cells are targets of Bd factors; (3) to
determine whether Batrachochytrium from different geographic locations and with
differing genetic makeup vary in their metabolic profiles and production of
molecules toxic to lymphocytes and other cells.