* 1557102
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenomics and evolutionary history of the anaerobic fungal group, Neocallimastigomycota
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Noha Youssef, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2021
* USD 392,602.00

The anaerobic gut fungi differ from all other groups of fungi in two ways: they
grow in the absence of oxygen, and they grow in a restricted habitat (the rumen
and alimentary tract of plant eating animals). They evolved hundreds of millions
of years ago and represent one of the oldest fungal groups, yet their
evolutionary history is unclear. Specifically, the exact relationship between
anaerobic fungi and other fungal groups, as well as the timing and sequence of
events that lead to their localization to a gut habitat, remains unclear.
Further, it is not exactly known how the gut habitat has affected their genomes
and evolution. This project will tackle these questions by sequencing the
genomes of a large, diverse collection of anaerobic gut fungi, and analyzing the
data produced using a wide range of computational procedures. The proposed
efforts will lead to significant advances in the understanding of the history of
this peculiar group of fungi and factors driving their evolution. Further, the
data obtained would be of extreme interest to a broader group of scientists
working in the areas of biofuel research, animal nutrition, and molecular
biology of fungi. The project will engage multiple high school and undergraduate
students in research, with special effort to engage minority (especially Native
American) students to advance the participation of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, and math disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Overall
research progress on anaerobic fungi has been slow, and sequencing of anaerobic
gut fungi (AGF) genomes has been hampered by their extremely high adenine-
thymine content and the proliferation of intergenic repeats in their genomes.
This project will utilize a new approach that combines multiple sequencing
technologies to sequence the genomes and transcriptomes of a large and diverse
collection of anaerobic fungal isolates. This research will utilize the data
generated to conduct an extensive phylogenomic analysis, aiming to resolve their
evolutionary history within the fungal tree of life, correlate the timing of AGF
diversification events to the evolution of their herbivorous hosts, resolve the
diversification pattern of anaerobic fungal genera, and investigate the impact
of the unique habitat and evolutionary trajectory on their genomic architecture.