* 1557249
* Strategies to Increase the Size, Efficacy, and Retention of the Math and Science   Teaching Workforce in High-Need Minnesota Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Jo Olsen, College of Saint Scholastica
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,199,816.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the "Strategies to Increase the Size, Efficacy, and
Retention of the Math and Science Teaching Workforce in High-Need Minnesota
Districts" project will recruit undergraduate majors in mathematics, biology and
chemistry and prepare them to become grade 7-12 mathematics and science
teachers. The project will fund 34 scholarships over 5 years. In this project,
College of Saint Scholastica will collaborate with partners, including Duluth
Public Schools, Proctor Public Schools, Lake Superior College, Duluth Children's
Museum, and the Great Lakes Aquarium. This project will advance knowledge and
understanding of the impact of implementing innovative strategies designed to
increase the size, efficacy, and retention of the mathematics and science
teaching workforce in high-need Minnesota districts. Early recruitment efforts
undertaken by The College of Saint Scholastica, in collaboration with partner
institutions, will be aimed at increasing recruitment of populations that are
underserved or underrepresented in teaching and in STEM disciplines.
Scholarships and targeted activities will be implemented to support students
through teacher education program requirements, applying for licensure, and
securing mathematics and science teaching positions in high-need Minnesota
schools. In order to promote retention in STEM teaching workforce, the College
of Saint Scholastica education faculty will pair new graduates with experienced
mathematics and science mentor teachers in high-need schools and will actively
support mandatory induction activities for at least one full academic year after
graduation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will provide comprehensive
services for prospective mathematics and science teacher candidates and Noyce
Scholars, with special emphasis on attracting and retaining individuals from
underrepresented groups. Project objectives include: 1) Increase the number of
mathematics and science teachers for high-need schools through recruitment and
support of 34 Noyce Scholars; 2) Enhance prospective teacher candidates'
interest in mathematics and science teaching with assistance from local
partners; 3) Promote retention of newly-graduated Noyce Scholars in their early
teaching years by providing mandatory induction support, pairing new graduates
with mathematics and science teacher mentors; and 4) Increase the knowledge and
understanding of the outcomes and challenges in recruiting mathematics and
science teachers and of implementing induction supports promoted in the
Minnesota Educator Induction guidelines. The project will employ research-based
strategies to increase recruitment of talented and underrepresented teacher
candidates, help improve pedagogy and knowledge-building, and promote retention
of new mathematics and science teachers. Throughout the project, multiple types
of qualitative and quantitative data will be collected for program improvement
and for advancement of knowledge regarding effective strategies to increase the
size, efficacy, and retention of the math and science teaching workforce in
high-need schools.