* 1557837
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of a Rapidly Evolving Potassium Channel in an Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Karen Magid, Huston-Tillotson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Ion channels, specialized proteins that reside in the cell membrane, shape the
electrical activity of nervous systems in all forms of life. Naturally occurring
variation (mutations) in genes that encode ion channel proteins can determine
electrical properties throughout the nervous system. To better understand the
relationship between sequence, structure and function of ion channels, the
investigators will use mutations discovered in a potassium channel gene found
only among the weakly electric fishes of Africa. They hypothesize that these
mutations confer extraordinarily rapid molecular movements, and thus rapid
electrical activity, enabling these fishes to produce rapid pulses of
electricity used in communication and navigation. The first aim of this grant
will be to sequence this gene from a variety of African electric fishes to
determine the evolutionary origin of this mutation. The second aim will be to
express these genes in-vitro to investigate the physical properties that the
mutation confers. This work is important because it gives us greater insight
into the role that genetic changes play in determining electrical properties of
all types of cells, including heritable diseases of the nervous system
(channelopathies), as well as adaptive differences that may shape the nervous
system in the evolution of new behaviors. As part of their work, the
investigators will train undergraduates, including those from underrepresented
groups in science, through coursework and laboratory experiences in molecular
evolution, physiology and genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will
investigate the relationship between sequence evolution and biophysical
properties of a potassium channel (Kv) exclusively expressed in the electric
organ, a derivative of muscle, in African electric fish. Most electric organ
discharges (EODs), are used for communication and navigation, and are
extraordinarily brief (500 microseconds) within this group, however a few
species have secondarily evolved long duration discharges. One Kv channel
(kcna7a) is abundantly expressed in the electric organ, and preliminary data
suggests high rates of sequence evolution and amino acid substitutions in
otherwise highly conserved regions of this protein, likely conferring unique
biophysical properties. In the first aim investigators will perform RNAseq on
electric organ and muscle tissues from 10 species of African electric fish
strategically chosen for their phylogenetic relationships and waveform duration,
and examine kcna7a sequence evolution as it relates to EOD phenotypic evolution.
In the second aim, investigators will perform site-directed mutagenesis on
kcna7a channel genes, guided by discoveries in aim 1, express mutagenized
channels in frog oocytes, and perform physiological recordings to determine
biophysical properties conferred by specific amino acids. This work will give
insights into the genetic basis of rapid evolution of a communication signal
involved in speciation; investigate novel amino acid substitutions in a class of
medically-relevant ion channels that are universally important in shaping neural
activity; potentially provide resources for making channels with hyper-fast
kinetics for shaping electrical activity in tissue engineering and provide
transcriptomic resources for laboratories studying other aspects of electric
organ development and evolution.