* 1557914
* Characterizing the Role of a Bacterial Consortium in a Host Reproductive Organ
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Spencer Nyholm, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2021
* USD 679,602.00

All animals have beneficial relationships with microorganisms. Many aquatic
animals lay external eggs that must be protected from fouling by microorganisms
to successfully develop. Although beneficial bacteria are thought to contribute
to egg defense, the mechanisms of this protection are largely unknown. The
Hawaiian bobtail squid is a model animal host for studying relationships with
beneficial bacteria. Females of this and many other squid species harbor
bacteria in a specialized organ of their reproductive tract. The function of
these bacteria is unknown, but they may assist with protecting such eggs from
fouling by other microorganisms. This work will use genetic and chemical
analyses to determine whether these beneficial bacteria and the compounds that
they produce can inhibit the growth of fungi and other microorganisms. The
ability of these bacteria to induce development of the squid's reproductive
organ will also be studied. The study of defensive symbioses is a growing area
of interest in a number of terrestrial and aquatic associations. This project
will take a multi-disciplinary approach by investigators with expertise in
symbiosis, chemical ecology and drug discovery to shed light on how bacteria and
microbial metabolites affect egg protection and development. The proposed study
will integrate research with education by contributing to the training of
graduate students and a number of undergraduate researchers, focusing on
students from underrepresented groups through several outreach programs. Results
of the study may lead to the discovery of novel anti-fungal and anti-microbial
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies characterized the bacterial
consortium found in the accessory nidamental gland (ANG) of the squid Euprymna
scolopes, and suggest that ANG bacteria deposited into eggs protect developing
embryos from fungal biofilms. Furthermore, female squid raised in the absence of
bacteria do not form an ANG by sexual maturity, suggesting that bacteria may be
necessary for proper development of the organ. Based on these results, the
proposed research has three main objectives. 1) Isolate and identify bioactive
metabolites from ANG and egg bacteria that show activity against fungal and
other microbial biofilms, and determine if bioactive bacterial strains or
isolated compounds can rescue eggs upon fungal challenge. The use of molecular
networks would compare secondary metabolite production by these bacterial
isolates. 2) Use transcriptomics to characterize bacterial gene expression in
active bacterial isolates. This information, along with sequence transcriptomes
and metagenomes from whole ANGs, eggs and genomes of active bacterial isolates,
would be used to predict the biosynthetic pathways leading to antimicrobial
secondary metabolite production that may be involved with egg protection. 3)
Characterize the role of bacteria in the development of the ANG, by testing
whether ANG bacterial isolates from the consortium are capable of inducing
morphogenesis of the ANG. The project would examine whether eggs from females
without an ANG are susceptible to fouling, and whether eggs challenged with
fungi can be rescued with active bacterial isolates and/or compounds.