* 1557678
* RUI: Specification and Evolution of Reproductive Fate in the Pea Aphid
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Gregory Davis, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2022
* USD 311,319.00

Evolution allows organisms to adapt to their environments over many generations
via genetic mutation and natural selection. In addition, some organisms can
adapt to changes in their environments within just one generation without any
change in their genes. Such "developmental plasticity" occurs when the
environment influences how organisms develop, and allows organisms to adapt to
environmental challenges more rapidly than is possible through evolutionary
change. Plasticity itself has evolved through the longer process of mutation and
selection, but little is known about this evolution. This project focuses on
aphids, small insects that reproduce clonally and give live birth during the
summer months. The summer form, however, cannot survive a cold winter. In the
fall, when mother aphids sense that days are getting shorter, they chemically
signal their embryonic offspring to develop into a form that can lay eggs that
can survive the cold temperatures of winter and hatch in the spring. The
participants in this project will investigate the molecular changes that occur
in developing aphid embryos when they switch from the summer to the fall form.
Participants will also investigate aphids from regions with mild winters that no
longer produce the fall form and do not lay eggs, to try to understand how the
response to shorter days has been lost over the course of recent evolution. The
work will take place primarily at Bryn Mawr College, a women's undergraduate
institution, and thus also aims to engage young women in the design and
execution of hypothesis-driven experimentation and data analysis within the
discipline of evolutionary developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aphid
reproductive polyphenism is poised to become an important example of genetic
accommodation in natural populations, one for which a good deal is known about
the developmental and endocrine basis of the plasticity. Such progress, however,
will require an accurate understanding of the fundamentals of the system.
Although several lines of evidence suggest that juvenile hormone is involved in
the photoperiod response, the precise role this hormone plays in mediating the
effect is not clear. A combined approach of hormone manipulation, measurements
of juvenile hormone titer, and gene expression during early specification and
subsequent differentiation into the summer and fall forms will discriminate
among competing hypotheses for the role that juvenile hormone plays in the
process. If successful, the experiments could demonstrate an embryonic role for
juvenile hormone in the specification of reproductive fate and identify other
early markers of this differentiation, providing candidates and opening new
doors toward understanding the switch and how it evolves to accommodate novel
environments.