* 1557867
* Sensory Traps, Imprinting, and Cross-contextual Learning: Can Shifting Food Preferences Alter Patterns of Mate Choice?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Andrei Sourakov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 07/31/2021
* USD 597,178.00

Understanding how biodiversity evolves, and in particular, how sudden
environmental changes can lead to rapid responsive changes in plants and animals
is an important challenge in biology. This study examines a simple, yet novel,
hypothesis to explain why so many animals have evolved elaborate and seemingly
arbitrary traits and colors that they display to prospective mates during
courtship. This project uses ideas from multiple fields of biology and
psychology to test the idea that preferences learned in one context (such as a
preference that an animal learns for a specific color of food) can affect the
formation of preferences in another context (such as a preference for that same
color when choosing a mate). These ideas will be tested in two species of
jumping spiders: a Kenyan species that eats female mosquitoes (specifically, the
vector of human malaria) where red colored food is preferred and an American
species that feeds on many agricultural pests and where red colored food is
avoided. Work will alter female food color preference and then determine how
this impacts the colors that females look for in mates. Both of these species
play critical roles in their respective food webs; understanding how their
populations respond to changes in prey have important implications for human
health and agriculture. The study will engage several undergraduate student
researchers, who will learn the scientific process through hands-on experience.
In addition, it will fund the participation of several non-science majors at a
local community college to improve scientific literacy among future leaders in
other fields (e.g., politics, business, education). In addition to traditional
scientific publication, the team will also disseminate findings in a
collaborative art exhibit entitled Arachnophilia (to take place in both the US
and Kenya).

Despite nearly 150 years of research to understand the mechanisms that drive the
evolution of elaborate male ornamental traits biologists frequently stumble upon
puzzling patterns in nature that challenge existing theory (e.g., yearly
fluctuations in mate preferences, unexpected patterns of geographic variation in
ornamentation and preference, and the presence of seemingly arbitrary
ornaments). Clearly, the current theory falls short of fully explaining the
complexity in nature. This study integrates ideas from across three distinct
paradigms in animal behavior (sensory traps, sexual imprinting, and cross-
contextual learning). It proposes a novel mechanism for the rapid evolution of
male display traits: that an individual cannibalistic female's recent
experiences with colorful food will shape how she interprets a male's colorful
courtship display. Despite its simplicity, this idea could explain broad
patterns of diversification and be applicable to a wide range of taxa. Using
correlational field studies and manipulative lab experiments, this idea will be
tested in two jumping spider species: Evarcha culicivora (a specialist on
Anopheles mosquitoes in Kenya) and Habronattus pyrrithrix (a generalist predator
from the southwestern USA). This study involves reversing the prey color
preferences of these two species by exposing them to different types of
naturally-occurring colorful foods and evaluating subsequent effects on mate
preferences. This study capitalizes on the charismatic courtship displays of
male jumping spiders to creatively link research, science education, and
outreach. Work will be carried out by teams of undergraduate researchers
(including non-science majors at a community college) and will be disseminated
through a collaborative art exhibit.