* 1557283
* Science and Mathematics Teacher Research Initiative: a Comparative Study of CalTeach Students to non-CalTeach Students in the Same Teacher Preparation Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Patricia Stoddart, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 884,736.00

In the 2010 National Research Council's report, "Preparing Teachers: Building
Evidence for Sound Policy," areas related to STEM teacher preparation that
lacked a sufficient research base were highlighted. This Noyce Track 4B research
project, The Science and Mathematics Teacher Research Initiative (SMTRI), seeks
to conduct a research study focusing on secondary STEM teacher preparation at
five University of California's campuses: UC Berkeley (UCB), UC Davis (UCD), UC
Santa Barbara (UCSB), UC Santa Cruz (UCSC), and UC San Diego (UCSD). This
project focuses on a critical challenge in STEM education: preparing novice
secondary school teachers to provide effective science and mathematics
instruction to the increasingly culturally and linguistically diverse secondary
school population who have traditionally been underserved in STEM education and
are underrepresented in STEM degrees and careers. The study will analyze the
impact of the University of California Undergraduate CalTeach program, which
provides undergraduate STEM majors with STEM education coursework and field
practicum, on the development of novice teachers' knowledge, beliefs and
practice as they progress through their program of pre-service teacher
preparation into the first year of teaching. This will be done through a
comparative study of CalTeach students to non-CalTeach students in the same
teacher preparation programs. The study will also track the participants through
the first year of teaching to analyze school placement, retention and teaching
efficacy of the two groups. The research will include an emphasis on the
preparation of teachers to implement the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) and Common Core State Standards (CSSS-Mathematics) and the related
challenge of integrating the teaching of academic language and literacy into the
teaching of STEM subjects for English Learners (EL).

The SMTRI research study will conduct three analyses to investigate: (1) the
impact of undergraduate STEM Education on STEM graduates' decision to become
teachers -- who they are and what they do after graduation; (2) the development
of CalTeach program graduates' knowledge, beliefs and practice for teaching
mathematics and science in comparison with the development of non-CalTeach
graduates as they progress through teacher preparation into their first year of
teaching; and (3) the impact of the form of the teacher preparation program by
comparing novice teacher development in an undergraduate teacher education
program at UCB with the development of novice teachers in traditional graduate
programs of teacher education at UCD, UCSB, UCSC and UCSD. The STEM focus for
this proposal is secondary STEM teacher education (certification areas: biology,
chemistry, mathematics and biology). The SMTRI project also will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by improving the knowledge base on
preparing all teachers to work with culturally and linguistically diverse
student populations. The project will develop a research and development
partnership among five university teacher education programs (UCB, UCD, UCSB,
UCSC, UCSD) with the possibility of scaling up to similar teacher education
programs nationally. Ultimately, SMTRI has the potential to make a significant
contribution to research on STEM education, teacher education, and EL learning
as it examines STEM teacher preparation and the integration of science, language
and literacy teaching in the NGSS and CCSS. The findings of this study have the
potential for wide scale impact in an area of professional education where many
teacher education programs are weak in preparing student teachers to implement
standards-based science and mathematics teaching in culturally and
linguistically diverse classrooms.