* 1557891
* SWI/SNF Chromatin Remodeling in Multipotency
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Laura Mathies, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 690,000.00

Stem cells have the potential to generate a variety of different cell types and
are important for the renewal of cells in adulthood, while differentiated cells
are committed to perform a specific function. In recent years, researchers have
found that differentiated cells can be converted into stem cells by introducing
a few key genetic factors into the differentiated cell. In order to harness this
potential for regenerative medicine, it is important to understand the genetic
factors that give stem cells their unique potential. The genetic model organism
Caenorhabditis elegans has many advantages for studying this process.
Importantly, the fates of all cells in the animal are known. This research
focuses on two cells that arise through a single cell division and have very
different potential: one is capable of making all support cells of the
reproductive system, while the other is differentiated. The genetic factors that
are different between these two cells will be identified and this will provide
insight into what makes a stem cell different from a differentiated cell. In
order to train the next generation of STEM professionals, this research will be
incorporated into an advanced undergraduate laboratory that gives students a
genuine research experience. Students are expected to be from diverse
backgrounds, including racial and ethnic groups that are traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adult stem and progenitor
cells are capable of producing a few related cell types. The genes and molecular
mechanisms that regulate and determine this capacity are not well understood.
This proposal uses progenitors of the C. elegans reproductive system as a model
for defining the genetic determinants of multipotency. The somatic gonadal
progenitors (SGPs) are multipotent progenitors that generate all somatic tissues
of the reproductive system. Each SGP is the product of a cell division that
produces one SGP and one differentiated cell, the head mesodermal cell (hmc).
Therefore, in this single cell division the potential to generate all of the
somatic gonadal types is differentially segregated into one daughter cell.
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are highly conserved, large protein
complexes that regulate chromatin structure and result in gene activation or
repression. Molecularly distinct SWI/SNF complexes are expressed in pluripotent
stem cells, multipotent progenitors, and differentiated cells, suggesting that
different SWI/SNF complexes are likely to play important roles in each of these
different cell states. Components of the C. elegans SWI/SNF complex are required
to distinguish SGPs from their differentiated hmc sisters. The goals of this
proposal are to identify the genes that distinguish multipotent SGPs from their
differentiated hmc sisters, and to identify the mechanisms by which SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complexes regulate these cell fates. These experiments will
provide insight into the genes and molecular mechanisms that distinguish
multipotent progenitors from differentiated cells, and will identify the role
SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes in these cell fates.