* 1557628
* Conference Proposal: The Radio Synchrotron Background
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jack Singal, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 02/28/2018
* USD 31,195.00

Astronomers have studied the radio waves that come to us from the universe since
the 1930s. One &lt;br/&gt;fascinating phenomenon that has been measured in radio
light is a faint, diffuse glow which covers the &lt;br/&gt;entire sky. This glow
is best described as the "Radio Synchrotron Background", where the term
&lt;br/&gt;"synchrotron" refers to particles making radio waves when they spin
around magnetic fields. Interest in the "Radio &lt;br/&gt;Synchrotron
Background" has been rekindled recently because of new measurements. This radio
glow &lt;br/&gt;presents a mystery because it is difficult to explain how it
came to be there with known astrophysical &lt;br/&gt;processes. It represents
one of the mysteries of contemporary astrophysics. While there have been
&lt;br/&gt;many publications in the literature on this topic, there has not yet
been a scientific workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will hold the first
scientific workshop on the radio synchrotron background, which will bring
&lt;br/&gt;together scientists working in these overlapping fields to discuss
the radio synchrotron background in &lt;br/&gt;person for the first time. There
are implications for many areas of active research in contemporary
&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics. The workshop will inspire new collaborations and new
lines of inquiry, and may spur &lt;br/&gt;future meetings on the topic. This
project funds travel support toward allowing scientists to attend the
&lt;br/&gt;workshop as well as for a talk for the public and for a report for
the scientific community on the &lt;br/&gt;outcome of the meeting. The workshop
will be held at the University of Richmond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Radio
Synchrotron Background is a newly re-appreciated astrophysical phenomenon which
has been &lt;br/&gt;a subject of great interest to many in the community.
Combining the ARCADE 2 balloon-based absolute &lt;br/&gt;spectrum data from 3-90
GHz with absolutely calibrated single-dish diffuse radio surveys at lower
&lt;br/&gt;frequencies reveals a radio synchrotron excess that is several times
brighter than was expected by &lt;br/&gt;many. The origin of the radio
synchrotron background is one of the mysteries of contemporary
&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics. It is difficult to produce the observed level of
surface brightness by known processes &lt;br/&gt;without violating constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of the radio background at the observed
levels presents profound challenges for our &lt;br/&gt;current understanding of
radio emission in the Galaxy and the universe. As demonstrated in many
&lt;br/&gt;recent publications, there are implications for many areas of
astrophysics, including cosmic ray &lt;br/&gt;propagation, galactic and
extragalactic magnetic fields, the radio to far-infrared correlation, radio
source &lt;br/&gt;counts, X-ray source counts, quasar luminosity functions, dark
matter annihilation, polarization of &lt;br/&gt;foregrounds in microwave
background maps, population III stars, mergers of clusters, and many more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will feature plenary sessions made up of
multiple presentations by attendees &lt;br/&gt;interspersed with and question
and discussion periods centered around different topics that study of
&lt;br/&gt;the radio synchrotron background touches. The visual component of
individual presentations, in the &lt;br/&gt;form of PDF, PowerPoint, or similar
files will be made available on the Web. Additionally, a report will
&lt;br/&gt;be prepared for the scientific community on the outcome of the
meeting. The priorities identified in the &lt;br/&gt;report will be determined
by consensus of the meeting attendees as synthesized by the organizing
&lt;br/&gt;committee. Finally, new collaborations and working relationships will
be established.