* 1557564
* The Development and Evolution of Social Intelligence
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Tibbetts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 368,955.00

Why do animals have strong variation in mental abilities like memory or task
learning? Some animals fail at apparently simple tasks, while others have a
remarkable capacity to learn difficult tasks, recall complex information, and
solve complex problems. It is suggested that animals need to be smart in order
to manage relationships within social groups. Consistent with this idea, animals
that live in complex social groups, like we see in humans, are typically smarter
than non-social animals. Although comparing mental abilities across many types
of animals has provided important information about the factors that influence
animal intelligence, results from large comparative analyses are rarely
definitive or easy to interpret. This project will take a new, experimental
approach to understanding the causes and consequences of within species
variation in animal intelligence. Using a wasp species where variation in memory
and learning has already been found, individual and colony success will be
compared to the ability of the colony members to learn and remember social
contacts and experiences. Findings from this work can help to better understand
the impacts of social behavior on intelligence and provide a better
understanding for why organisms, including humans, gravitate to social settings
and groups. Science education will be an important component of this project,
including research opportunities for students as well as production of a comic
book for middle school students that uses animal behavior research to teach
students the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will use
Polistes fuscatus wasps as a model to test the causes and consequences of
variation in social intelligence. Despite decades of comparative work on the
relationship between social behavior and intelligence, no previous studies have
tested how and when selection acts on social intelligence. P. fuscatus provide a
good model for this work because they use individual face recognition in daily
interactions. Learning and remembering unique individuals allows the formation
of individually differentiated social relationships, a challenging task that is
thought to select for enhanced social intelligence. P. fuscatus also show
extensive within-species variation in the ability to learn and remember unique
conspecifics. The project has two main goals. 1) Test the factors that produce
intraspecific variation in social intelligence, including the effects of social
experience, nutrition, and genotype on cognitive variation. Identifying how
genotype and the environment interact to produce variation in social
intelligence is important to understand how selection acts on this trait. 2)
Test the consequences of variation in social intelligence. Do individuals with
enhanced social cognition benefit during social interactions relative to
individuals with lesser social cognition? This aim will provide the first
intraspecific analysis of the selective consequences of social intelligence,
testing a critical, untested prediction of the social intelligence hypothesis.