* 1557870
* Collaborative Research:  Biomineralization Processes and their Environmental Modulation in Marine Bivalves
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Inna Sokolova, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 382,952.00

Bivalve mollusks such as oysters and clams are ecosystem engineers and important
economic resources in estuaries. Bivalves build shells from calcium carbonate
(CaCO3), which protect them from predators and environmental stressors and are
essential for survival. Mollusks' shells, produced from precursors abundant in
the seawater, have unique mechanical properties that make them superior to
geological CaCO3. However, they are energetically costly to deposit and can be
eroded under corrosive conditions of low salinity, high concentrations of carbon
dioxide (CO2) and low pH, characteristic of estuarine waters. Recent studies
show that biomineralization of marine bivalves is impaired by prolonged exposure
to the moderately elevated CO2 levels (800-2000 ppm), which appears paradoxical
since thriving bivalve populations are found in estuaries with a broad range of
CO2 levels (400-10,000 ppm). Another recently discovered conundrum is that some
mollusks with shells made of the more soluble aragonite are less affected by
elevated CO2 levels than those with the shells made of less soluble calcite.
These findings challenge the current paradigm in biomineralization and indicate
that interactions between the environment and biological controls of
biomineralization are more complex than currently recognized. To close this gap
in knowledge, the investigators will determine the molecular and cellular
mechanisms of biomineralization in mollusks with shells made of different types
of CaCO3, assess how these mechanisms are affected by seawater chemistry and
identify physiological and energetic constraints on biomineralization in
potentially corrosive estuarine waters. The project involves development of an
interdisciplinary BioCADRE program for training of undergraduate students,
training and mentorship of post-doctoral researchers, and fostering of
interdisciplinary collaborations between the University of Pittsburgh and
University of North Carolina at Charlotte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
focuses on the biological mechanisms of mineralization in two keystone bivalve
species, Crassostrea gigas and Mercenaria mercenaria with calcitic and
aragonitic shells, respectively. The PIs will test the hypotheses that hemocytes
and mantle cells utilize different molecular mechanisms of mineral sequestration
and transport and that species-specific differences in biomineralization
mechanisms contribute to different abilities of these bivalves to build shells
at low CaCO3 saturation levels. The PIs will assess how salinity and CO2 levels
affect sequestration, transport and deposition of the mineral as well as
expression and activity of the proteins involved in matrix formation and acid-
base balance. The PIs will determine whether successful biomineralization at low
CaCO3 saturation levels leads to elevated costs of basal maintenance and trade-
offs between biomineralization and other energy-dependent functions. These
studies will elucidate how cellular, molecular and whole-organism processes are
orchestrated to support active mineral deposition in a wide range of CaCO3
saturation levels, determine what mechanisms compensate for higher mineral
solubility during exposure to hypercapnia and low salinity and assess whether
these mechanisms are more effective in aragonite-depositing than calcite-
depositing mollusks. This project builds on previous successful collaborations
between a biomineralization expert and a mollusk physiologist and has the
material and intellectual resources required for its success.