* 1557078
* Constraining the Relationship Between Vegetation Change and Net Carbon Sequestration in Arctic and Boreal Peatlands
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Dorothy Peteet, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Peat-forming ecosystems are key components of the global carbon cycle, as they
are tremendous stores of carbon from carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. But
peatlands also release methane back to the atmosphere. The degree to which
peatlands act as carbon sinks and methane sources largely depends on the types
of plants growing there. The far northern areas where Arctic peatlands occur are
warming rapidly and so it is important to determine how sensitive their carbon
storages are to changes in vegetation that are already underway. It is known
that when the main peatland plants change from sphagnum mosses to sedges, as is
happening in many areas, the rate of carbon storage may change a lot, but the
specific response of any particular peatland is not easy to predict. Much of the
unpredictability results from difficulties in telling apart the dominant plants
in peatlands through history. If that was possible, then much better predictions
into the future could be made. So the main objective of this project is to
create a database of the chemical properties of Arctic sedges and other plants
known to dominate peatlands in the past. The database will be available to the
public and be set up so that it can be easily updated and added to. The project
will also continue a program that brings high school teachers from the New York
area to the arctic to participate in field studies associated with the project.
These teachers will then develop teaching modules connected to high school
science curriculums.

Members of the Cyperaceae (sedges) inhabit diverse environments, spanning a wide
range of moisture balance, pH, and nutrient availability. However, they are
notoriously difficult to identify by their fossil remains in peat cores, even to
the family level, because of the paucity of identifiable plant parts that are
species specific. But while the plant parts themselves are often absent,
chemicals they produced are almost always present. Of the thousands of compounds
produced, most have yet to be properly characterized and linked to particular
species. This project will generate such a database and will also relate
vegetation types, as characterized by their chemical constituents, to net carbon
accumulation rate. In doing so, the first predictive models of carbon
accumulation in peatlands based on vegetation change will be developed. This is
an important step towards fully integrating peatlands into global climate
models, which will allow a more comprehensive understanding of the feedbacks
between climate change and peatland carbon accumulation.