* 1557868
* Collaborative Research: Using an Energetics Framework to Forecast the Interactive Effects of Abiotic and Biotic Stressors on Intertidal Mussels
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Geoffrey Trussell, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 425,068.00

The impacts of environmental change on animals and plants is well established,
and numerous studies have shown that not only does environmental change alter
the physiological health of species, it also can alter the ways in which species
interact with one another. It also suggests that some of the first detectable
impacts of environmental change may lie in alterations in the ability of
organisms to grow and reproduce, rather than just lethality. This project will
develop a framework for looking at the impacts of extreme environmental change
on an ecologically and economically important bivalve species, the mussel
Mytilus edulis, in the Gulf of Maine, which is warming at an unusually fast
rate. Importantly, our modeling framework is, for the first time, able to
account for the interactions of temperature change with the additional stresses
that occur in the presence of predators. These models will therefore not only
advance our basic understanding of how multiple stressors affect animals in
nature, but also will provide a mechanism for predicting the impacts of
environmental change under realistic field conditions that are often ignored by
laboratory-only based experiments. The project also will create novel methods
for teaching high school students about the impacts of extreme change on their
local environments using cutting-edge virtual-reality technology coupled with
hands-on experiential learning in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to develop a predictive energetics (Dynamic Energy Budget) approach to
quantitatively explore the potentially interactive effects of abiotic
(temperature) and biotic (risk of predation) stressors on intertidal mussels.
The central question that addressed by this project is, how unreliable may
predictions of the impacts of environmental change be if a focus is placed only
on the isolated rather than combined influence of abiotic or biotic stressors? A
framework that considers the effects of environmental change on multiple,
interacting species is sorely needed. Building upon an energetics model already
parameterized to quantify the effects of temperature and food availability on
the mussel Mytilus edulis, this project expands the approach to examine how
predation risk - the "fear of being eaten" - may alter thermal sensitivity under
more realistic field conditions where predators are present. Previous work by
this team has shown that the effects of predation risk are comparable to, or
exceed those, caused by predicted climate scenarios, but very few attempts have
been made to place these risk effects within a bioenergetics framework,
especially in marine systems. This proposal capitalizes on the highly
complementary approaches of two research groups to develop a predictive
framework examining the cumulative effects of abiotic and biotic stressors on
growth, maximum size and reproduction of an important ecosystem engineer under
realistic field and trophic interaction conditions.