* 1557176
* Collaborative Research: Hydrological tipping points and desertification of semi-arid woodlands.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* William Pockman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,012,904.00

Forest mortality caused by drought has recently increased and is now of global
concern. This project is designed to improve the ability of ecologists to
predict the impact of significant tree die-off in semi-arid, forested
ecosystems. The study focuses on piñon-juniper woodlands. In the Southwest U.S.,
where they occur, higher temperatures and decreased precipitation have increased
drought severity, reducing tree health, and triggering widespread tree death
across the region. This research is motivated by previous findings showing that
piñon pine mortality unexpectedly leads to woodlands becoming hotter and drier,
potentially altering the environmental conditions that control future plant
growth and ecosystem recovery. These surprising results challenge the
expectation that tree mortality would lead to increased soil water availability.
This work will contribute key data on the specific roles of woody plants in
regulating water availability in water-limited, semi-arid ecosystems following
mortality of large numbers of trees. The modeling will clarify the extent to
which specific forests are vulnerable to drought and changing climate, and will
help to identify key environmental factors that increase vulnerability. One
postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students, and several undergraduate
researchers will receive training and support at two Hispanic-American Serving
Institutions. This study will inform regional natural resource managers of
climate effects and develop activities for students from Albuquerque-area and
San Marcos, TX schools through STEM focused K-12 education programs at both
institutions.

The project will test the overarching hypothesis that tree density in semi-arid
biomes may represent a tipping point, such that a decrease in tree density due
to drought-induced mortality can trigger a potentially irreversible drying of
the system, and transition to a new ecosystem state. The project will address:
1) specific mechanisms that explain why plant-available soil moisture and
remaining juniper and small piñon pine tree function decreases following piñon
mortality (decrease of hydraulic redistribution, altered energy balance, or
reduced infiltration due to hydrophobic litter inputs); and which process, if
any, is dominant; 2) if there are specific tree density thresholds or species-
specific community compositions that facilitate aridification following tree
mortality; 3) if there are soil structure and/or precipitation regimes in semi-
arid woodlands that facilitate aridification following tree mortality and 4)
what is the likelihood that these disturbed woodlands will return to their
previous state or progress to a new ecosystem state. The experimental design is
centered on nine large plots, three with no disturbance that will act as
controls, three in which all piñon pines are girdled, and three in which all
juniper are girdled, which will allow the research team to examine species-
specific roles of piñon and juniper in regulating the hydrology of these
woodlands. Measurements include the response of hydraulic redistribution and
sapflow in the remaining species, soil moisture profiles, and surface energy
balance components, which will be used to constrain a land surface model, the
Community Land Model (CLM 4.5), modified to include hydraulic redistribution.
The proposed work will greatly enhance the ability to predict how and why
coniferous mortality in semi-arid biomes may trigger aridification, advance our
understanding of the links between tree mortality and hydrology in semi-arid
systems, and quantify the role of hydraulic distribution at the ecosystem scale.