* 1557464
* Analysis of Northern New England Cold-Air Damming Events
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Samuel Miller, Plymouth State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 317,398.00

Cold air damming is a phenomenon where certain wind directions can cause cooler
air to be trapped against a mountain. In the eastern US, these events are often
accompanied by precipitation, and can be especially hazardous in winter with
snowfall and freezing rain common. The intensity of these events is difficult to
forecast and less scientific attention has been paid to cold air damming events
in the mountainous areas of northern New England. This award will allow the
research team to develop a climatology and conduct numerical modeling of cold
air damming events in order to answer questions about their formation,
evolution, and dissipation. The results of the study should help to improve
forecasts of high-impact winter precipitation events related to cold air
damming. A number of graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the
research, helping to develop the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a 15-year
climatology and composite study of northern New England cold air damming (CAD)
events with a goal of determining when the events occur and when they are most
intense, how the events compare at selected locations, and what the role of CAD
is on precipitation types. Ensembles of simulations of CAD events using the WRF
model will help to answer questions related to the sensitivity of numerical
weather prediction forecasts of CAD to initial condition uncertainty and
variations in parameterization schemes. The simulations will also help to answer
questions about predictability of the formation, strength, extent, evolution,
and erosion of CAD.