* 1557994
* Host Control of Intracellular Bacteria Survival in the Nitrogen-fixing Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2023
* Dong Wang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 04/30/2023
* USD 506,000.00

For the growth of plants the availability of nitrogen is frequently the limiting
factor. While most crops rely on nitrogen fertilizer, much of it chemically
synthesized, legumes have the remarkable ability to provide their own nitrogen
nutrition by entering a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria,
converting otherwise inert nitrogen gas in the air into ammonia. Because
synthesizing chemical nitrogen fertilizers consumes massive amounts of fossil
fuel and fertilizer runoff causes environmental degradation, harnessing the full
potential of nitrogen-fixing symbiosis can contribute to a sustainable future.
This project aims to understand at the molecular level how legumes have the
capacity, absent in other crops, to engage nitrogen-fixing bacteria in a
productive symbiosis. It will identify the function of key plant genes necessary
to allow the bacteria to work in concert with the host. Discovering the
mechanism of the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis will have broad beneficial impacts on
the society, which will be communicated at multiple levels to a scientifically
literate public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and animals engage in complex and
elaborate interactions with microbial partners, some detrimental and others
beneficial to the host. During the symbiosis between legume and nitrogen-fixing
rhizobia, individual bacteria are ingested by the host and converted to
membrane-bound nitrogen-fixing organelles. Recent advances in the field showed
that this intracellular compartment is sustained by a specialized protein
secretory system from the host, which delivers key proteins to modulate the
host- microbe interface. This research project centers on understanding the
mechanisms by which host secretory proteins interact with the microbe to ensure
the survival of the bacteria during the intracellular stage of the symbiosis.
The findings will significantly advance our understanding of the molecular
dialog between hosts and their microbial partners.