* 1557672
* Biocomponent Devices: Developing Actuators from Insect Muscles
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 616,724.00

All human-made devices, from the very first pre-historic tools to present day
robots, have been constructed from non-living materials, most of which are very
stiff and synthetic. To make modern devices more suitable for use in close
proximity to humans and for work in natural environments it is important that we
find new ways to build machines that are biologically compatible, biodegradable,
environmentally safe and able to interface with tissues. A major challenge for
making such biologically compatible machines is that there are no suitable
motors (actuators) to make them move. Attempts to use muscle cells derived from
animals such as frogs and mice have had limited success because vertebrate
tissues require an intricate blood system and they are easily damaged by
changing environmental conditions. It is also hard to replicate the conditions
found in a vertebrate embryo that make muscles grow appropriately. This research
introduces a new biological approach to making such actuators by growing them
from insect cells produced during metamorphosis. Adult insect tissues (such as
flight muscles) form directly on existing larval tissues and their growth can be
controlled using simple manipulations of insect hormones. Preliminary studies
show that insect muscles can be grown in culture at room temperature and that
they will survive for many months. This research will identify the conditions
needed to generate powerful insect muscles and develop methods to grow them for
use in living machines. Successful completion of this work will lead to the
production of an engineered muscle that can be sustained for several months and
that can generate forces ten times greater than current muscle actuators grown
in culture. The work will have wider implications in revealing some of the
processes (genetic, biochemical and hormonal) that lead to the re-programming of
cells that must occur as part of insect metamorphosis. This is expected to
stimulate new experimental approaches to studies of tissue specification, growth
and repair.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These studies will test the hypothesis that
fully formed tissues can be grown ex-vivo from metamorphic cells of the tobacco
hawk moth Manduca sexta. Using the dorsal longitudinal (flight) muscles (DFM) as
a target tissue the experiments will focus on four main goals: 1) To
characterize the physiological and molecular changes that accompany DFM
formation during metamorphosis and in culture. Measurements will be made of in
vivo changes in electrical characteristics and the contractile properties using
isometric/isotonic tests and dynamic work loops. The gene expression profile
(transcriptome) of developing muscles and growing explants will be compared at
different stages to help identify gene networks associated with Manduca muscle
formation. 2) To characterize the roles of local (cell-cell, mechanical) and
systemic (circulating) factors in muscle specification, differentiation and
growth. This will involve tissue excision and cross stage transplant methods
that are well established for insects. 3) To recapitulate the normal formation
of adult dorsal flight muscles from larval precursors in culture by engineering
the hormonal and substrate conditions. The transcriptomes of the in-vitro
muscles will be compared with both native larval and adult DFMs to look for
changes in key developmental and physiological gene networks. 4) To grow and
maintain muscle constructs in-vitro for practical actuator applications. The
goal is to engineer a muscle that can be sustained for several months and that
can generate stress an order of magnitude better than current in-vitro muscle
actuators by maximizing survival, cell proliferation and eventual
differentiation. It is expected that this process will produce densely packed
muscle fibers that can be used for high-stress actuators. The unified
contraction of these fibers will be controlled by growing them on micro-
electrode arrays or though the expression of light-sensitive channels such as
ChR2. This research will engage graduate students in cross-disciplinary research
in soft robotics.