* 1557621
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating the Role of Landscape and Urban Planning in Prevention and Mitigation of Domestic Violence
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Kim England, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,018.00

This project investigates the role of landscape and planning in creating long-
term solutions for the prevention and mitigation of domestic violence and
violence against women. Domestic violence is a significant barrier to the
economic and social development of women, families and communities across the
globe and is a key area of concern for US policy makers. The project focuses on
an urban community in Costa Rica that was planned and designed 20 years ago as
an innovative solution to the problem of domestic violence. The planning process
at its core was informed by anti-violence organizing. As such it offers an
opportunity to look at the relationship between the built environment and the
social milieu surrounding violence across generations. This project is thus a
reflective study on how successful a design approach is for addressing domestic
violence. By studying the effects of design on the behaviors and attitudes of a
residential community this project will connect community, home and
interpersonal practices to regional and national policies. A key output of this
project will be a set of resources for creating community level responses to
domestic violence that can be taken up and employed by both policy makers and
local organizations within the US and other countries. These resources, in
addition to the oral histories and case study data, will be made available to
the public in both English and Spanish through an online portal. This portal
will also be valuable for engaging undergraduate students in courses on urban
planning, politics and gender.

This project will contribute to scholarship on the relationship between urban
planning, vernacular landscapes, and everyday practices. The study brings
together literatures on geopolitics, social movement organizing, feminist
planning, landscape analysis and memory studies in a conceptual framework that
enables the exploration of how anti-violence organizing can be sustained across
generations. The central goals of this project are to (1) trace the ways the
ideologies of anti-violence organizing might be embedded in the built
environment through intentional urban planning; (2) how those ideologies are
then experienced and internalized by inhabitants of those places; and (3) if
this process works inter-generationally. Ultimately this project seeks to
understand to what extent a particular built environment informs the decision
making and perceptions of individuals. These goals will be accomplished by
evaluating a urban community in Costa Rica, where domestic violence was a
driving factor in the original design process, using a short term cohort study
with the "builders" (people who participated in the design and construction of
the community 20 years ago) and the "second generation" (people who grew up
there). The empirical data will consist of (1) life history interviewing; (2)
participant photo documentation; and (3) semi-structured follow up interviews.
This innovative combination of visual and textual methods speaks to the study's
conceptual landscape analysis component as well as enabling the investigators to
analyze participants' understanding of domestic violence and the sustainability
of anti-violence organizing across generations in relation to the built
environment.