* 1557836
* Network Structure and Conflict Management in a Cooperatively Breeding Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Ian Hamilton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 325,000.00

Human and non-human animals live in "social networks" of interactions and
relationships. For example, one animal might interact frequently with its
groupmates, while another rarely does so. An animal might be aggressive to
another, but interact peacefully with yet others. The researchers will
investigate how these social networks change after conflict to either make
conflict worse in the future, or to prevent conflict from re-emerging. The
researchers hypothesize that social networks that we observe in nature will tend
to change in ways that limit further conflict for two reasons. First, we might
not have much of a chance to observe networks that do not do so, as otherwise
conflict becomes so severe that the whole group quickly breaks apart. Second,
individual animals may benefit from avoiding conflict, and so they modify their
behavior in ways that reduce the risks of further conflict. To test this
hypothesis, the researchers propose to explore how social networks change after
conflict in the cichlid fish Neolamprologus pulcher, which live in stable, long-
lasting groups using dynamical network models coupled with experiments in
nature. If social networks change in ways that limit conflict, this would help
understand how groups of individuals with competing interests are able to stay
together and prevent day-to-day quarrels from escalating. This project involves
international collaboration in Zambia and training of students in both
mathematical and biological research. This project is co-funded by the Animal
Behavior program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the
Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the
BIOMAPS program for proposals at the interface of Biology, Math and the Physical
Sciences, and from the Office of International Science and Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to perturb groups of N pulcher in
the laboratory and the field, for example by removing individuals to create
opportunities for others to change social status. They will conduct intensive
behavioral observations on all group members before and after perturbation. They
propose to use stochastic actor oriented models (SAOM) to analyze social network
change. Stochastic actor-oriented models are a type of time ordered dynamic
network model in which individual behaviors and network structures coevolve.
They propose to use mathematical and computational models to test whether the
patterns of connections found from the SAOM analyses are associated with low
levels of conflict and high group stability. Finally, the researchers propose to
measure stress hormone (cortisol) levels and reproductive success to investigate
whether individuals benefit from being in groups that are better able to limit
conflict. Findings from this research will provide insights into how
individuals' social environment emerges through the effects of their
interactions with one another, the resilience of the social environment to
perturbation, and how the emergent social environment feeds back on individual
performance and reproductive success.