* 1557813
* Extracellular ATP Signaling in Plant Defense -- a Damaged-self Recognition System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* David Gang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2020
* USD 745,709.00

Although ATP is generally considered to be the energy currency molecule in the
living cell, ATP also acts as a signal for damage recognition in multicellular
organisms when it is released into the extracellular space following cellular
damage. Recently, extracellular ATP was suggested to come into play in plant
defense responses. Understanding molecular mechanisms that control ATP-induced
defense signaling will help identify potential molecular targets to engineer
disease resistance into crop plants; this development will not only improve the
yield and quality of biomass but it will also reduce the need for added
chemicals to control plant disease. Thus, the project is poised to bring
significant economic, environmental, and social benefits by preventing pollution
in the environment and reducing input costs for producers. The project includes
the education and training of post-doctoral researchers and students. Moreover,
the project will integrate research and education by providing summer research
projects to high school students. A strong emphasis will be placed on
recruitment and training of underrepresented groups, especially for the high
school summer intern and undergraduate student positions. This training will
offer students a potentially empowering and educational glimpse into scientific
research, and prepare them for future careers in science. In conclusion, the
proposed project integrates research and education to achieve beneficial results
for education, agriculture and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy
currency molecule, ATP, is released into the extracellular space following
cellular damage, where it acts as a danger signal for damaged-self recognition
in multicellular organisms. Very recently, the first plant purinoceptor, P2
Kinase (P2K), was identified, and further suggested the involvement of
extracellular ATP in the plant defense responses to wounding or damage from
infectious organisms. However, how the signaling pathway connects to the plant
defense response after ATP binding to the P2K receptor is unknown. The long-term
goal is to develop an in-depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms
mediating extracellular ATP signaling during plant defense responses. The
immediate objective is to determine how P2K receptor-mediated ATP signaling
regulates plant defense responses. The project?s aims are: (1) Elucidation of
sensing mechanism of extracellular ATP by the P2K receptor; (2) Identification
and functional analysis of molecular components that act downstream of the P2K
receptor; (3) Identification and characterization of signaling networks between
extracellular ATP and other stress hormone signaling pathways, so as to
elucidate the role of extracellular ATP in plant defense response. This research
is crucial to understanding how plants survive pathogen and herbivore attacks as
well as giving the researchers a unique opportunity to compare animal and plant
purinergic signaling systems, in order to define components and responses that
are evolutionarily conserved.