* 1557995
* Prevalence and Functional Significance of Regulated Alternative Splicing in Plant Pathogenic Fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Ioannis Stergiopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Understanding the molecular basis of microbial pathogenicity is vital for
deciphering the biological process of disease, and for designing new and
effective disease control methods. In spite of advances in treatment of
microbial diseases, fungal diseases continue to pose an increasing threat to
humans, animals, and plants that often endanger food security and human well-
being. The last few decades, in particular, have seen an unprecedented increase
in emerging infectious fungal diseases, while the continuous loss to microbial
drug resistance of available chemistries for disease control, intensifies the
problem and necessitates the development of novel therapeutic strategies. Key to
this process is the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms employed by microbes
to infect their hosts. In this respect, alternative splicing (AS), a key element
in eukaryotic gene expression by which different protein variants are generated
from the same gene, is an unexplored feature of microbial pathogenicity which
could promote microbial virulence by regulating the optimal production of
virulence factors during infection. Thus, the project will focus on a systematic
analysis of AS in plant pathogenic fungi, with an emphasis on deciphering its
functional significance for parasitic infections. The findings will
significantly advance our understanding of fungal pathogenesis and could be used
for the development of novel therapeutic treatments for plant diseases through
the pharmaceutical manipulation of fungal AS during infection of the host. The
project will also be used as a basis for raising public awareness on infectious
fungal diseases and training of a diverse student body in molecular plant
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most studies on fungal pathogenesis on plants
have focused on the discovery and biochemical characterization of virulence
factors that contribute to infections and disease, but much less attention has
been placed on the epigenetic mechanisms that control transcriptome diversity of
virulence-associated genes. AS splicing is perhaps the most crucial
posttranscriptional regulatory mechanism of gene expression but, despite its
importance in generating proteome diversity and functional complexity in
eukaryotic cells, its prevalence, biological role, and functional consequence
for fungal pathogenicity have been barely studied. The goal in this project is
to systematically identify and characterize AS events in plant pathogenic fungi
during a complete infection cycle of their host, in order to provide critical
answers to fundamental questions regarding its pervasiveness, species
conservation, and contribution to microbial virulence. This area of study is
important because regulated AS of virulence-associated genes is a relatively
unexplored feature of microbial pathogenicity, which potentially enables
microbes to quickly modulate and fine-tune interactions with their host. To
achieve its goals, the project will integrate genome-wide transcriptome
profiling, with selective detection of novel splice isoforms through targeted
proteomics approaches, and functional analyses of candidate AS genes by RNAi-
mediated isoform-specific gene targeting. To assess the generality of the
findings, the analysis will be done in two phylogenetically related plant
pathogenic fungi when infecting their common host. The successful completion of
this project could trigger a paradigm-shift in the field of host-microbe
interactions by highlighting the importance of AS-mediated post-transcriptional
regulation in parasite fitness and virulence.