* 1557033
* Uniting modern tools of phylogenomics and morphology to investigate the diversity and evolution of velvet mites, chiggers, and water mites (Parasitengona)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Robert Wiedenmann, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 782,015.00

Arachnids, including scorpions, harvestman, and mites, comprise an estimated
97,000 described species, but many new species remain to be discovered and
described. Mites, in particular, due to their small size and wide distribution
are poorly known and likely to harbor many new species. This research focuses on
documenting the diversity and evolutionary relationships among velvet mites,
chiggers, and water mites (Parasitengona). These particular mites are often the
most abundant animals in a given habitat and can be useful indicators of
ecosystem health in streams and forests. They have interesting life cycles, with
parasitic larvae and predacious nymphs and adults. The larvae of most species
are parasites of other arthropods and have been shown to affect host populations
by shortening host life and reproductive capability. The larvae of one group -
chiggers - are parasites of vertebrates and occasionally bite humans, causing
irritation and public health concerns. The predatory nymphs and adults play
important ecological roles as well, but they are also the most familiar, with
some species being the largest and most colorful of all mites. This project will
contribute to mite biology, but also has an extensive citizen science component
that will engage the public and allow them to contribute to the knowledge of
mites living in their area. Additionally, the project will work with K-12
educators to develop projects focused on the diversity of insects, scorpions,
crabs, mites, and related animals (Arthropods) that will introduce students to
the scientific method and improve observational skills and critical
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to integrate
modern morphological and phylogenomic tools to develop a complete evolutionary
picture of the largest radiation of mites, Parasitengona (velvet mites, water
mites, and chiggers). The project will address this goal with two specific aims
that will bridge the gaps in Parasitengona systematics and target key elements
meant to reach broader audiences. The first aim is to create a robust
phylogenetic hypothesis for Parasitengona using an anchored hybrid enrichment
protocol to sequence approximately 1000 loci across 600 taxa. The resulting
phylogenetic hypothesis will solidify the currently unstable classification and
present a tool for testing many evolutionary questions, including two core
events that have had the greatest impact on Parasitengona diversification: 1)
the shift from predator to protelean parasite and subsequent host shifts; and 2)
the invasion of freshwater. The second aim is to reconcile previous research on
parasitengone morphology with modern approaches. An internal morphological
survey will use modern non-destructive 3D imaging techniques such as confocal
scanning microscopy to yield digital interactive models. An extensive external
morphological survey using low-temperature scanning electron microscopy to gain
unprecedented amounts of morphological information. Lastly, the project will
integrate these new findings with legacy data into a matrix-format that will
assist with understanding the evolution of the group and will be the first step
to developing an online anatomy ontology for all mites. Overall, the project
will produce an unparalleled amount of data for mites and develop a foundation
for a multitude future research directions.