* 1557787
* Regulation of Mitochondrial Functions by Iron and Ceramides in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Pamela Padilla, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 992,743.00

Biological processes such as responses to stress, cell death and lifespan depend
on maintaining a balance among levels of various compounds such as fats
(lipids), iron and sugars. Although substantial research efforts have revealed
how the levels of fats and sugars are controlled by different hormones, such as
insulin, the connection of these processes to processes that regulate iron
levels is poorly understood. Recently, the investigators identified cellular
processes that potentially integrate the ways that iron and lipid levels are
maintained. The investigators will determine the dynamics and interaction
between iron homeostasis and synthesis of specific lipids (ceramides), and how
these interactions impact organismal functions such as metabolism, cell death
and responses to stress. A genetic model system will be used to identify novel
genes involved with cellular iron and lipid homeostasis. Additionally, the
investigators will incorporate their research with education by providing
research opportunities and mentoring to graduate and undergraduate students.
Furthermore, an outreach-based learning module will be incorporated into the
existing and successful UNT Elm Fork Education Center. This science education
center reaches over 20,000 visitors per year (majority are K-8th graders). By
collaborating with the Elm Fork Education Center students will be exposed to the
field of genetic modeling and the cellular responses to environmental stress in
animals. Completion of this project will elucidate novel mechanisms regulating
mitochondrial function relative to whole animal biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to dissect the pathways
controlling sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron regulation and to
determine if sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron regulation are
mechanistically linked. The approach is to use the genetic model system
Caenorhabditis elegans to conduct cellular, molecular and genetic analysis on
mutants with altered sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron regulation. The
investigators will test the hypothesis that 1) central features of mitochondrial
function and the response to oxygen deprivation in an intact whole organism are
sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron regulation; and 2)
sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron regulation are mechanistically linked
in mitochondrial functions. To test these hypothesis the following Specific Aims
will be conducted: Aim 1: Determine how ceramide biosynthesis and iron
regulation impact mitochondria functions and whole organism stress responses;
Aim 2: Conduct genetic suppression analyses to identify signaling pathways that
interact with ceramide biosynthesis and iron regulation; Aim 3. Utilize genetic
analysis to determine if neet-1 and ceramide biosynthesis mechanistically
interact to regulate mitochondrial functions. The proposed research could have a
transformative impact on the way sphingolipid/ceramide metabolism and iron
regulation is viewed in the context of mitochondrial homeostasis. The project
provides research training for graduate and undergraduate students. Furthermore,
an outreach-based learning module that focuses on the genetic model system C.
elegans will be offered through a program at the UNT Elm Fork Education center.
This outreach program will have a broad impact since it reaches over 20,000
visitors per year.