* 1557913
* Discovering the Mechanistic Basis of Individual Differences in Sensory Representation and their Effects on Preference Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Benjamin de Bivort, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2019
* USD 675,000.00

Why individuals behave differently from one another is an enduring question in
behavioral neuroscience. Every individual is a product of unique genetics,
environment, experience and developmental contingencies. How these differences
play out to produce individual behavior is currently unknown. This project aims
to study the origins of individuality in behavior using the genetic model system
Drosophila melanogaster, which permits holding genetics, environment and
experience constant across individuals. Nevertheless behavioral diversity on
odor-evoked behaviors is abundant in these experimental populations. The
molecular and neural circuit mechanisms underlying these individual differences
will be investigated using the tools of modern behavioral neuroscience,
including high-throughput behavioral testing, pharmacological manipulation to
identify critical neuromodulatory effects and neurotransmitters, and imaging to
record neural activity. Preliminary evidence suggests that each individual
encodes odor information differently. That is, behavioral differences may arise
because each individual senses its olfactory environment differently. The
mechanisms underlying these differences in stimulus encoding will be the focus
of investigation. The principles uncovered are likely applicable in humans as
well, given the commonalities of molecular biology across animal species. In
order to broadly communicate these principles, and encourage student STEM
engagement, the PI will collaborate with the DNA Learning Center of Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory to develop and distribute odor preference kits for high school
students. These will allow students to measure variation in their own odor
preference and investigate its origin in genetic differences in olfactory
receptors.

The objective of this project is to identify the neural underpinnings of the
intragenotypic variability in odor-evoked behavior using a uniquely accessible
system - the early olfactory circuit of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
Building on tools developed in their laboratory, a combined approach of
behavioral and neurophysiological characterization will be used to determine
the: 1) degree of idiosyncrasy in flies' odor preferences, 2) ways in which odor
coding varies between individuals, and 3) behavioral consequences of this
neurophysiological variation. In flies, the olfactory system is coarsely
hardwired, with neurons that are anatomically and genetically identifiable
across different individuals. Despite this stereotypy, individual odor
preference is quite variable across flies - as in humans. Likewise, the neural
coding of odor varies between flies. The relationship between these dimensions
of variation is unknown, but can be elucidated by identifying neural coding
features that predict behavioral tendencies. First, their behavioral assay will
be extended to measure multidimensional odor preferences of individual flies.
Second, subcellular-resolution functional imaging will quantify across-fly
variation in neural coding in olfactory sub-circuits. Third, these approaches
will be combined by recording neural activity in animals that have been first
measured for behavioral preferences to assess which idiosyncratic neural
activity signals are predictive of idiosyncratic odor preferences.