* 1557190
* LTREB : Collaborative Research: Long-term dynamics of amphibian populations following disease-driven declines
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Roland Knapp, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 247,595.00

Outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases are increasingly recognized as major
threats to wildlife populations. The initial invasion of a novel pathogen into a
susceptible host population can cause a disease outbreak resulting in high
levels of mortality and declines in population size. When this happens, natural
selection can occur on both the host and pathogen populations during the disease
outbreak. This can result in evolutionary changes in the host's susceptibility
and tolerance to infection by the pathogen. It can also change the pathogen's
ability to damage the host (virulence). These changes can in turn determine
whether the host population can persist and recover from the disease.
Understanding these evolutionary processes is crucial in development of
conservation strategies for threatened species. This project will examine these
processes for the case of a fungal pathogen that causes the disease
Chytridiomycosis in frogs and salamanders. This disease has had catastrophic
effects on amphibians worldwide, with numerous species extinctions documented in
recent decades and many more species at risk. The researchers will investigate
the patterns of evolutionary change in both the pathogen and the host (mountain
yellow-legged frogs), following the invasion of the disease into hundreds of
high elevation lakes in the California Sierra Nevada. This project will
contribute to the understanding of the role of infectious diseases, such as
Chytridiomycosis, as agents of evolutionary change in natural populations. It
will provide critical information to state and federal agencies. It will also
train and educate numerous, undergraduates and graduate students as well as the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on data from a long-
term study of the population dynamics of mountain yellow-legged frogs (Rana
sierrae and Rana muscosa) in the complex landscape of the California Sierra
Nevada, and the impacts of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), as it has
invaded and spread through hundreds of frog populations. In most cases, invasion
of Bd results in outbreaks of the disease Chytridiomycosis, rapid frog
population declines, and local extinctions. In some cases however long-term
persistence of frog populations occurs with Bd in an enzootic state in which the
impact of the pathogen is greatly reduced. The research will make use of recent
advances in molecular approaches, and the extensive dataset and archive of
samples from the R. sierrae/R. muscosa - Bd system, to investigate how
populations of both host and pathogen change during the transition from pre-
pathogen arrival, to disease outbreak, to enzootic disease, to potential
recovery of the pre-disease host population abundances. This dataset will be
used to investigate the genetic basis for differences in host
resistance/tolerance and pathogen virulence. Cutting-edge genomic analysis of
existing swab samples will be combined with continued surveys of field
populations to identify new disease outbreaks and describe the transition from
outbreak to enzootic state, collection of Bd cultures and frog mucosal samples
from field populations, and laboratory experiments on Bd virulence and frog