* 1557260
* Support for the Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) Mayall 4-meter Telescope Facility
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Lori Allen, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 12/31/2019
* USD 7,000,000.00

Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) will operate and maintain the Mayall 4-m
telescope located on Kitt Peak near Tucson, Arizona, during the FY16 - FY18
period to enable the following four key activities: (a) general scientific
research by community scientists, prioritized by a community-based peer review
process (approximately 240 nights); (b) execution of an imaging survey of the
one-quarter of the night sky in near-infrared light (approximately 250 nights)
to produce a high-value public dataset; (c) installation of the Dark Energy
Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI); and (d) essential corrective and preventive
technical maintenance as well as minor technology improvements necessary for the
successful continued operation of the Mayall. This work will be accomplished
within a collaborative agreement between NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE).
KPNO is a unit of the National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO), which is
operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA),
under cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation
(NSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research supported by this award
will probe a broad range of modern astronomy and astrophysics issues including
the nature of asteroids and dwarf planets in the Solar System, the formation and
evolution of our own Milky Way galaxy as well as galaxies in the distant
universe, and the distribution of dark matter and its influence on cosmic
evolution. The wide-field near-infrared survey will be the foundation for
creating a more accurate three-dimensional map of the Universe with DESI. In
turn, that map will be used to distinguish between the competing effects of
gravitation ("pull") and the still mysterious dark energy ("push") on the
evolution of the Universe over the last 10 billion years. Calibrated images (as
well as object catalogs from the near-infrared imaging survey) will be publicly
available in a form that will allow creative reuse, multiplying their research
value considerably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Open access for
enquiry-based research via peer review and open data for all will allow
scientists and citizens to engage in the NOAO/KPNO research enterprise no matter
who they are or where they work. The story of DESI, its technology as well as a
new 3D map of the universe and what we learn from that, will be a central public
engagement opportunity at the Kitt Peak Visitor Center, which receives more than
40,000 visitors per year. The DESI project brings together two federal agencies,
five US federal research centers, two major private philanthropic organizations,
and 16 US universities as well as highly specialized industrial partners. Many
participants are early career scientists, some as early as undergraduate. In
turn, the DESI project will transform the Mayall into one of the premier
spectroscopic survey facilities in the world, leveraging more than 50 years of
NSF investment in the Mayall and extending its scientific impact deep into the
21st century.