* 1557873
* Genetic Regulation and Divergence of Developmental Plasticity in Pristionchus nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Erik Ragsdale, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

"Developmental plasticity" is the ability of creatures with identical genes to
vary in response to cues from the environment. This plasticity is thought to
allow evolution to occur faster because it allows a species to have multiple
traits. We don't yet know of many genes that allow some creatures to have this
plasticity. This project will study a set of genes that create plasticity in the
nematode worm Pristionchus pacificus. This worm has different mouth structures
and behaviors depending on crowding and availability of food. The research will
determine the function of these genes and how they interact, and it will
reconstruct how these genes have evolved in related species that don't have
developmental plasticity. The results of the research will show how
developmental plasticity operates and changes at the level of individual genes.
In addition, the investigators will train undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students in biological research spanning the fields of genetics,
developmental biology, and evolution. The research will augment two successful
science outreach programs established at Indiana University: a) the PI will host
and mentor underrepresented minority high-school students in their own research
project, collect data, and present findings at an annual poster conference; b),
the PI will help high-school teachers to develop and implement projects,
experiments, and activities as classroom resources to improve the teaching and
learning of state life science standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
build a functional genetic understanding of how development responds to diverse
environmental settings, specifically through the production of discrete,
alternative phenotypes (i.e., polyphenism). The objectives of the research are
twofold. First, it will characterize the genetic factors and pathway that
constitute a developmental switch for a polyphenism in the model nematode
Pristionchus pacificus, by means of: (i) cloning and determining the spatial
expression of genes that act downstream of a known polyphenism switch gene
(eud-1), and; (ii) empirically determining how the interactions between their
products form an environmentally responsive switch. Second, the research will
determine how these factors change or assume new functions with the divergence
of polyphenism regulation. Specifically, the research will reconstruct the
evolutionary history of these factors via: (i) inferring patterns of sequence
evolution and identifying potential functional variants, and; (ii) using reverse
genetics in other species to perform comparative functional tests of those
factors. Through analysis of a genetic pathway forming a developmental switch
and the evolutionary divergence of its components, this research project will
pioneer a functional genetic analysis of how developmental plasticity -
specifically, a polyphenism - responds to environmental inputs, and how its
regulation changes over evolutionary time.