* 1557317
* Capacity Building of a New Pathway for STEM Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Mark Spraker, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2017
* USD 74,979.00

The University of North Georgia's College of Science and Mathematics and College
of Education are creating the North Georgia Undergraduate Education or NGagE
program. The program will take advantage of the newly created pathway provided
by the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia to prepare and
certify teachers. The new program will be innovative and train STEM majors to
become highly qualified STEM teachers in both STEM content and pedagogy. The
program will create new courses that will integrate recognized and successful
STEM practices and methodology in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science and
Physics. The NGagE program will also provide extensive field experience building
on UNG's successful Professional Development Community (PDC) model for training
pre-service teachers. Pre-service teachers in the NGagE program will have the
opportunity to apply the skills and knowledge gained through the program
coursework immediately in the partnering school districts. This STEM pathway
will have a significant effect on the STEM preparation in Georgia, and assist
prospective teachers in overcoming barriers in pursuing STEM training through
the combined efforts of a project team of scientists, educators, and community
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Georgia College of
Science and Mathematics and College of Education propose a Capacity Building
project through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program. The goal and scope
of the North Georgia Undergraduate Education Program (NGagE) are to increase the
number and quality of STEM secondary teachers by utilizing a newly created
pathway for teacher preparation. A collaborative faculty team will analyze the
needs in the UNG service area. To build capacity, the team will: 1) attract and
recruit high school upperclassmen, university freshmen, undeclared majors, and
practicing professionals to become STEM majors in the new pathway with the goal
of increasing the number of highly prepared STEM teachers; 2) build partnerships
within a Professional Development Community with schools and teachers to
facilitate the training and mentoring of pre-service teachers; and 3)
successfully prepare STEM teachers through the development of innovative
coursework, the use of STEM faculty mentors for advising and undergraduate
research, and industry partners for relevant STEM practices. The first year will
entail laying the foundation for the NGagE program. The assessment of successful
project development and capacity building will be both quantitative and
qualitative. Program development and new coursework will be reviewed. NGagE has
a unique opportunity to develop and reform secondary teacher preparation in the
STEM fields in the state of Georgia.