* 1557846
* Collaborative Research: Co-evolution of Communication Signals with Central Sensory Processing Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gary Marsat, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2020
* USD 294,830.00

To understand how sensory inputs can guide behavior, it is important to identify
how the structure of sensory signals, the patterns of brain activity that encode
these signals, and the abilities of animals to perceive them are related. We
still do not understand the general principles that link specific neural
response properties with the structure of behaviorally relevant signals. This
project will address this question by comparing how the brain encodes
communication signals several closely related species of electric fish that
display key differences in their signals. The project will use
neurophysiological experiments, behavioral assays, and signal analysis to ask
how brain mechanisms are optimized to species-specific signal properties and how
these neural mechanisms influence the ability of the animals to perceive
signals. The project will test the hypothesis that the structure of
communication signals and the patterns of neural responses are efficiently
matched across species to enable to detect and/or the discriminate conspecific
signals. The model system, the communication signals of weakly electric fishes,
is an ideal platform to link evolutionary, neurophysiological, and computational
approaches to understanding the neural basis of behavior. Furthermore, electric
fishes' use of a "sixth sense" to detect their world and communicate is a
fascinating phenomenon that can engage public interest in animal diversity and
neurobiology. The project will train high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. The researchers will also work with K-12 teachers to develop lesson
plans that are linked to the project?s research and that are aligned with the
learning goals of the AP Biology curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication
signals often evolve with peripheral sensory filters to optimize species-
specific signal capture. Much less is known, however, about how central sensory
circuits evolve to efficiently extract and analyze complex features of
conspecific signals. This project will comparatively study the communication
signals and sensory systems of weakly electric fish to investigate relationships
between signal structure, neural mechanisms of sensory processing, and
perceptual tasks. The central hypothesis is that sensory coding and signal
structure co-evolve in response to perceptual demands to permit efficient
detection and discrimination of conspecific signals. The project will first
analyze how cross-species variation in the structure of two communication
signals that impinge on the same sensory channel influences the conspicuousness
of signals. The project will then use in vivo electrophysiology to compare how
the coding strategies of central sensory neurons are related to the structure of
signals across species. Finally, behavioral tests will quantify how signal
structure and sensory coding strategies influence the abilities of the fish to
detect and discriminate signals. The project thus explicitly links signal
diversity, sensory systems, and behavior. This project has strong potential to
open a new direction in studying the mechanisms and evolution of communication
systems by revealing how complex features of species-specific signals are co-
adapted with neural coding strategies and the sensory tasks they accomplish. The
CoPIs will take advantage of the interdisciplininary approaches of the project
and the charismatic and engaging nature of the animal model to provide outreach
and educational opportunities from the K-12 to advanced graduate levels.