* 1557553
* Conceptualizing Cultural Contact And Transmission Across International Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 315,734.00

Researchers have increasingly questioned the concept of viewing the world in
terms of bounded, self-reliant social units such as nation states. Instead they
see the world as culturally, economically and politically interconnected with
massive movement of people, goods and information. In this highly fluid context
people create and recreate ethnic, cultural and racial identities. The study of
these processes is key to understanding social change and cultural conflict.
Archaeology is particularly well positioned to study connectivity, movement, and
ethnogenesis over the long span of human history. Dr. McGuire of Binghamton
University, along with Mexican colleagues will study these processes among
prehistoric peoples in northwest México and the southwestern United States. The
project focuses on the Trincheras Tradition of northern Sonora, Mexico to
examine connectivity, movement and ethnogenesis linking central Mexico with the
southwestern United States. The project transcends the U.S. - Mexico border to
establish contemporary research connectivity and to foster international
cooperation. It integrates research with education to promote teaching, training
and learning. It is a bi-national project that employs US and Mexican students
in a cooperative research program. It introduces these students to existing
networks that link North American and Mexican archaeologists in northern México.
The public education component of the research includes lectures in the US and
México and field trips for interested public groups from both nations. The
researchers publish their results both in México and the United States using
scientific outlets, popular journals, and museum exhibits.

Dr. McGuire and his colleagues examine how pre- AD 1200 Trincheras Tradition
people participated in a series of cultural traditions that connected the
prehistoric Hohokam peoples of southern Arizona with the prehistoric cultures of
West México. The project?s transnational, collaborative research evaluates three
alternatives for processes of movement, connectivity, and ethnogenesis in the
Trincheras Tradition. The Trincheras as Hohokam model proposes that the
Trincheras Tradition was the southernmost extension of the Hohokam. The Mexican
Migration model envisions a common culture across northern Sonora and southern
Arizona that Hohokam migrants displace in southern Arizona. The West Mexico
model argues that before the AD 1200s the Trincheras Tradition was part of a
series of cultural traditions that connected the peoples of southern Arizona
with the prehistoric cultures of West Mexico. The project gathers the data to
test these models by doing the first intensive excavations in Trincheras
Tradition sites dating before the AD 1200s. Evaluating these three alternatives
helps archaeologists to better understand processes that spanned the U.S. and
Mexico. In doing so, the research contributes to our understanding of social
change and cultural conflict at a continental scale. Such understanding
generates new insights into connectivity, movement and ethnogenesis as universal
aspects of the human condition.