* 1557467
* QuBBD: Large Scale Modeling of Big Multi-cohort Data for Cardiovascular Diseases and Type 2 Diabetes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Xi Luo, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 93,653.00

Cardiovascular disease and Type 2 diabetes are leading causes of death in the
United States. It is well known that these diseases are the result of multiple
genetic, environmental, and lifestyle risk factors. Understanding the complex
interplay of these risk factors will lead to identification of key and causal
risk factors that will provide the foundation for developing personalized
prevention and treatment strategies. To this end, decades of research efforts
have focused on the collection of comprehensive data from large populations.
However, many challenges remain in how to model and uncover the complex disease
mechanisms from such big datasets, and thus, gaps remain in how to best
diagnose, treat, and prevent these diseases. This award supports initiation of a
collaborative research project that brings together cardiovascular/diabetes
scientists and statisticians to address these challenges. The project addresses
the development of large-scale mathematical models of genetic, environmental,
and lifestyle risk factors, using existing datasets from three reputable
national studies, including the Framingham Heart Study, the Jackson Heart Study,
and the Women's Health Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will first
develop large-scale network models for high dimensional risk factors.
Specifically, this project will develop large-scale and computationally feasible
graphical models for heterogeneous data with mixed data types and complex
dependence, and then employ graph theoretical approaches to identify the key
drivers. Based on the identified networks and key drivers, novel and
interpretable predictive rules will be developed. These modeling results will be
validated systematically using multi-cohort data. Finally, this project will
deploy a web-based portal for disseminating the modeling results, which will
serve as a core tool for research and learning. This award is supported by the
National Institutes of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in
partnership with the National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical
Sciences.