* 1557192
* Using Phylogenetic Structure to Clarify the Evolutionary Ecological Distribution of Microorganisms
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Thomas Sharpton, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2021
* USD 731,791.00

Microscopic organisms, or microbes, are fascinating creatures because they
exhibit an unparalleled diversity, can be found virtually everywhere in nature,
and are responsible for critical ecosystem services. Advances in DNA sequencing
technology have transformed how scientists study these evolutionary and
ecological aspects of microbial life by providing genetic insight into which
types of microbes live in specific environments. However, less is understood
about how microbes have evolved the ability to thrive in these environments.
This research project uses innovative methods to integrate evolutionary and
ecological information about microbes to determine how they have evolved in
particular environments and to discover evolutionary groups of microbes that are
essential to the ecosystem. This work is important because (1) it will provide
researchers with the tools needed to understand how evolutionary and ecological
forces influence microbial biodiversity, (2) it will facilitate effective
preservation of microbial ecosystems and their services, and (3) is will provide
a means of efficiently engineering communities of microbes that are industrially
valuable. Further, this research will provide valuable, fundamental insights
regarding the mechanisms by which microbes evolve within the context of their
ecosystem. In terms of broader impacts, this work is valuable because the tools
generated will benefit future investigators in developing more quantitative
analyses and research plans. The research team will also convene an annual
bioinformatics workshop intended to bring in more under-represented and first-
generation students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a set of
eco-phylogenetic methods for assessing how and why specific groups of microbes
diversify. Specifically, this approach analyzes phylogenies assembled from a set
of microbial communities and profiles the presence and abundance of each
evolutionary group (clade) in each community. It then identifies clades whose
phylogenetic and ecological distributions indicate that specific evolutionary or
ecological mechanisms have influenced their diversification. This includes
development of statistical and model-based procedures to assess the likelihood
that non-random processes created the observed patterns in community
composition, diversification and relatedness. Finally, it will apply these
methods to the study of mammalian gut and plant leaf associated microbial
communities to determine which microbial clades are critical to the structure of
these communities, co-evolving with their host, and subject to evolutionarily
conserved interactions with other microbial clades.