* 1557474
* Plasticity of Electrical Synapses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Julie Haas, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2021
* USD 834,950.00

Direct electrical connections between neurons are widespread throughout the
mammalian brain, but their contribution to brain function is poorly understood.
Similar to other types of connections or so-called synapses between neurons,
electrical synapses are known to undergo changes in strength. However, the
specific conditions that result in plasticity or changes in strength of
electrical synapses are unknown. This project investigates the specific neuronal
activity rules and underlying mechanisms whereby these synapses are modified by
ongoing brain activity. Further, this project aims to advance our understanding
of how these activity-dependent modifications of electrical synapse strength
impact brain function, in particular that processing of sensory information via
the thalamus to the cortex. The findings will yield important new insights into
the function of electrical synapses and their plasticity across the brain, and
how the brain gates cortical attention to the sensory environment surrounding
the organism. The project involves a combination of brain research,
undergraduate and graduate training in neuroscience concepts and research
techniques, and educational development through special institutional programs
aimed at disadvantaged children and youth, with a goal of public education and
broadening participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM disciplines) by traditionally underrepresented students.

Learning rules and mechanisms for long-term synaptic modification have been
described extensively for neurotransmitter-based synapses. However, strikingly
little is yet known about activity-dependent plasticity of electrical synapses,
also known as gap junctions. Because electrical synapses are widespread but
their importance in mammalian brain function, it is critical that we advance our
understanding of whether and how these types of essential synapses are regulated
in a use-dependent manner. The central hypothesis of this project is that the
strength of electrical synapses in the thalamic reticular nucleus, the major
inhibitory regulator of cortico-thalamic communication, is continuously updated
by activity in electrically coupled neurons; in turn, this plasticity alters the
synchrony within and the inhibitory output of the thalamic reticular nucleus. To
test this hypothesis, the control and the impact of electrical synaptic
plasticity is investigated using in vitro electrophysiology and optogenetic
techniques. Aim 1 examines the mechanisms that underlie plasticity of electrical
synapses, with the goal of elucidating and developing predictions about the
relationship between activity and synaptic strength. Aim 2 measures the impact
of electrical synaptic plasticity on synchrony within networks of coupled
thalamic neurons, and thereby offers new insight into the inhibition that
coupled interneurons deliver to their downstream targets. Aim 3 tests the
functional role of electrical synapse plasticity in brain rhythms and network
plasticity. Together, the studies will lead to novel understanding of how
electrical synapses contribute to brain function.