* 1557781
* Molecular Mechanisms of Thermal Tolerance in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* James Morris, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2021
* USD 800,000.00

Temperature has a major impact on animal physiology, and the ability to
withstand daily and seasonal fluctuations in environmental temperature is
critical for survival. This challenge is particularly acute for small insects,
which include major agricultural pests and animal disease vectors, from aphids
and flies to mosquitoes. The body temperatures of these animals closely follow
the ambient temperature, and their sensitivity to temperature, especially cold,
is a key factor in determining their geographic distributions. In this project,
the researchers will probe the molecular and cellular pathways through which
animals adjust their physiology to withstand cooling, using the fruit fly
Drosophila as a model. The key systems this animal uses to sense that the
environmental temperature is dropping will be identified. Next, the researchers
will examine how the initial sensation of cooling is communicated to and
processed by the brain. Finally, the investigators will examine how signals from
the brain act to adjust the animal's physiology so that key organ systems are
able to cope with environmental change. From an intellectual perspective, these
studies will provide insight into how an animal's senses can modulate its
physiology, and into how an animal can respond to environmental challenges. This
work is designed with several broader impact objectives. These include training
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral fellows in biological research,
providing experiential learning opportunities to engage undergraduate students
in scientific research, providing mentored teaching opportunities for graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows, and providing publicly available resources
for the research and educational communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperature
affects all biological processes, and the ability to sustain physiological
function despite fluctuations in body temperature is important for animal
survival. In this proposal, the investigators will examine how animals withstand
temperature fluctuations, particularly cooling, using the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster as a model. The proposal uses a combination of molecular genetics,
physiology and behavior to examine three main research goals. First, the
cellular and molecular sensors through which cooling is detected to initiate
physiological changes that confer cool tolerance will be identified and studied.
Second, the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in eliciting these
physiological changes will be identified and examined. Third, the extent of
inter-species variation and environmental plasticity in cool tolerance among
multiple Drosophila species will be explored, identifying promising natural
variants and regulatory strategies for further study. Together, these studies
will provide insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which
animals sense temperature and modulate their thermotolerance to cope with
fluctuations in environmental temperature.