* 1557130
* LTREB Renewal: Evolutionary Dynamics in a Rapidly Changing Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Daniel Blumstein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 11/30/2022
* USD 531,994.00

The purpose of this study is to understand how natural selection changes over
time for a species experiencing a rapidly changing environment. This research
builds on an extensive long-term (since 1962) data set of individually marked
yellow-bellied marmots at Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Colorado. The
project will measure changes in key physiological and behavioral traits of
individual marmots, and determine their influence on reproduction and survival
in this model organism. This work is important because it will provide new data
and insights to better understand the limits of evolutionary responses to
environmental change. The work will continue a long term record of changes in
fitness (i.e., reproductive success and survival) for populations of the marmot
inhabiting different elevations, and linking this to traits like body mass,
aggression, and dominance behavior in these mammals. Continuation of this data
provides a valuable window on the effects of climate change on a hibernating
mammal, and a priceless data set that can be used to explore both population and
evolutionary dynamics. Broader impacts of this project will include: recruitment
and training of graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented
groups; wide dissemination of research results to scientific audiences and the
general public via scientific and popular articles and talks, and working with
science journalists; and maintenance of a blog and website to provide public
information on marmot biology and ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will evaluate changes in the environment, in selection pressure, and in trait
variance of marmot populations at both low and high elevation sites at Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory. The work will expand earlier analyses on body
mass traits such as mass at emergence, rate of mass gain, and mass before
hibernation. Analyses of changes in selection and in trait distributions will be
based on the past 40 years and the next 2-3 years. The PI will focus analyses on
behavioral and endocrine traits using 12-15 years of data, and use a combination
of path analysis to test for causality and the multivariate animal model to
decompose trait variance into its environmental and genetic components. By
quantifying how selection on traits changes over time, how changes in
reproductive success and survival affects traits, and how changes in these
traits affect reproduction and survival, this research will integrate proximate
and ultimate mechanisms and use novel approaches to study causal inference.