* 1557230
* Collaborative Research (RUI): Na,K,Cl Cotransporters in Mosquito Epithelial Transport - Connecting Molecules to Physiology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Christopher Gillen, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 64,000.00

This research explores the mechanisms that mosquitoes use to regulate their salt
and water balance under the challenging conditions they face during their
lifecycles. Most mosquito larvae live in freshwater and must absorb salt to
counteract the tendency for salt to diffuse out of their bodies. In contrast,
adult female mosquitoes must expel large amounts of salt after they engorge on a
salty blood meal. The specific focus of this project is on three mosquito
proteins that help carry salts such as sodium, potassium, and chloride into or
out of the body. One of these proteins is closely related to proteins in humans
and other vertebrate animals that are important to salt and water balance. Thus,
studying the mosquito version of this protein may uncover fundamental properties
of salt-transporting proteins that are shared between vertebrates and insects.
The other two proteins are only found in mosquitoes and other insects, and have
not been characterized in any animal. Gaining a better understanding of these
novel insect proteins may be especially useful in developing strategies to
control mosquitoes and other insect pests, since it may be possible to target
them without affecting vertebrate proteins. This research project will develop
new tools for researchers to assess where these proteins are located in the
mosquito body, what salts they carry, and what chemicals can interfere with
their function. Additionally, three undergraduate students and one graduate
student will receive closely mentored research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mosquitoes must secrete and absorb ions differently
depending on their life stage, sex, and environment. Three proteins from the
yellow fever mosquito Aedes aegypti have sequence similarity to vertebrate
Na+-dependent cation-chloride cotransporters (CCCs), which participate in both
ion absorption and secretion. This work will produce critical reagents and
refine procedures that are necessary to begin linking the molecular properties
of the mosquito CCCs to their transport functions and whole-animal physiological
roles. The first objective is to develop isoform-specific antibodies that
recognize and differentiate among each of the three mosquito CCCs. The
selectivity of the antibodies will be evaluated by comparing their reactivity
among different mosquito tissues and developmental stages, mosquitoes in which
expression of a specific CCC has been silenced by RNA interference, and in
Xenopus oocytes injected with cRNAs encoding a particular CCC. The second
objective is to confirm functional heterologous expression of each mosquito CCC
in Xenopus oocytes. Functional expression of the CCCs will be evaluated using
standard radioisotope uptake assays and newly developed non-radioactive methods.
Findings from the proposed work may also be useful in identifying novel
molecular targets to aid in the development of new insecticides for the control
of insect disease vectors and agricultural pests. Three undergraduate students
and one graduate student will receive mentored research training and the
principal investigators will initiate community outreach programs.