* 1557384
* Preparation of STEM Majors and Recruitment of STEM Graduates to Increase the Number of Highly Qualified STEM Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Allan Ludman, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,198,536.00

The Queens College, City University of New York, Noyce STEM Academy is a five-
year project dedicated and designed to motivate and encourage both talented
students majoring in the STEM disciplines and STEM professionals to become
successful science teachers in high-needs public schools in New York City. This
project aims to recruit 24 STEM majors and 24 STEM professionals in order to
produce 48 new, highly qualified STEM teachers. The significance of the STEM
Academy is founded on its commitment to promoting science progress through the
advancement of science awareness and a more scientifically informed public. This
project resonates with the Noyce Program's mission, which seeks to improve the
lives of students by strengthening science instruction provided within K-12
educational systems. The STEM Academy will respond to the well-documented need
of preparing highly qualified science teachers who will serve in disadvantaged,
high-needs schools. The significance of this project is its commitment to
attract STEM majors and professionals from culturally diverse backgrounds, to
retain them as outstanding teachers, and ultimately to improve student
achievement by recognizing the link between out-of-school science experiences
and those in formal classroom settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal and scope
of the STEM Academy will be to support 48 STEM individuals in the greater New
York City metropolitan area to serve in high-needs schools. The STEM Academy
will include two tracks: one designed for talented undergraduate students (N=24)
to receive scholarships for two years as they complete requirements for their
dual science and education majors, and another designed for candidates who are
STEM professionals (N=24) seeking initial teacher certification in science. The
STEM Academy will accomplish its goals through the following methods and
approaches: 1) providing prospective, talented science educators with a
carefully crafted year-long, clinically-rich induction and mentoring program
that integrates learning experiences in community-based science learning centers
with preparation in formal high-need partner schools; 2) increasing capacity of
STEM teaching majors from culturally diverse communities; 3) providing a career
transition for STEM majors and STEM professionals; 4) providing a well-developed
curriculum that enhances students' science content knowledge, teaching
pedagogies, and research experience; 5) studying effective teaching practices
and behaviors through apprenticeships with master teachers in host schools; and
6) providing sustainable, integrated support during the candidates' first two
years of teaching. In addition to producing 48 outstanding science teachers, the
STEM Academy anticipates the following potential benefits and contributions: (1)
building of knowledge regarding the importance of mentor relationships on the
training and retention of talented STEM professionals from culturally diverse
backgrounds in the field of science education; (2) developing greater
understanding of the context in which science learning occurs in both informal
and formal settings; and (3) increasing the capacity of highly qualified science
educators for high-needs schools who will advance scientific literacy in their
classrooms. The results of this work have the potential to assist other like-
minded teacher preparation programs across the country.