* 1557421
* An Archaeological Study of Identity Negotiation Within A Multicultural Community Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Rinita Dalan, PaleoCultural Research Group
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 68,513.00

Recent archaeological research shows that interactions among people living in
plural communities not only reflect political and economic relationships but
also influence how those relationships develop. This project will advance that
line of research by studying the relationships between public declarations of
identity embodied in residential architecture and regional political-economic
changes in northern Great Plains farming communities dating to the A.D. 1400s
and 1500s. Public debates about social and cultural diversity create a dynamic
environment where norms are challenged and new political, economic, and social
relations can emerge. Archaeologists can understand the content and therefore
the significance of public debates over values and meanings by investigating how
individuals and households chose to express the social or cultural differences
between themselves and their neighbors. An archaeological perspective can
provide special value since it can trace how patterns develop over significant
periods of time. Archaeologists studying Colonial-era native communities have
long recognized the political and economic consequences of day-to-day
interactions among people claiming different identities. However, archaeologists
now know that plural communities were common long before Europeans came to the
Americas. Community formation and dissolution, migration at multiple scales,
warfare and alliance formation, and trade continually transformed the ancient
cultural landscape and as a consequence understanding social processes within
plural communities is crucial for reconstructing the native history of the
continent. This project will contribute to a growing body of comparative
archaeological and historical research on the ways in which daily interactions
among people brought together by colonialism, migration, war, or ecological
change helped shape large-scale historical trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Mark Mitchell, of PaleoCultural Research Group, along with his research team
will study household diversity within the native settlements clustered around
the confluence of the Heart and Missouri rivers in present North Dakota. A wave
of transformative change, marked by increased population density, expanded long-
distance trade and interaction, more frequent warfare, and economic
intensification, swept through this region between A.D. 1400 and 1600. However,
little currently is known about the social processes operating within individual
communities. This project will study intra-community social interaction by
comparing the private lives of families living in two distinctly different types
of houses, one that was recognized at the time as local and another that was
recognized as foreign. The primary aim is to determine whether these families'
architectural choices were motivated by their differing communities of origin,
status, ideological affiliation, or some combination of these factors.
Understanding why different households chose particular expressions of social or
cultural difference will provide insight into the factors underpinning regional
changes in demography, settlement, and economic practice. The project will
involve students from two different institutions and will broaden participation
by American Indians in regional archaeological research.