* 1557661
* Natural Diversity and Mutant Analysis of Regulators of Plant Immunity for Rational Design of Immunity Proteins as Decoys
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Jennifer Lewis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2022
* USD 644,572.00

Plant pathogens cause tremendous crop losses worldwide and evolve quickly to
overwhelm existing host immunity. Many pathogens deliver effector proteins into
their hosts to promote virulence of the pathogen. Over evolutionary time, the
plant can evolve to recognize specific effector proteins from the pathogen. The
PI's research group has identified a plant protein (a "decoy") that acts as a
"mousetrap" for a pathogen effector protein, and enables the plant to mount a
strong immune response. This work will determine the genetic parameters
necessary for pathogen recognition in the host, in order to help design better
decoys and protect crops from infection. This project includes substantial
outreach to a local two-year college that serves a diverse student body,
including underrepresented groups (37% Hispanic, 24% African American, 19%
Asian, 1% Hawaiian) and underprivileged students (68% receive financial aid), in
order to expose students to cutting-edge research and broader educational
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissection of the molecular determinants
underlying host immunity will provide a rigorous toolkit to combat the
significant problem posed by plant pathogens. HopZ1a, a Pseudomonas syringae
type III secreted effector protein, is recognized indirectly through ZAR1, a
nucleotide-binding site leucine-rich repeat containing receptor protein, when
HopZ1a acetylates the ZED1 pseudokinase. ZED1 appears to be a decoy that has
evolved to trap the T3SE into recognition, as it is not a functional kinase and
does not have a role in basal immunity. This work will examine ZAR1 and ZED1
natural and mutant diversity in order to develop constraints for rational design
of a pathogen decoy. The PI will collaborate with a local two-year college that
primarily serves underprivileged students and underrepresented groups, and will
host several students each summer to learn new scientific techniques. The lab
will design a module on plant immunity that will be taught in the college. This
will provide teaching opportunities for students and post-docs, and increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in science. Together these efforts will
encourage underrepresented students to pursue and excel at multi-disciplinary
scientific research, provide outreach opportunities for graduate students and
post-docs, and make progress on significant scientific and agricultural
problems.