* 1557541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cosmogenic Surface Exposure Dating of Late Holocene Spatial and Temporal Variability of the Southern Greenland Ice Sheet
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,984.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the behavior of the
margins of the southern Greenland ice sheet during the late Holocene epoch, a
time period covering the last several thousand years. The doctoral student will
seek to determine whether ice margins behaved synchronously in the region and
whether they reached their maximum extent before or during the time known as the
Little Ice Age from about 1300 to 1900. A more precise determination of when the
southern Greenland ice sheet reached its maximum extent will provide new
information and insights regarding broader hemispheric climate dynamics. If the
southern Greenland ice margins reached their maximum extent during the Little
Ice Age at the same time as glacial margins in Europe and North America, then
the southern Greenland ice sheet likely behaved in concert with a hemispheric
wide climate signal. This finding would suggest that current southern Greenland
ice sheet retreat might be in response to warming trends around the globe in
recent centuries that are influencing ice retreat in Europe and North America.
If the southern Greenland ice sheet reached its maximum before the Little Ice
Age, however, a more complex set of explanations for why ice margins in
different parts of the Northern Hemisphere reached their maxima during different
time periods will be required. Identification of an earlier maximum also would
require reconsideration of dynamics affecting the southern Greenland ice sheet
itself, because its margins may stabilize in the future as climate models
predict minimal warming over this part of Greenland in the coming century.
Project findings will be shared more broadly with school groups and the public
through education and museum programs. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

The doctoral student will date the retreat of two southern Greenland ice sheet
outlet glaciers using cosmogenic surface exposure ages on boulders from moraines
that are dated as being more than 300 years in age. `These results will be
compared with existing data from a pilot study and new data to the north of
these locations. In the end, four different ice margins in southern Greenland
will be dated, thereby allowing the testing of spatial and temporal variability
in the southern Greenland ice sheet. The student will address two fundamental
research questions. (1) When was the late-Holocene maximum of the southern
Greenland ice sheet? Regarding this question, the student will test the
hypothesis that the late-Holocene maximum underwent a late-Holocene advance more
extensive than its Little Ice Age advance in response to significant early
cooling. (2) Does regional climate govern southern Greenland ice sheet
variability at centennial timescales? The student will address this question by
testing the hypothesis that the southern Greenland ice sheet responds
synchronously to centennial climate variations, such as those observed during
the late Holocene. Testing these hypotheses will shed light on geologically
recent ice sheet-climate interactions important for modeling the Greenland ice
sheet response to spatially variable temperature changes. Project results will
determine if southern GIS margins have responded to climatic changes of less
than several degrees on a timescale relevant to humanity?s near-term future, a
potentially transformative result, particularly for predicting sea-level rise
over the coming century.