* 1557346
* Encouraging Students to Become Secondary STEM Teachers in Eastern Iowa
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Nicole Becker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,438,653.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the project titled, "Encouraging Students to Become
Secondary STEM Teachers in Eastern Iowa" will recruit undergraduate majors in
STEM disciplines or STEM professionals and prepare them to become secondary STEM
teachers. The project will fund 30-40 scholarships/fellowships over five years.
In this project, the University of Iowa will collaborate with Kirkwood Community
College, the Iowa City Community School District, Mt. Pleasant Community Middle
School and Clear Creek-Amana High School. The project will support students in
attaining a Masters of Arts in Science Teaching degree (MAT) or a Bachelor of
Arts degree and MAT through a new 4+1 program at the University of Iowa that
allows students to complete both degrees in 5 years. Scholarship recipients will
receive up to three years of support and will participate in summer professional
development workshops designed to support development of content knowledge,
evidence-based pedagogies, and strategies for supporting underrepresented groups
in STEM. Noyce Scholars will be mentored by experienced teachers from high-need
partner school districts. Additionally, the project team will develop a new
transfer pathway for secondary science teaching that will support Kirkwood
Community College students in transferring to the University of Iowa to complete
degrees in STEM and teacher licensure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Iowa (UI) will partner with Kirkwood Community College (KCC) to implement
recruitment strategies frequently used at UI such as STEM-focused career
exploration activities are not currently in place at KCC. The objective of this
project is to encourage students in STEM coursework at KCC and UI to consider
secondary science teaching careers. The goal of this project is to recruit STEM
students at Kirkwood and the University of Iowa into secondary science teacher
preparation programs through career exploration activities and financial
support. An existing course titled "Exploring Teaching" at KCC will be modified
to include a STEM focus and will become part of a new transfer pathway at KCC
that will support students' ability to transfer to UI's teacher preparation
programs. Summer internship opportunities for freshmen and sophomores will be
developed in collaboration with the Kirkwood Interactive Camps for Kids. Career
exploration courses, internships, and Noyce Scholarship opportunities will be
advertised broadly to STEM students and underrepresented populations at both
institutions. Noyce Scholars will be mentored by experienced teachers and will
interact with mentors and peers through fieldwork experiences and professional
development activities. Data collected from the project will provide a basis for
improvements in teacher recruitment and in other teacher preparation programs.