* 1557009
* LTREB-Renewal:   Twenty-Nine Years of Tidal Marsh Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* J. Patrick Megonigal, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The United States is rapidly losing coastal wetlands, critical ecosystems that
nourish fisheries, clean our water and protect us from storms. While some marsh
losses result from coastal development, others losses have yet to be fully
explained. Marshes can build soil vertically and gain elevation to keep pace
with slowly rising seas, but the marsh plants that sustain these ecosystems get
stressed when sea level rises too quickly. The amount of sea level a marsh can
tolerate depends on other factors that are also changing. For instance, the
amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is rising. Likewise, pollution from
nutrients like nitrogen has increased sharply from preindustrial times. Both
increased carbon dioxide and nitrogen tend to make marsh plants grow more, which
could help marshes keep up with sea level rise. But they also change the types
of plants that grow and it is unknown what effects that will have on marshes.
This project asks: how will rising carbon dioxide and nitrogen affect plants and
the ability of coastal marshes to keep up with sea level rise? Since about half
of the U.S. population lives within 50 miles of a coastline, there is
considerable pressure on coastal wetlands and the services they provide. The
annual loss of low-lying coastal wetlands lost to open water each year threatens
fisheries, wildlife habitat, water quality, and infrastructure. The project will
also continue public education and science education programs at many levels,
and the research results will be made freely available on a public Smithsonian
Institution website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the central question of
this project, the study builds on a thirty-year history of ecological
observations at a Chesapeake Bay marsh in Maryland. Measurements of primary
production and soil chemistry will be combined with parallel experiments that
simulate the future environment by adding carbon dioxide and nitrogen to marsh
plots, and comparisons will be made of native to invading plants. The long-term
records of this site enable the scientists to document changes in the species
composition of plants growing on the marsh over time. At this point, the surface
elevation of the soil in the marsh is falling behind local sea level rise,
suggesting that this marsh may be in the process of collapsing. The
investigators will continue their local measurements, but the results should be
generally applicable to coastal wetlands everywhere.