* 1557971
* Investigating Microglia-synapse Interactions in the Mouse Cortex in Vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Anna Majewska, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2020
* USD 752,000.00

Microglia are cells of the immune system that act as the first defense of the
brain against infection and disease. Traditionally, these cells have been
thought to be inert unless activated by a pathological event. Recently, it has
been discovered that microglia are in fact very active, even in the absence of
pathology, and that they can actively participate in important functions in the
healthy brain, such as the rewiring of neuronal networks during neurodevelopment
and learning. How microglia can sense the activity of neurons is currently
unknown, but understanding such a mechanism is critical to unraveling how
microglia perform their physiological functions. The experiments proposed
determine how neuronal activity affects microglial signaling and physical
contacts with neurons by monitoring both neurons and microglia in the living
mouse brain. The results will give a wealth of knowledge about how microglia
behave in the physiological brain and also give insights into how their
functions could impact neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disease. In the
process of doing the experiments, young scientists are trained for a future in
academic and non-academic science, and participate in outreach activities that
teach K-5 children about the brain. Additionally, scientists from upstate New
York with research programs that focus on glial biology come together to share
their new results to build a new vision of how these cells act together with
neurons to perform computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand
physiological microglial function, it is necessary to study these cells with
minimal perturbation in the living brain. Two-photon microscopy allows the
monitoring of signaling within cells in the intact brain, and in this project
the investigator images calcium signals in neurons and microglia of anesthetized
and of awake mice. Neuronal calcium signaling indicates levels of neuronal
activity in a dendrite-specific manner, and the behavior of microglia with
respect to more and less active dendrites can be tracked. However, little is
known about the function of calcium signaling in microglia. The imaging
experiments provide information on whether intracellular calcium is responsible
for directed movements of microglial processes and interactions with neurons in
vivo. The experiments address how such activity influences microglial contacts
with synapses, synapse elimination, and microglial signaling. Taken together,
the studies allow for deeper understanding of how microglia and neurons interact
in physiological conditions.