* 1557923
* Signal Molecules in Ctenophores: Quest for the Earliest Transmitters
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Leonid Moroz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,087,825.00

Ctenophores, also known as comb-jellies, are marine invertebrates that show an
unprecedented capacity for regenerating. Their nervous system has two networks
of interconnected cells and an elementary brain, and information travels from
one nerve cell to another differently than in any other animal group. This
research will reveal how comb-jellies build their nervous systems as compared to
those of all other animals, and discover new molecules that control nerve cell
communication in comb-jellies. Learning about these enigmatic organisms will
open new horizons in scientific knowledge about alternative ways to build nerve
cells and neural circuits, and will also decipher ways to rebuild damaged
nervous systems. Data from these experiments will be deposited in publically
web-accessible servers for the broader scientific community. This work will also
provide unique opportunities for field education and training of students and
the general public by using mobile marine laboratories and digital resources
that are accessible world-wide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wild-captured animals from
the genuses Pleurobrachia and Mnemiopsis are the major experimental models for
this research. Neuron-specific, single-cell approaches will be used to study
gene expression, metabolomics, proteomics, connectivity and function with the
overall goal of identifying novel neurotransmitters and neural specification
molecules in cell populations forming the two distinct neural nets (ectodermal
vs mesoglea-derived) and aboral organ (the analog of the elementary brain) of
diverse ctenophore species. Specific outcomes will be: (1) deciphering a new
chemical language in neural systems by genome-scale annotation of neurogenic and
myogenic molecular pathways and transcription factors using single-cell RNA-seq
and epigenome sequencing technologies; (2) tracing neuronal identities
throughout development; (3) identifying and characterizing novel signal
molecules or neurotransmitters using capillary electrophoresis and mass
spectrometry complemented by physiological approaches; and (4) developing
potential models to explain the neural origins and evolutionary diversification
of synapses.