* 1557042
* Collaborative Proposal: Biodiversity discovery and analysis of "Aigarchaeota", a globally distributed but poorly understood archaeal lineage
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Brian Hedlund, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2021
* USD 632,711.00

Over half of the major groups of microorganisms on Earth have never been
cultivated in the laboratory, and most have never been explicitly targeted for
scientific investigation and remain poorly understood. One such group of
microbes is Aigarchaeota, a diverse, globally distributed group that inhabits
terrestrial, geothermal hot springs and marine hydrothermal vents. The overall
goal of this project is to dramatically expand our knowledge of the species
diversity, distribution, ecological function, and organismal biology of
Aigarchaeota and to establish a taxonomic classification for the entire group.
More generally, this project aims to set a precedent for the investigation of
poorly studied microbial biodiversity and integration of biodiversity research
on microbes into a meaningful taxonomy. This project will support a variety of
researchers at Minority-Serving Institutions and Hispanic-Serving Institutions,
and will provide research opportunities for students who are underrepresented in
science. In addition, this project will contribute to an educational outreach
program that provides content knowledge to K-12 students and teachers throughout
from Clark County School District, and provide high-school teachers the
opportunity to participate in a workshop and field excursion to collect samples
for microbial analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two major
study sites, Great Boiling Spring in northwest Nevada, and springs in Tengchong
County, Yunnan Province, China, but also includes investigations of terrestrial
and marine geothermal systems worldwide. The specific aims are: 1) To discover
new Aigarchaeota taxa and erect a candidate taxonomic structure, 16S rRNA gene
sequences amplified from natural samples and mined from databases will be
combined with single-cell genomic and metagenomic datasets; phylogenetics,
phylogenomics, comparative genomics, and ecological niche modeling will be
integrated to erect a candidate taxonomic structure; 2) To assess the function
of Aigarchaeota, stable isotope labeling experiments, quantitative reverse-
transcriptase PCR, and metaproteomics will test explicit hypotheses about
Aigarchaeota metabolism, providing a window into how Aigarchaeota organisms
function in nature; and 3) To cultivate, isolate, and describe Aigarchaeota pure
cultures, enrichment cultures will be established in the laboratory and used to
try to isolate and describe axenic cultures by using both traditional and
innovative approaches. The combination of large-scale data mining,
phylogenetics, taxonomy, ecological niche modeling, and field and wet lab work
described here spans all components of the Systematics and Biodiversity Sciences
Cluster and aims to transform our knowledge of a major lineage of Archaea and
provide insight into species- to domain-level evolution.