* 1557704
* Mechanisms of Mutualism and Parasitism: Entomopathogenic Fungi, Insects, and Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Nemat Keyhani, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2021
* USD 548,520.00

The use of beneficial microbes that are capable of killing insects represents a
more environmentally friendly and sustainable alternative to chemical
pesticides. One such microbe is the insect pathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana
that has been commercialized for pest control applications. In addition to their
ability to target insects, B. bassiana is also able to form mutualistic
associations with plants, resulting in increased plant growth and resistance to
insects. This project seeks to understand the biological (genetic and
biochemical) basis for the interactions between B. bassiana, insects, and
plants. Understanding this process has important implications in beneficial
versus pathogenic outcomes, environmental microbiology, and ecosystem balance.
Knowledge gained from the proposal can be used to improve the efficacy and
safety of using microbes for pest control and plant growth promotion. These
interactions present an excellent model system for student laboratory activities
relating to fundamental principles of host-parasite biology and evolution,
fungal and insect physiology, symbiosis and mutualism, and application of the
scientific method. The program provides resources, curriculum development, and
citizen science outreach in mycology and entomology for use in K-12 classrooms
and beyond. Training at the high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral levels are integrated within the scientific and outreach goals of the
project.

Filamentous fungi are a major evolutionary branch of the eukaryotes. Several
basal fungal lineages are parasites of invertebrates, and fungal-arthropod
interactions represent ancient paradigms for examining pathogenesis. The
filamentous fungus Beauveria bassiana is a pathogen of arthropods and forms
endophytic relationships with plants. These two seemingly disparate interactions
provide a tractable system with which to test and challenge some basic concepts
regarding the evolution and persistence of mutualism and parasitism. Our central
hypothesis is that in B. bassiana, mutualism and parasitism share underlying
molecular determinants. To test this, our research aims to (a) perform a
comparative molecular and biochemical analysis between the pathogenic insect
interaction and the mutualistic plant interaction, emphasizing the
transcriptional and regulatory networks involved, and (b) uncover additional
molecular determinants of B. bassiana insect virulence and plant mutualism and
examine their respective cross-contributions. This work would provide insight
into the factors that contribute to trade-offs that occur during the
establishment and/or maintenance of pathogenic versus mutualistic outcomes
during organismal interactions. These interactions can be exploited to develop
novel means of increasing the pest control and/or plant growth promotion
potential of the fungus. Specific knowledge gained from the proposal aid
understanding of two broad areas that address how organisms maintain phenotypic
plasticity and sensitivity to dramatically different environments: (a) host-
pathogen interactions and host-specificity, i.e. the pathways involved in insect
virulence, and (b) mutualistic interactions, characterizing the pathways leading
to endophyte establishment by the fungus.