* 1557864
* Neuronal Reorganization Underlies Evolution of Novel Adaptive Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Coby Schal, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 02/28/2021
* USD 650,000.00

The taste system detects and discriminates among tastants that convey
information about the quality and nutritional value of food. In response to
selection with insecticide baits that contain sugars, populations of the German
cockroach have become averse to glucose and fructose. This emergent trait is
genetically-encoded and it provides a huge advantage to the cockroach when
glucose- or fructose-containing baits are used in pest control. The German
cockroach is a world-wide pest with significant economic and medical impacts on
society. It is a principal source of allergens that can trigger asthma and
vector of pathogenic microorganisms, including antibiotic resistant strains.
This project will delineate the mechanisms responsible for the rapid emergence
of this novel behavior with behavioral, electrophysiological and genetic
analyses. This research is the first in any animal to (a) characterize rapid
changes in the taste system that have resulted in the emergence of a new
adaptive behavior; (b) describe in detail a novel sensory mechanism where a
single stimulus at the same intensity drives opposite acceptance and rejection
responses by activating different taste neurons; and (c) characterize the best
understood case of behavioral resistance in animals. Although behavioral
resistance is often cited as a major impediment to efficacious pest control, the
mechanisms that underlie behavioral resistance are not known. This research
represents the clearest explanation of sensory mechanisms that underlie the
rapid emergence of a behavioral resistance trait in animal populations. The
findings are being incorporated into several textbooks and apps on Neurobiology,
Behavior and Evolution.

Taste polymorphisms are often described as changes in sensitivity of gustatory
receptor neurons (GRNs) within a taste modality, with phenotypes ranging from
highly sensitive to completely insensitive to a particular compound. The
proposed project addresses a unique gain-of-function natural polymorphism that
results in a highly adaptive behavior. The project will test the hypotheses that
(a) glucose and fructose are processed as deterrents by GRNs, (b) different
taste organs differ in their GRN organization, contributing to effective
processing of tastants as appetitive and aversive stimuli, and (c) that the
molecular mechanism(s) that underlie this neuronal change involves either mis-
expression of sugar-gustatory receptors (GRs) on bitter GRNs or modifications of
bitter-GRs on bitter-GRNs for affinity for glucose or fructose. Approaches and
methods will include behavioral observations of tastant acceptance and
rejection, electrophysiological studies using a single sensillum preparation,
morphological studies using light, scanning and confocal microscopy, and genetic
studies with artificially selected lineages of cockroaches. Genetic resources
include 20 lines of selection-with-recurrent-backcrossing at each generation for
avoidance of specific sugars, as well as lines in which these traits have been
introgressed into a closely related species. Annotation of all chemoreceptors in
the genome sequence will be followed by a Pool-seq approach, whole-genome re-
sequencing and RNA-seq. Understanding the gustatory system of cockroaches, a
primitive hemimetabolous lineage, will contribute to a broader understanding of
insect gustation that so far has centered mainly on holometabolous and more
highly advanced Diptera and Hymenoptera.