* 1557496
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering the Role of Sirtuins in Linking Food Availability and Stress Tolerance Through Multi-Scale Signaling Networks in Mussels
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Anne Todgham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 474,973.00

One of the major aims of biology is to explain how changes that occur at the
sub-cellular level affect the function at higher levels of biological
organization, such as organs or the whole organism. Specifically, how are
changes in the expression of genes and proteins, and the concentration of
metabolites of a cell, affecting the organ of which the cell is a part?
Furthermore, when do these changes in organ function affect properties of the
whole organism? Using the California mussel Mytilus californianus, we ask, when
do subcellular changes in gill cells affect feeding rate or changes in muscle
biochemistry affect the ability to close their shells? We aim to address these
questions by collecting data from different levels of biological organization
simultaneously, from the subcellular to the organ and organism levels in
response to relevant environmental stressors, such as food availability, heat
stress and the inhibition of signaling pathways. The investigators' expertise in
comparative environmental physiology and computational mathematics will enable
them to address the relevance of subcellular changes to predict organ and
organism level changes using a mathematical model. The proposal has a strong
training component and is centered on lowering the barriers to molecular and
computational technologies and building a diverse community of young scientists
in integrative organismal biology. Furthermore, K-12 resources will be developed
on the physiological impacts of future environmental change that align with
Common Core and Next Generation Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objective of this study is to develop quantitative, predictive models
that uncover the underlying interactions/regulations among subcellular networks
(transcriptomic, metabolomic and proteomic or TMP) and their effect at the
phenotypes of the organ and organism in response to environmentally relevant
stressors (i.e., low/high food availability and low/high body temperature),
based on high-throughput experimental data, in the intertidal mussel Mytilus
californianus. The experimental design will also focus on testing a possible
mechanistic link between food availability and stress tolerance by inhibiting
signaling pathways involving sirtuins, which are deacylases that respond to
caloric restriction and stress. This proposal distinguishes itself from previous
studies on the thermal physiology of intertidal organisms in that it
incorporates statistical models (including regression and decision trees) to
uncover the regulatory structure of the TMP networks and determine whether the
resulting topology accurately predicts observed phenotypic responses measured at
the organ and whole organism levels. The PIs' complementary expertise in TMP
analyses, integrative biology and computational modeling will enable them to
combine "omics" technologies, organismal physiology and computational approaches
to advance integrative organismal biology. The PIs are planning to disseminate
the modeling framework through a research coordination network (RCN) on
Integrative Organismal Biology. The results will improve our ability to predict
how mussels will respond to future environmental change and thereby improve our
understanding of the role of mussel aquaculture in providing a secure and
sustainable food resource in the future.