* 1557138
* Observing the Invisible: A Collaborative Investigation between Astrophysicists and Philosophers
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Barry Madore, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 313,337.00

General Audience Summary

This project is a collaborative investigation between astrophysicists and
philosophers of science that focuses on the astrophysical notion of dark matter,
which does not produce or interact with light (or, more broadly, electromagnetic
radiation). Astrophysicists believe that twenty-five percent of the universe is
composed of dark matter, but they don't know what dark matter is or where most
of it resides. The guiding empirical hypothesis of this project is that some
dark matter resides in dark galaxies; that is to say, in dark matter halos that
either never possessed or have lost their ordinary matter at some time in the
past. The project involves searching for these dark galaxies and studying the
unique blend of observation, simulation, theory, and reasoning that allows
astrophysicists to make such a discovery. It will provide a unique opportunity
for a postdoctoral fellow to receive advanced training in philosophy and
astrophysics at the highest levels; it is designed to fully engage the post-
doctoral fellow in astrophysical work at the telescopes and with computers. In
addition, astrophysicists will participate in a philosophical analysis of the
scientific study. It is hoped that this intimate and intense interaction will
push the boundaries of knowledge in astrophysics and at the same time
demonstrate the unique richness inherent in a new sub-discipline, philosophy of
astrophysics. The postdoc will spend three terms at the University of
Pennsylvania, one term at the Carnegie Observatories, and she will be trained to
use the Magellan telescopes at Las Campanas. The researchers will train and be
assisted by undergraduate research assistants, who are to be recruited in part
from programs targeting students from under-represented groups. Researchers on
the project will give four public lectures on topics in the philosophy of
astrophysics. In addition, the postdoc will develop a K-12 outreach kit that
focuses on exciting topics in dark matter galaxy research and important new
roles for citizen scientists.

Technical Summary

This interdisciplinary project focuses on the search for dark matter galaxies by
bringing into joint consideration the simulations, observations, and database-
combing required to find them, and the philosophical issues raised and
illuminated by the search. The central philosophical issues are focused on the
theme of epistemic warrant. For example, they will consider how imaging,
spectroscopy, simulation, and theorizing combine to warrant inferences about
objects that are millions of light-years away and are intrinsically invisible at
all known frequencies. Another example is the use of simulations of dark-matter-
galaxy/luminous-matter-galaxy interactions to determine their behavior. This
will provide an opportunity to study the precise ways that theory enters into
the construction of simulations, and how much theory determines values for
simulation parameters. Philosophical questions include: What warrants importing
these data into the luminous/dark-galaxy interactions? What considerations go
into concluding simulations are precise and accurate, given that no one has ever
knowingly observed the target event?