* 1557519
* Geochemical tracers to establish the significance and timing of gas hydrate induced slide failure in the Hikurangi margin, as a component of the SLAMZ project
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Marta Torres, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 298,363.00

This project investigates the relationship between landslides and gas hydrate
formation on the northeastern Hikurangi margin of New Zealand. Submarine
landslides pose a significant socio-economic hazard, not only because they may
destabilize offshore installations (e.g. underwater cables), but more
significantly because the tsunamis generated by such slope failures have caused
significant human fatalities and destruction of coastal infrastructure. The
Hikurangi margin off New Zealand is ideally suited to study the various
processes known to act as drivers/preconditioners for slope failure. The project
will assess the importance of many factors on slope stability including gas
hydrates and sediment composition and diagenesis (e.g., what makes a particular
sedimentary layer weak); tectonic stress and geometry (e.g., slope steepening);
and margin hydrogeology (e.g., transient pore pressure changes associated with
climate and faulting). The geochemical component of this project complements a
large, international, multi-year German-led project termed Slide Activity on the
Hikurangi Margin, New Zealand (SLAMZ). Results from this study will serve to
test various current ideas on the role of gas hydrate on slope stability, and
will also address issues such as the water and carbon budgets along the margin
and the presence and extent of fluid flow within the sediments. The results will
thus have a broader relevance in the context of our understanding of the
hydrogeology, element cycling, and earthquake generation in subduction zones
worldwide. The project includes the training of an undergraduate student as well
as mentoring of a postdoctoral investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Submarine
slope failure is a major sedimentary process along ocean margins worldwide, with
consequences that include margin architecture, hydrogeology and tsunamogenesis.
Numerous studies have proposed that gas hydrates play a major role in
controlling slope failure initiation and mass-movement processes, including a
new hypothesis that postulates that gas hydrate itself may lead to seafloor
weakening through plastic, very slow (creeping) deformation similar to rock
glaciers in the terrestrial environment. In contrast to the extensive
geophysical and near-seafloor data sets available for the Hikurangi margin,
there is a lack of deep core geochemical data to address the interdependence of
fluid, temperature, and gas hydrate dynamics in slope stability. This project
aims at generating the first data set on geochemical parameters that complements
ongoing geophysical, petrophysical and modeling efforts to unravel the role of
gas hydrate in slope stability of the Hikurangi Margin in a partnership with
scientists from Germany and New Zealand. The SLAMZ program (led by the
University of Bremen) will use a seafloor to sample sediment at eight locations
with contrasting tectonic settings and geometries, depth of gas hydrate
stability, slump characteristics and fluid flow. The geochemical component of
this large international project will generate and analyze pore fluid data that
are key to: 1) Establish distribution and concentration of gas hydrate; 2)
Evaluate postulated changes in gas hydrate stability associated with seamount
subduction; 3) Constrain transients associated with gas hydrate and sediment
slumping processes; and 4) Detect and characterize the nature and sources of
fluid flow. Our results will contribute to our understanding of the geochemical,
and geomechanical transformations in gas-hydrate bearing subduction zones, with
implications to the societally-relevant processes that contribute to slope
instability.