* 1557316
* Preparing STEM Majors to become Highly Qualified STEM Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Graham, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,742.00

The Susquehanna University Noyce project addresses the need for highly qualified
STEM teachers in urban and rural communities. It will prepare and support 25
physics, chemistry, and mathemtics majors to become highly qualified secondary
education candidates for teaching positions in high-need school districts in
Pennsylvania. Project objectives are to: recruit, retain, and graduate the Noyce
scholars; to ensure they benefit from innovative best practices in STEM
pedagogy; and to ensure they develop cultural competencies and the preparation
needed to successfully teach in rural or urban high-need classrooms. The project
emphasizes instructional practices that engage learners in inquiry-based
learning activities and provides relevant and significant field experiences. An
important component of the project is the emphasis placed on promoting cultural
competencies related to linguistic, cultural, and economic diversity. Candidates
develop these competencies through field placements, cultural immersion, and
add-on certification as English as a Second Language (ESL) Program Specialists.
Upon graduation and employment in Pennsylvania schools, Noyce scholars will be
provided on-going mentorship through site visits and alumni retreats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Susquehanna University Noyce project will prepare the
physics, chemistry, and mathematics majors through the following: An internship
program that provides these pre-service teacher candidates with early teaching
experiences incorporating systematic reflection, mentoring, and constructive
feedback; field experiences that provide cross-cultural immersion in high-need
rural or urban communities and are supported through systematic critical
reflection; field experiences that prepare the candidates for working in
economically, culturally, and linguistically diverse classrooms; courses that
include best pedagogical practices for diverse classrooms, and optional ESL
certification. In addition, the STEM educational methods courses will model and
prepare candidates to utilize instructional activities characterized by inquiry,
experimentation, collaboration, and interdisciplinary learning. Finally, during
student teaching, Noyce scholars will complete action research capstone projects
on their instructional practices. Data will be systematically collected on each
element of the Noyce Scholars project, as well as on the holistic experience of
Noyce scholars, to assess individual and cumulative consequences. Ultimately,
the project will prepare STEM teachers with a sophisticated understanding of
diverse and underserved students' learning needs and deep knowledge about their
content area and effective pedagogical approaches. Teachers who possess strong
content knowledge, employ engaging instructional practices, and understand
students and their communities promote greater student academic achievement and
sustained interest than those lacking one or more of these capacities. When
learners from underserved communities view their teachers as community members
and/or invested in their communities, they are more likely to see themselves as
capable of pursuing similar academic and professional paths. This project has
the potential to positively impact surrounding high-need communities by
increasing academic achievement, STEM engagement, and subsequent interest in
postsecondary education and/or STEM-related careers. In turn, these project
outcomes hold potential to expand the knowledge-base regarding the preparation
of teachers to succeed in such high-need school districts. Susquehanna
University has a commitment to actively recruit Noyce scholars from historically
underserved populations (minority, low-income, and first-generation students) in
order to increase the presence of relatable role models in mathematics and
science.