* 1557804
* Glycan Recognition and the Role of Innate Immunity in Cnidarian-dinoflagellate Symbioses
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Thomas Gilmore, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2020
* USD 583,278.00

Coral reefs are profoundly important ecosystems that are threatened worldwide.
Corals are animals that form the structural basis of these reefs, and contain
microscopic algae inside their cells. This mutualistic partnership or symbiosis
provides the foundation of the entire diverse coral reef ecosystem. While a
great deal of attention has been focused on the environmental threats to corals
and how and if corals will survive climate change, there remains only a partial
understanding of the microscale cellular and molecular mechanisms that underpin
the coral-algal symbiosis. Insight into regulation of this symbiosis will
provide a stronger foundation for studies of the impact of ocean warming,
acidification and other anthropogenic stressors on coral health. This project
will bring together a coral biologist , a chemist, and a cancer cell biologist,
to examine the intricate molecular and cellular conversations that the partners
of the symbiosis engage in to initiate and maintain the symbiosis. The project
will also examine how these conversations go awry and lead to symbiosis
dysfunction and breakdown during the phenomenon of coral bleaching, a stress
response to elevated temperature that results in coral death and reef
degradation. In addition to studying corals in the field, this project will also
study sea anemones which are an excellent proxy for corals, many of which are
endangered and are difficult to culture in a laboratory setting. This project
will contribute to the training of scientists and expose school-aged children to
coral reef and symbiosis science.

Many cnidarians, including corals and anemones, engage in symbioses with
photosynthetic dinoflagellates (Symbiodinium spp.), and together they form the
trophic and structural foundation of the coral reef ecosystem. Despite the
importance of corals to coral reefs and the threatened state of coral reef
health in an era of dramatic climate change, the basic cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying the initiation, establishment and breakdown of the
partnership are only partially understood. This project will examine inter-
partner signaling and host cell immune response during onset and breakdown of
cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbioses. Experiments will be conducted in two model
systems, the anemone Aiptasia sp.-Symbiodinium B1 and larvae of the coral Fungia
scutaria-Symbiodinium C1f. The team proposes the following Specific Aims: Aim 1:
Characterize glycan recognition between host and invading Symbiodinium by glycan
profiling and glycome manipulation of the algae, and host receptor pull-down
approaches. Aim 2: Compare structural dynamics of phagocytosis and intracellular
signaling when hosts are challenged with Symbiodinium by analyzing phagocytic
profiles, phagosomal markers, NF-kB activation and the signaling sphingosine
rheostat in hosts challenged with different symbiont types and other particles.
Aim 3: Examine disruptions and changes in phagosomal dynamics and cell signaling
in partnerships subjected to elevated temperature that leads to bleaching by
measuring changes in phagosomal maturation, activation of NF-kB and sphingolipid
signaling in host tissues after an elevated temperature stress.