* 1557697
* Genetic Analysis and Life History Consequences of Variation in Larval Behavior in Cactophilic Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Luis Cruz-Vera, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Patrick Abbot
* 05/31/2021
* USD 612,000.00

Some of the most fundamental questions in biology pertain to understanding
speciation. A strong driving force in speciation is adaptation to the local
environment a population resides in, which can lead to splitting gene pools
apart. If two populations of the same species living in distinct environments
are adapted to their local ecological conditions, offspring between the two
populations may not survive as well and ultimately reduce the exchange of
genetic information between populations. It is the formation of this genetic
isolation that can lead populations to become different species. This study
focuses on two populations of a cactus-breeding fly, Drosophila mojavensis,
which live in different environments, use different cactus species, and have
distinct larval behaviors. In one population the larvae feed on small cactus
pads (prickly pear) and don't move much, while the other population feeds on
larger cactus (organpipe) and move more and faster. Capitalizing on the rich
genetic 'toolkit' for Drosophila this study will identify the genes responsible
for these differences and determine how changes at the gene level can lead to
different behaviors and population isolation. Information from this research
will be shared with the science community through publications and
presentations. The investigator will mentor students through research in
behavioral genetics and will use the funded techniques in research-focused
college courses. Also the investigator will partner with local high schools to
expose students to research at the university
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolution and underlying genetics
of alternative larval behaviors could be instrumental in elucidating how
adaptation to local ecological conditions can lead to the divergence of
populations, speciation, and how genotypes lead to behavioral phenotypes.
Ecological adaptation has a significant influence on the variation seen in
behavioral strategies. In saprophytic and phytophagous insects the properties of
the plant host have been shown to greatly influence the pattern of genomic,
metabolomics, physiological, life history and behavioral variation. It is this
divergent, ecologically-driven adaptation to a host's properties that can drive
the evolution of reproductive incompatibilities between host populations and
lead to the formation of species. This study will focus on the variation of
larval activity, and its underlying genetic control, of the cactophilic
Drosophila mojavensis. Distinct populations of D. mojavensis have nutritionally
and chemically distinct cactus hosts, which are associated with different larval
behaviors. The study will examine the physiology and life history consequence of
the distinct behaviors and link it to the transcriptional and genomic changes
between the distinct cactus host populations of D. mojavensis. A quantitative
trait loci analysis will examine the genetic underpinnings of larval behavior.
CRISPR-Cas9 knockouts and transgenics will be generated to quantify the
functional role of the candidate behavior QTLs in an ecological context and
examine the life history consequences of variation at these loci and provide a
strong examination of genotype to phenotype level questions.