* 1557716
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Towards Automated Quantitative Prostate Cancer Diagnosis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Brittany Fasy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 46,639.00

Subjective analyses of images by pathologist reviewers are plagued by issues of
inter-rater variability and throughput. However, as digital pathology whole
slide scanners become more commonplace, the amount of high-quality pathology
image data available to researchers and clinicians is increasing, and the
newfound widespread availability of pathology images in digital form, including
the NCI Cancer Genome Atlas (TGCA), opens up new possibilities to use
computational approaches to leverage the information inherent within them for
diagnosis, prognosis, and precision medicine. This award supports initiation of
a collaborative research project that aims to discover new quantitative image-
based prognostic biomarkers for prostate cancer, focusing on an investigation of
novel concepts from computational topology applied to prostate cancer glandular
architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current standard for prostate cancer
grading is the Gleason score, which is a subjective rating system based on an
analysis of high-level tissue architecture and glandular shape and organization.
However, Gleason scoring is variable between pathology reviewers, and may not
capture all of the potentially prognostic information contained in glandular
growth patterns. In this project, new topological descriptors will be developed
that capture architectural features of prostate glands in pathology images.
These descriptors can then be used to aid pathologists by providing more
quantitative and more reproducible analogs to the traditional Gleason scores,
and they may have independent prognostic value. They can also be used to
classify slides in order to distinguish between different types of cancerous
architectures of glands, compared to the current gold-standard histopathological
and molecular characterization. In particular, the aim of this project is to
demonstrate effectiveness of using computational methods based on tools from
computational geometry and topology to recognize and quantify glandular
architectural features. Glandular density will be the first architectural
feature quantified in this collaborative work. This award is supported by the
National Institutes of Health Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in
partnership with the National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical
Sciences.