* 1557812
* Small RNA Trafficking in Cross-kingdom RNAi between Fungal Pathogen Botrytis cinerea and its Plant Hosts
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Hailing Jin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2020
* USD 700,000.00

Plants, as well as humans and animals, are constantly under attack by pathogens,
pests, and parasites, resulting in severe consequences on global food production
and human health. Cell-to-cell communication between hosts and pathogens plays
an essential role in regulating host defense and pathogen virulence and involves
transport and exchange of regulatory molecules across the cellular boundaries.
Recent findings from the PI's lab of fungal sRNAs that translocate into plant
host cells to suppress host immunity provided the first example of sRNAs
trafficking between pathogens and their hosts. This project will use the fungal
pathogen B. cinerea, which causes grey mold diseases on almost all vegetables,
fruits and many flowers, and its plant hosts to understand the mechanism of
cross-kingdom small RNA trafficking and regulation, and to develop an effective
RNA-based practical strategy for controlling B. cinerea and other aggressive
pathogens. This project will provide excellent training opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Efforts are in
place to recruit students from underrepresented minorities to work on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small RNA (sRNA)-mediated RNA interference (RNAi)
plays an essential role in both host immunity and pathogen virulence. The PI's
lab has discovered that sRNAs from some eukaryotic pathogens regulate pathogen
virulence. Some sRNAs from an aggressive fungal pathogen, Botrytis cinerea, are
translocated into host plant cells and hijack the host RNAi machinery to silence
important host immunity genes. Recent studies from animal systems also suggest
that mobile sRNAs are capable of trafficking between mammals and their
interacting organisms. However, how these mobile sRNAs are transported between
the interacting organisms, and whether plant endogenous sRNAs are secreted and
translocated into pathogen cells are still largely unknown. It is also not clear
what these mobile sRNAs regulate in the interacting organisms. This project aims
to address these questions by determining pathways and components required for
sRNA trafficking between fungal cells and plant cells; identifying and
functionally characterizing these sRNAs; and developing sRNA-based effective
means to control aggressive eukaryotic pathogens. The results of these studies
will advance our knowledge of sRNA trafficking in the cross-kingdom RNAi between
plant hosts and eukaryotic pathogens. Understanding how sRNAs communicate
between organisms will facilitate utilization and manipulation of sRNAs for
disease control and host immunity.