* 1557942
* Elucidating structure-function relationship and signaling mechanisms of the novel group III G gamma protein AGG3 in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 597,128.00

Due to their sessile nature, plants continuously adjust their growth,
development and productivity in accordance with their surroundings. They respond
to environmental stresses (e.g. drought, cold temperatures), various pathogens,
low or high nutrient availability, and interactions with other organisms by
precise modification of underlying signaling pathways. Several proteins, many of
which are present in all organisms, have evolved plant-specific structural
features and functions to effectively address these challenges. One such group
of proteins is the heterotrimeric G-protein family, which although present in
all eukaryotes, has certain plant-specific components and features. This
research seeks to discover the unique signaling pathways regulated by a novel,
plant-specific G&amp;gamma; protein, AGG3, of Arabidopsis. Results obtained from
this research will help us understand how plants maintain their yield against
environmental stresses. These results will have potential practical applications
in the breeding or engineering of more productive crops with limited resources.
The work will also involve the training of a postdoctoral researcher in a
multidisciplinary field and mentoring of undergraduate students. The research
will help promote an understanding of plant science to the high school students
and general public thorough a series of hands on experiments and interactive
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though all eukaryotes possess
heterotrimeric G-proteins and their overall signaling mechanisms are broadly
conserved, plants have taken the 'core' G-protein system and rewired it to meet
their needs. One novel component of the plant G-protein system is the newly
discovered, higher plant-specific, type III (or Class C) G&amp;gamma; protein,
represented by AGG3 in Arabidopsis. Type III G&amp;gamma; proteins have a
modular architecture, with an N-terminal domain similar to canonical
G&amp;gamma; , fused with a large C-terminal extension (up to 3 times the length
of G&amp;gamma; domain) that contains up to 35% cysteine (Cys). The type III
G&amp;gamma; proteins are currently a focus of intense research due to their
involvement in regulation of many agronomically important processes in plants,
including seed yield, organ size regulation, abscisic acid (ABA)-dependent
signaling and stress responses, and nitrogen use efficiency. The mode of action
of these proteins remains largely unknown, and some unique mechanisms that are
independent of the classic G-protein cycle are also proposed. This research
therefore aims to determine the G-protein-dependent and -independent roles of
AGG3, and elucidate its underlying signaling mechanisms; especially those
operative during abiotic stress signaling. Genetic complementation of single and
higher order mutants will be performed using specific domains of AGG3, followed
by identification of its protein interaction network. These analyses will help
define the role of AGG3 and its network elements in abiotic stress signaling
pathways and how it is related to its ability to control yield.