* 1557023
* Coevolutionary Arms Races Driven by Conflict: a Test in Social Amoeba
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Rebecca Zufall, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 696,634.00

Cooperation is observed across all levels of biological organization: genomes
cooperate within cells, cells cooperate within multicellular organisms, and
individuals cooperate to form societies. However, at each of these levels, there
are some individuals who cheat and others who do not, and biologists still do
not fully understand how populations evolve stable systems with both types of
individuals or how this coevolution is distributed across populations of the
same species in nature. This is because individuals who cheat gain the benefits
of cooperation without paying their fair share of the cost, and thus this should
spread rapidly through populations. Studying the natural distributions of
cheating and cooperation in populations is important because cheating is
prevalent in the natural world and occurs across all levels of biological
organization, from genes that enhance their own transmission to the detriment of
the individual that harbors them, to brood parasites that trick others into
raising their young. More importantly, the evolution of mechanisms to prevent
cheating was likely critical to the emergence of biological complexity.
Moreover, cheating can influence everything from the success of symbioses to the
emergence of cancer, and thus has important applications to both medicine and
agriculture. The novelty of this project is that the researchers will document
natural populations of a slime mold in the wild to determine if there is
variation (and coevolution) in the degree of cheating and in resistance to
cheating across space and through time. The research also takes a population
genomic approach to determine the genes involved in cheating and resistance.
Overall the goal is to understand the ecological and evolutionary processes
influencing the dynamics of cheating in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
prominent hypothesis is that cheating selects for mechanisms to resist or
suppress it, which in turn selects for mechanisms to overcome that resistance.
Cheating might thus give rise to an arms race of adaptations and counter-
adaptations. If so, then social conflict, just like other forms of selective
conflict, may cause rapid, divergent, and never-ending change, driving
evolutionary divergence and diversification. To date, this arms race hypothesis
has garnered support from laboratory experiments and molecular evolution
analyses, but there is no work examining how cheating impacts the evolutionary
trajectories of social traits in nature. The goal of this research is to test
several predictions of this hypothesis in natural populations of the social
amoeba (or cellular slime mold) Dictyostelium discoideum. This organism has an
unusual form of multicellularity that renders it particularly vulnerable to
cheating. The research will quantify phenotypic patterns of adaptation and
counter-adaptation in nature, inspired by approaches used to elucidate other
forms of selective conflict, such as host-pathogen or genetic conflict.
Longitudinal sampling across space and time, combined with the ability to save
and revive past and future social partners, offers a unique opportunity to
observe coevolution in situ and constitutes a major advantage over other model
systems.