* 1557904
* Tissue Homeostasis through Cell Competition and Compensation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Wu-Min Deng, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 11/30/2019
* USD 730,000.00

This project will study a basic question in cell and developmental biology, a
novel mechanism by which cells maintain tissues in a healthy state. Healthy
cells monitor their neighbors and induce sick cells to undergo cell death,
followed by compensating growth and division of the healthy cells, so that the
tissue keeps the same number of cells and all the cells are healthy. These
studies will provide new insight into how the fine control of this process
occurs to repair damaged tissues, and how it changes in aging tissues. In
addition to its scientific merit, the project will also integrate research and
science education. The knowledge obtained will be used as data for classroom
presentation to stimulate students' interest in scientific research.
Furthermore, the PI will recruit high-school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to participate in the project. Students will carry out
directed independent research in the areas of molecular biology and genetics,
and learn not only the basic technology but also critical scientific thinking,
which will benefit their future careers. The PI will also present in local
schools and will bring the project-related research to an undergraduate
experimental course. These activities will promote the participation of
underrepresented groups and have a broad impact on society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In their recent studies, the PI and colleagues found
that, in post-mitotic Drosophila follicular epithelia, normal cells play an
active role in eliminating aberrant but viable neighbors through JNK-dependent
"cell competition," and undergo sporadic cellular hypertrophy to repair the
tissue. This "compensatory cellular hypertrophy" (CCH) is probably a general
cellular mechanism for post-mitotic tissue homeostasis, as it is also induced
when some cells in the post-mitotic follicular epithelium fail to grow to their
full size. The PI and colleagues further found that CCH is induced by
hyperactivation of insulin- or IGF (insulin-like growth factor)-like signaling
(IIS) in hypertrophic cells. In the proposed study, they will determine the
mechanisms underlying post-mitotic cell competition and CCH processes. This
research will address the following specific aims: (1) To reveal the mechanisms
underlying loser cell elimination in post-mitotic cell competition. Under this
aim, crucial questions such as how JNK signaling is activated in winner cells
neighboring loser cells, and how this pathway executes its effect to eliminate
loser cells via apoptosis, will be addressed. (2) To determine the mechanisms by
which loss of local tissue volume induces CCH. This aim focuses on how changes
in local tissue volume are translated into IIS signaling activation in certain
winner cells, and how cellular hypertrophy is regulated. They will test the
hypothesis that homeostatic CCH is induced by tensile forces caused by loss of
local tissue volume.