* 1557549
* Female Gaze, Retinal Specializations, and the Evolution of Complex Male Courtship Displays in Habronattus Jumping Spiders
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Nathan Morehouse, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 03/31/2017
* USD 710,000.00

Studies of complex animal visual displays (e.g., colors, patterns, movements)
allow us to uncover how complexity can result from the coevolution of signals
and the eyes that perceive them. During courtship, the unusually colorful male
Habronattus jumping spiders engage in elaborate dances that showcase movements,
colors, and patterns to prospective mates. Although females react to these
displays by changing where they face, we know almost nothing about where females
look during courtship, or how male displays function to manipulate female gaze.
To understand how these displays have evolved to capture and retain female
visual attention, this research program will use newly available eye tracking
technology and digital tools to examine interactions between male displays and
female gaze in the Fiery Haired Jumping Spider, Habronattus pyrrithrix. The
research team will then expand their work to 20 additional Habronattus species
to understand broader patterns of display evolution. This research program will
allow us to better understand how animals communicate through complex visual
displays and how evolution shapes complex signals. In addition, the scientific
team will use insights from their research to enrich educational collaborations
with community partners. These partnerships include the development and
implementation of curricula for regional public schools, as well as biomimicry-
themed "superhero summer camps" and afterschool programming in collaboration
with Assemble, a Pittsburgh-based non-profit organization which focuses on
teaching inner-city youth about science by integrating art into science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One widespread feature of visual systems is
distinct regionalization of visual competency across the visual field, including
regions of heightened motion sensitivity, spatial acuity and/or color vision.
Animals compensate for this regionalization with movements of the head or eyes
that aim specialized retinal regions at areas of interest within the visual
scene. These gaze movements determine what animals see when they interact with
visual stimuli. However, despite the fundamental importance of gaze to animal
vision, we know almost nothing about how animals use their gaze to evaluate
communicatory displays. We know even less about how visual displays have evolved
to effectively capture, retain or manipulate the gaze of signal receivers. This
research will build upon current understandings of the coevolution of visual
signals and visual systems by evaluating the evolutionary relevance of gaze-
display dynamics for diversification of male courtship displays in Habronattus
spiders. The research will employ gaze-tracking, video playbacks, and digital
and physical manipulations of male displays to reveal basic properties of gaze-
display interactions in the species Habronattus pyrrithrix. Leveraging insights
derived from these in-depth studies, the research will use comparative
approaches to test broader hypotheses regarding the evolution of gaze-display
interactions across the genus Habronattus.