* 1557975
* Investigation of Nuclear Envelope Budding Molecular Mechanisms during Synaptogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Sean Speese, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,932.00

The development of new connections between neuronal cells in the brain is a
critical process which ultimately underlies our ability to learn and remember.
This proposal focuses on a newly-discovered process called Nuclear Envelope
Budding (NEB) that allows cells to make targeted changes to the structure of
their connections with other cells. Three sets of experiments will be carried
out, examining (1) molecular changes that underlie NEB, (2) the mechanical means
through which NEB is accomplished, and (3) how NEB actually functions in newly-
developing cell-to-cell connections. An exciting and novel aspect of this latter
set of experiments is the use of live cell microscopy to document the
development of new connections in real time as they form in a living organism.
These studies will provide novel and critical insights into how the brain
develops and into how our experiences can lead to changes in our neuronal
circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal takes advantage of the well-
established Drosophila neuromuscular junction (NMJ) model of synapse outgrowth
and maturation to further our understanding of how RNA granules are formed and
subsequently trafficked to synaptic sites during development. In particular,
these studies will focus on the recently described process of Nuclear Envelope
Budding (NEB), a nuclear export pathway by which RNA granules that contain
postsynaptic transcripts are released from postsynaptic muscle nuclei. In Aim 1,
we will investigate how Pin1, a highly conserved enzyme, functions to regulate
NEB via nuclear lamina remodeling. In Aim 2, we will explore the role of a non-
canonical Nuclear Pore Complex that we hypothesize loads mRNA transcripts into
RNA granules forming at the periphery of the nucleus. Finally, in Aim 3, we will
take advantage of a new tool to image trafficking dynamics of RNA granules in
postsynaptic muscles at the time of synaptogenesis. This proposal utilizes high
resolution imaging modalities including array tomography, immunogold EM and live
cell imaging. These approaches, combined with the genetic tractability of the in
vivo system, poise this study to make a significant contribution to our
understanding of RNA granule biology and provide exciting new mechanistic
insight into the bidirectional communication that occurs between the nucleus and
the forming synapse during NMJ development.