* 1557086
* Collaborative Research: Effects of forest fragmentation on Lepidopteran herbivores of contrasting diet breadth
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* David Wagner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 11/30/2021
* USD 629,785.00

The fragmentation of habitats into smaller and more isolated pieces can leave
animals in areas that have insufficient food resources within reach. This
problem is particularly acute for those species that are dietary specialists.
These specialists may then be lost from the habitats, and their loss can have
cascading effects on other species that may further alter the composition of
ecological communities. This project will test alternative hypotheses that have
been proposed to explain declines in specialist herbivores from fragmented
forests. This research is important in understanding how changes in land use or
other disturbances that fragment habitats will affect biodiversity and the
integrity of ecosystems. The project will focus on butterfly larvae of species
with different diet requirements as model study organisms. Their dependence on
particular plant species and their role as prey for birds will be studied in 40
forest sites in Connecticut where the basic ecological interactions are well
known. In addition to analysis of response to past forest fragmentation,
experiments protecting caterpillars from predation will help quantify the
importance of food resources. The study will improve understanding of natural
food webs subject to human impacts and can guide future forest management. This
project will also provide research training for students in forest ecology that
will strengthen the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest
fragmentation is likely to substantially modify interactions among species, and
a recurrent pattern is the loss of dietary specialists from food webs in small
forest fragments. Focusing on a complex, tri-trophic ecological network of
larval Lepidoptera, their hostplants, and avian predators, the project will
establish how bottom-up and top-down mechanisms alter the absolute and relative
abundance of specialist herbivores in forest fragments. The project will combine
extensive extant data on plant-Lepidoptera associations and regional forest
fragmentation, new data on plants and caterpillars at 40 sites, field
experiments, and lab analyses on caterpillar diet breadth and growth response,
to quantify effects of host plant availability and predation on the diet
specificity of lepidopteran larvae in temperate deciduous forests. This
detailed, multi-trophic approach will enhance mechanistic understanding of
changes in trophic networks due to fragmentation. Four broader impacts will
result from this work: 1) training future scientists, 2) recruiting
underrepresented groups, 3) public outreach in science and 4) improving
scientific infrastructure.