* 1557694
* Regulation of Pseudomonas syringae Virulence by Plant-Derived Chemical Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Jeffrey Anderson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2020
* USD 646,724.00

Bacterial diseases of plants cause significant losses in overall yield and
marketability of many economically-important US crops. Although plants possess
an immune system that can provide effective resistance against infection,
bacteria have evolved sophisticated counter-measures that can effectively
suppress these host defenses. As a result, a major determinant of infection
outcome is how rapidly both bacteria and host plant can deploy their respective
virulence and defense strategies. This project will investigate the molecular
basis for chemical signaling events that occur between plants and bacteria at
the onset of infection, with a focus on how pathogenic bacteria perceive plant-
derived metabolite signals to begin their infection process. Non-specific
antimicrobials such as copper sprays and broad-spectrum antibiotics are
frequently used to control bacterial diseases in crops. This project will
provide a deeper understanding of host perception mechanisms in bacteria that
could lead to development of specific chemical inhibitors of this process,
thereby providing alternative methods to control disease and potentially improve
crop fitness. The project will also provide opportunities for undergraduate
students at smaller resource-limited colleges to gain research experience
through internships in the investigator's laboratory. Furthermore, a workshop on
proteomics methodology will be developed and delivered by the investigator as
part of a two-week summer STEM camp for high school students. Genes encoding the
virulence-promoting type III secretion system (T3SS) of the plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae must be expressed at early stages of infection for this
bacterium to be fully virulent. In previous work, the investigator identified
plant-derived metabolites that induce the expression of T3SS-encoding genes in
P. syringae. Although the bioactive plant metabolites are potent enhancers of
virulence, how they are perceived by P. syringae to initiate expression of its
T3SS is not known. A primary objective of this project is to elucidate the
genetic basis for host recognition by P. syringae with a goal of identifying
potential receptor proteins that are directly involved in perceiving host
metabolite signals. A second objective is elucidate why a P. syringae gacA-
mutant that hyper-expresses its T3SS is less virulent, with the goal of
understanding how P. syringae coordinates the deployment of virulence factors to
maximize pathogenicity. Lastly, exogenous application of T3SS-inducing
metabolites during P. syringae infection of Arabidopsis suppresses enhanced
resistance mediated by plant pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs), suggesting a
mechanism of PRR-dependent resistance may be the removal of these metabolite
signals or interference with their perception. This project will investigate if
extracellular levels of the bioactive metabolites change following PRR
activation in Arabidopsis plants. Insights into this possible mechanism of plant
defense may lead to the development of engineered crop plants that deploy PRR-
mediated defenses in a more effective and targeted manner.