* 1557443
* Physiological Genomics of Seasonal Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Robert Reed, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2021
* USD 732,416.00

Developmental plasticity is the ability of an organism to alter physical and/or
behavioral traits in response to environmental conditions. The capacity for
plasticity is a fundamental ability that most organisms use, as it allows for
individuals to respond to environmental variation. While decades of experimental
work have led to a well-developed understanding of many the mechanisms
underlying plasticity during embryonic development and in the adult, the
underlying genetic mechanisms are less well understood. Even more poorly
understood is how these plastic response processes adapt genetically over
multiple generations. This project will begin to fill this gap in our knowledge
by leveraging the advantages of the buckeye butterfly experimental system:
natural, heritable geographic variation in plasticity coupled with a laboratory
manipulation. The goals of this project are to define how gene expression
changes for traits that are fixed (not plastic) versus seasonally plastic
traits, and to identify genes responsible for natural variation of plasticity in
different populations. This study would represent one of the first efforts to
combine all these mechanisms to produce an integrated portrait of seasonal
plasticity. This funding will also contribute to the training of undergraduate
and graduate students and help develop resources in insect
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to study the genetic
basis of reaction norm variation in the buckeye butterfly Junonia coenia.
Geographic variation in seasonal wing color plasticity, coupled with the ability
to manipulate reaction norms via artificial selection, makes this butterfly a
useful model to study the genetic basis of environmental response. Reed will
integrate across physiological, developmental, and genetic mapping approaches to
address long-standing questions regarding the genetic basis of plasticity
including: (1) What is the physiological and transcriptional basis of regional
variation in plasticity? (2) What is the genetic basis of natural variation in
plasticity? (3) What plasticity-associated genomic regions have been under
selection in different locally adapted populations?