* 1557117
* Evolution and the Levels of Lineage
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Matthew Haber, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,687.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This philosophy of biology
project engages in conceptual analysis of the notion of a lineage, which is
roughly a line of decent from ancestors, and related notions. The project
focuses on questions of what lineages are, how they are nested, and how this
hierarchical organization was built through evolution. The scope of the project
is broad and the consequences far-reaching. How lineages interact across levels
is centrally important, for example, in studying how gut microbes influence mate
preference in fruit flies and impact what we treat as units of selection; in how
we conceive of when polar and brown bears diverged, given the hybridization
between those groups; or in how we think about parental lineages as we
manipulate how mitochondrial lineages are transmitted from one human generation
to the next. A particularly impressive feature of the project is its
interdisciplinary focus. The project includes an interdisciplinary workshop,
Species in the Age of Discordance, scheduled for spring 2017. The workshop will
directly engage the public through outreach events including a Biohumanities
Public Lecture Series event on taxonomy in the 21st century, which will be held
at the downtown Salt Lake City Public Library. The PI will also coordinate with
the Utah Museum of Fine Arts and the Natural History Museum of Utah on an
exhibit featuring the work of artists collaborating with taxonomists, including
a public lecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aims of this proposal are to articulate a
"levels of lineage" perspective, describe the core commitments of that
perspective, and identify how these inform researchers and generate novel
research questions. Biological lineages are hierarchically organized, but
nesting of those lineages may be "leaky" due to a variety of evolved biological
mechanisms and processes. Detecting these patterns of discordance provide
evidence for a sophisticated multilevel account of evolution, and require
biologists to revise core commitments (theoretical, conceptual, methodological,
etc.). The levels of lineage perspective identifies the conceptual resources
biologists draw on in these projects. It will extend and consolidate recent work
in microbiology, systematics, phylogenetics, and evolutionary and population
genetics, among other fields. This project aligns with recent work in demanding
a diachronic approach by treating the core apparatus of biology as products of
evolution. For example, rather than treating the biological hierarchy as a
background assumption, researchers are instead prompted to ask, why this
hierarchy, or even one at all? Answering these questions provides further
resources and research questions.