* 1557328
* Ambitious Math and Science Teaching Fellows
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Nick Cabot, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,390,490.00

This Noyce Teaching Fellows project will provide training for 16 teaching
fellows to complete a Master's degree program for licensure in secondary
mathematics or science teaching. The project will also provide professional
development and support for the participants during their first four years of
teaching in high needs schools. The key elements of the project are (a)
research-based teacher preparation courses and clinical experiences, (b)
professional development to support induction, and (c) support for teacher
retention. The ambitious teaching philosophy, which promotes instructional
practices and routines that support every student, across racial, ethnic,
gender, and linguistic boundaries as they learn essential ideas within a
discipline, will be central to the curriculum. This project will be carried out
by Oregon State University in partnership with the Mid-Valley Math and Science
Network, six Mid-Valley School Districts, and the Teachers Development Group, a
non-profit organization that designs professional development plans that focus
on improving students' mathematical understanding and
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to provide fellows with
a Master's degree program and follow-up professional opportunities that use an
evidence-based teaching model, which focuses on the development of strategies
that will support students from diverse backgrounds with an emphasis on solving
real-world problems. The fellows will be introduced to the foundations of this
ambitious teaching model (high leverage teaching practices, equitable
instruction, and discipline-specific practices) during the Master's program and
continue to refer back to these foundations once they have been placed in the
classroom. The investigators hypothesize that the ambitious teaching model will
be especially effective in STEM classrooms in high-needs schools. Project
evaluation will address this premise through assessment of the fellows'
continuing progress (Mathematical Quality of Instruction) and formative teaching
observation (EQUIP) during the induction phase. The results and resources
developed through this work will be disseminated through, the Mid-Valley Math
Science Teaching Network, an established online network of Oregon teachers and
administrators, and at meetings of the Teachers of Teachers of Mathematics.