* 1557612
* Induction and Maintenance of Neural Progenitors
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Elena Silva, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The first step in the formation of the central nervous system (i.e. brain and
spinal cord) is the induction of a plate of cells on one side of the developing
embryo. This plate consists of proliferating neural stem cells that
differentiate and form all of the neurons and glia of the brain and spinal cord.
To create a brain of the correct size and organization, the neural stem cells
must be tightly regulated such that they replenish themselves through cell
division, and then differentiate into neurons at the right time during
development. Many of the signals required to induce neural stem cell formation
and to direct neuron formation are known, however how the regulatory signals are
relayed, interpreted and coordinated to form a complex, centralized nervous
system is unknown. To determine how these signals induce and instruct neural
stem cells, the process will be compared in both a simple (marine acorn worm)
and complex (frog) organism. The acorn worm and frog have similarly structured
nervous systems but use unique routes during development to reach the same end.
Thus, comparison of the induction and segregation of their nervous systems
allows for the identification of the essential components and changes that
evolved to allow for the development of the complex vertebrate brain. These
studies are fundamental for explaining how multiple signals are integrated and
decoded to regulate stem cells and to form a highly structured organ. These
studies will provide numerous training opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students including members of underrepresented groups
in science and are essential to the development of the acorn worm as a model
organism to study the development of the brain and other organs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specification of neuroectoderm and the
maintenance of a neural progenitor population are tightly regulated and
fundamental to the development of the central nervous system. While many of the
signals (BMP and FGF) and transcription factors involved in neurogenesis are
known, the mechanisms by which signals drive changes in gene expression and how
the signals are coordinated to maintain a balance of proliferating stem cells
and differentiating neurons are not well defined. This project examines the role
of FGF and BMP signaling in neural progenitor induction, maintenance and
segregation in the chordate Xenopus laevis and the hemichordate Saccoglossus
kowalevskii. The molecular and embryological tools in Xenopus enable
identification of the molecular mechanisms downstream of BMP signaling that
induce the nervous system, and the identification of the roles of FGF in the
induction and maintenance of progenitors. The Xenopus studies combined with
analysis of the formation of the nervous system in Saccoglossus allows for the
identification of conserved and novel regulatory themes in the specification and
segregation of neural cells. The unique neural organization and development of
Saccoglossus provides a unique opportunity to address a major question in
developmental biology - How do changes at the molecular level drive significant
morphological changes? This critical deuterostome dataset will broaden the
phylogenetic perspective and provide insight into the evolutionary history of
the development of the nervous system. These studies will provide numerous
training opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students
including members of underrepresented groups in science and the focus on
technique development in Saccoglossus is essential to its development as a model
organism to study neural development.