* 1557724
* Immunity in an Ecological Context: The Intersection of Host Physiology, Medicinal Food Plants and Microbiomes in a Natural Butterfly-parasite System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Jacobus de Roode, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2020
* USD 868,531.00

Almost all organisms are attacked by parasites. Recent studies have shown that
many animals, from butterflies to chimpanzees, can protect themselves against
parasites through self-medication (the use of anti-parasitic substances or
diets). However, the mechanisms by which medication behaviors reduce parasite
infection and disease remain poorly understood. This project focuses on monarch
butterflies and their protozoan parasites. Monarch caterpillars are specialist
feeders on milkweed plants, and milkweeds vary in their concentrations and
toxicity of chemicals called cardenolides. When feeding on toxic milkweed,
monarchs become less sick, and infected female butterflies preferentially lay
their eggs on toxic milkweed to reduce disease in their offspring. This project
will determine whether toxic milkweeds reduce disease by directly killing
parasites, by increasing the immune response of monarchs, or by providing
monarchs with a gut flora that prevents parasite infection. Beyond monarch
butterflies, this project has broad relevance to other animals, many of which
use medicinal plants. The parasites studied here are related to parasites
causing disease in agricultural animals and humans, thus elucidating the anti-
parasitic activity of milkweed chemicals could have future applications for
treating disease. The project will also integrate research with education, by
training graduate and undergraduate students, including those from
underrepresented groups in science. The researchers will also develop lesson
modules with the Wylde Center, an Atlanta-based non-profit organization that
teaches environmental awareness through community-garden based outdoor programs.
As part of this, the project will directly contribute to the science education
of thousands of K-12 students.

Hosts have evolved a range of defenses against their parasites, including
behavioral and microbial defenses. Such defenses may have important consequences
for the evolution of physiological immunity, but research on the interplay
between physiological immunity, behavioral immunity and microbial protection
remains scarce. This project will study the interaction between monarch
butterflies, their milkweed host plants and their protozoan parasites to address
three hypotheses: (1) behavioral use of medicinal milkweeds directly decreases
parasite infection, rendering physiological immunity superfluous and reducing
investment in such immune mechanisms; (2) medicinal milkweeds do not reduce
monarch immunity but instead exert their protective effects by enhancing
physiological immune responses; and (3) medicinal milkweeds modulate monarch
midgut microbiota to a state that confers resistance to parasite infection.
These hypotheses will be addressed by elucidating immune responses
differentially mounted upon infection of butterflies from resistant and
susceptible populations, comparing anti-parasite immune responses in monarchs
fed on medicinal and non-medicinal milkweed plants, and by analyzing the effects
of milkweed secondary and nutritional chemicals on monarch immunity and
resistance. In addition, comparison of the midgut microbiota of monarchs reared
on medicinal and non-medicinal milkweeds will be coupled with experiments
manipulating gut microbiota to test for the effect of medicinal milkweed
microbial communities on monarch resistance to infection. The researchers will
use a combination of fieldwork, controlled experiments and next generation
sequencing technology, including the use of RNASeq to quantify differential
immune responses and MiSeq to quantify bacterial and fungal caterpillar gut
communities.