* 1557850
* Regulation of Temporal and Spatial Organization of Newborn GnRH Neurons by IGF Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Cunming Duan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2022
* USD 832,590.00

How newborn neurons are organized into the right locations with the right timing
to form functional circuits is a fundamental question in developmental
neurobiology. An attractive model system in which to address this question is
the Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal system. GnRH neurons are
master regulators of the reproductive system. They secrete GnRH peptides to
initiate reproductive activity. Abnormal development of GnRH neurons can lead to
reproductive disorders. Although significant advances have been made in
understanding the central importance of GnRH neurons in reproduction, very
little is known about where the GnRH progenitor (i.e., undifferentiated) cells
are located in the developing nervous system and how they are instructed to
become GnRH neurons. This project fills this gap in our knowledge. The
anticipated results will provide new knowledge on how insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) signaling, a major embryonic growth-promoting pathway, regulates GnRH
neuronal development. The knowledge gained from this project may have
applications in the aquaculture industry and will help understand the etiology
of reproductive disorders. This project provides training opportunities for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. The
students participate in all aspects of this cutting-edge research project. In
collaboration with the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History, the
project also includes the development of a summer camp curriculum in
neurobiology, entitled "Shining Neurons in the Brain!", for K-12 students. This
and other outreach activities make this NSF-funded research accessible to the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An attractive model system in which to address the
question of how newborn neurons are organized into the right locations with the
right timing to form functional circuits is the GnRH neuronal system. GnRH
neurons emerge from the nasal/olfactory placode in early embryos and undertake a
long-distance migration from the olfactory region to the preoptic area and
hypothalamus. The embryonic origin(s) of GnRH progenitor cells is still under
debate. Little is known about how these progenitor cells are specified to give
rise to GnRH neurons. Most vertebrate species have a second GnRH gene that is
expressed in the midbrain. Much less is known about the GnRH2 neuron development
and regulation. This project tests the hypothesis that the two types of GnRH
neurons originate from the cranial neural crest- and/or optical placode-derived
progenitor cells and that IGF signaling regulates the emergence of GnRH neurons
at the right time and location by controlling the proliferation, migration,
and/or survival of their progenitor cells. Perturbation of IGF signaling in a
critical time window during early embryogenesis alters the temporal and spatial
organization of the newborn GnRH neurons, which, in turn, affects reproductive
function later in life. Aim 1 investigates the embryonic origins of GnRH
neurons; Aim 2 determines whether IGF signaling regulates the emergence of the
GnRH neurons by controlling migration, proliferation, and/or survival of their
progenitor cells, and Aim 3 determines the long-term reproductive consequences
of this regulation.