* 1557353
* Understanding Large-scale Zonal Jet Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2022
* David Lorenz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 538,652.00

This project will study the dynamics of the westerly wind belt of the mid
latitudes of earth's atmosphere. The westerly wind belt is associated with the
mid-latitude jet stream in the upper troposphere and it also influences the
strength and position of fronts and mid-latitude storm systems. Despite the
importance of the westerly jet on mid-latitude weather and climate, complex
interactions between motions on a variety of different spatial and temporal
scales makes understanding the important dynamical mechanisms controlling the
strength and position of the mid-latitude jet very difficult. Progress has been
made by separating the total flow into two components: 1) the background
westerly flow, which is defined as the winds averaged in the east/west direction
around the entire globe, and 2) the waves, which are defined as the difference
between the total flow and the background flow. Recently, the PI has developed a
methodology to separate the various mechanisms whereby the background westerly
flow affects the waves. Because the role of the waves on the background flow is
already well understood, this new methodology can be used to understand how the
waves and the background flow interact to determine 1) the leading patterns of
natural variability and 2) the response to external forcing, such as increasing
greenhouse gases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study extends previous work by
applying the new methodology to state-of-the-art climate models and
observations. This will determine the reasons for climate model biases in the
mid-latitude circulation that will then help lead to model improvements and
therefore more credible predictions of future climate change. For example, the
natural variability of the mid-latitude jet is too persistent in time in climate
models and moreover this bias has been shown to affect the magnitude of the
response to increasing greenhouse gases. The new methodology is ideally suited
to separate the proposed reasons for this bias: 1) the mean westerlies are too
far equatorward in the climate models or, 2) the planetary wave activity is too
weak in the climate models. In addition, the methodology is ideally suited to
separate the proposed reasons for latitudinal shifts in the position of the
westerlies in response to increased greenhouse
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in simulated climate should be considered
credible only to the extent that model spread is small. In this research, the
reasons for the model spread in the westerly jet response and variability will
be diagnosed so that the models can be improved. These improvements are
important because increasing greenhouse gases tend to shift the position of the
westerlies toward the poles. Furthermore, such latitudinal shifts in the
position of the westerlies are a major component of the natural year-to-year
variability in the mid-latitudes. For example, an extreme equatorward shift in
the mid-latitude jet led to the extremely cold, snowy winter of 2009-2010 in the
mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. A similar situation occurred in March
2013. Besides temperature and precipitation, these shifts in the westerlies also
have many other impacts including poleward moisture transport, the earth
radiation budget via cloudiness, the ocean circulation and sea ice. This project
will have additional broader impacts because the PI is active in the climate
impacts community. The PI's familiarity and access to climate model simulations
through this and other projects enables him to provide essential information on
the robustness of the climate information that these users need. In addition,
after publication of the results, the code for the methodology used in this
project will be made public on the PI's web site for other groups to diagnose
and understand their own simulations and observations. This work will also train
a Ph.D. graduate student.