* 1557792
* How FGF Receptor Signaling Drives Homeostatic Neuroplasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* C. Andrew Frank, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

The ability of cells to monitor the environment and adjust their structure and
function in order to best maintain all of the physiological properties that
support their existence (homeostasis) is a fundamental property of all
biological systems. Cells in animal nervous systems are no exception; they need
to constantly change their signaling connections with other cells (synapses) in
brain circuits in response to both normal environmental changes and to
physiological challenges such as toxins, so that brain function can be
homeostatically maintained within a physiologically appropriate range. However,
we currently have a very poor understanding of the basic biological mechanisms
underlying the homeostatic regulation of cell-to-cell communication that affects
brain circuitry. This project uses genetic tools uniquely available in the
fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster together with electrical recordings,
biochemical techniques, synapse imaging by microscopy, and drug manipulations to
understand how a newly-identified molecular factor in fruitfly muscles (called
Heartless/Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor tyrosine kinase [Htl/FGFR])
homeostatically controls the level of activity in the motor nerve cells that
cause these same muscles to contract. This research will precisely elucidate
what causes this muscle-specific molecule to become biologically active, and how
it signals its activity backwards in this circuit to affect the activity of the
nerve cells that control muscles. This research plan also integrates a variety
of educational activities at multiple levels, including: 1) an ongoing research
and educational collaboration with a faculty member at a nearby primarily
undergraduate institution (PUI); 2) a yearly three-day summer workshop designed
by the principal investigator (PI) to expand neuroscience research resources for
PUIs; 3) K-12 STEM public outreach in Iowa through tours of the PI's lab and
school visits by the PI and his graduate students; and 4) long- and short-term
research opportunities for undergraduates, including underrepresented minority
students enrolled in programs such as the SROP/McNair Scholars Program at the
University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homeostatic forms of synaptic
plasticity direct synapses and circuits to maintain normal ranges of output,
despite the perturbations they may experience throughout life. A significant
unknown is the molecular underpinning of the homeostatic regulation of synapse
function. The PI's lab addresses this problem utilizing the Drosophila
melanogaster neuromuscular junction (NMJ) as a model. At the NMJ, impaired
muscle excitability is corrected by offsetting, homeostatic increases in
presynaptic neurotransmitter release. Precisely how the muscle communicates a
need for increased neurotransmitter release is not understood. Similar forms of
regulation have been found in the mammalian central and peripheral nervous
systems, and they are not understood either. Using Drosophila genetics and
electrophysiology, the PI's lab has identified new molecules that illuminate
signaling events controlling synaptic homeostasis. One molecule forms the basis
for this project, a Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor (FGFR) tyrosine kinase.
Data from the lab support muscle-specific roles for FGFR. The central hypothesis
is that muscle-derived FGFR activity tunes synaptic strength by mediating both
anterograde (nerve-to-muscle) and retrograde (muscle-to-nerve) cell-cell
signals. There are two specific aims. Aim 1 will determine the molecular signals
in the muscle triggered by FGFR during the execution of homeostatic
compensation. This aim includes experiments that will identify direct targets,
as well as the retrograde signal(s) activated by those targets. Aim 2 will
determine how homeostatic FGFR signaling is activated and regulated. Both aims
will employ a combination of electrophysiology, biochemistry, synapse imaging,
and pharmacology.