* 1557323
* The Sacramento Math and Science Teacher Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Judi Kusnick, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,998,673.00

This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project leverages current high school
reform efforts in the Sacramento region by enabling a community of 20
mathematics and science master teachers to lead implementation of new K-12 STEM
standards and model effective practices for in-service and pre-service teachers.
The master teachers participate in a three-phase program of study, which
includes (1) understanding and implementing science standards and cultural
competency, (2) developing leadership capacity, and (3) mentoring pre-service
teachers. Key features of Phase 1 such as the participation of the master
teachers in the Parent Teacher Home Visit Project (through which they will be
trained in cultural competence, conduct home visits with the families of high-
needs students, and then engage them in class) and the implementation of Linked
Learning (an educational approach that makes science and mathematics more
relevant to students by linking course content to real-world applications that
are in turn connected to regional career pathways) will lay the foundation for
professional development in Phases 2 and 3. The project is a partnership between
Sacramento's four largest high needs, unified school districts (Elk Grove,
Natomas, Sacramento City, and San Juan), the Sacramento County Office of
Education, and the Sacramento Metro Chamber of Commerce's workforce development
and education affiliate (NextEd).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research shows that the
use of Linked Learning strategies in STEM courses can be especially effective at
high schools with high drop-out rates, and/or where substantial numbers of
students are low income and/or culturally or linguistically diverse. Recognizing
that this pedagogical framework paired with a better understanding of students
and their families can also be used as teachers align course content to new
standards, this plan will focus on developing Master Teachers through Linked
Learning and the Parent Teacher Home Visit Project. Subsequent leadership
training will be used to expand these competences to pre-service teachers. The
evaluation plan will address the effectiveness of the project in developing and
retaining math and science teacher-leaders in high needs local education
agencies. Action research data collected by the master teachers will be used to
analyze the extent to which teaching practices change and leadership initiatives
develop. Additionally, the development of leadership capacity will be assessed
through master teachers' reflection papers and surveys given to those being
trained or mentored by them. The results of this work will be disseminated at
the California Department of Education STEM Annual Conference, California
Science Teachers Association, California Mathematics Council, and Association of
Mathematics Teacher Educators.