* 1557882
* RUI: Physiology of Sleep and Assessment of the Costs of Experimental Sleep Loss in Arctic-Breeding Songbirds
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2023
* Noah Ashley, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 03/31/2023
* USD 965,048.00

Sleep is an essential and restorative process that is often neglected in modern
society. In humans, chronic sleep loss (insomnia, shift work, sleep apnea) has
negative consequences on normal physiological and mental function and is a risk
factor for many chronic conditions, such as metabolic and cardiovascular
diseases. In the Arctic, migratory songbirds are active for 20 hours/day to take
advantage of constant summer light, and seemingly do not suffer from the well-
known detrimental effects of sleep loss, such as physiological and cognitive
dysfunction. This research aims to investigate sleep patterns and assess the
costs and benefits of sleep loss in arctic-breeding songbirds in Barrow, Alaska
(71°N). Broader impacts of the proposal include training the next generation of
science teachers to provide instruction to K-12 students of rural Alaska,
engaging students (high school, undergraduate, and graduate) and postdoctoral
trainees from traditionally underrepresented backgrounds in collaborative
research, and disseminating research findings to scientists and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sleep is essential for most organisms, although its
precise function is enigmatic. Chronic sleep loss is well known to have
detrimental effects on human health and performance. However, other species
display a diversity of sleep patterns that challenge the assumption that reduced
sleep is costly for all vertebrates. This proposal takes advantage of state-of-
the-art miniaturized transmitters to assess sleep architecture in free-ranging
songbirds. Arctic-breeding passerines exhibit extended wakefulness during
migration and are active 20 hours/day on their breeding grounds where continuous
daylight prevails. The project aims to investigate the sleep/wake cycles of two
species of songbirds with different life-history strategies that breed in the
high Arctic (Barrow, Alaska, 71° N). It is hypothesized that both natural and
sexual selection play a role in determining their sleep patterns. Next, daily
sleep will be experimentally increased or decreased to assess life-history
tradeoffs with fecundity and/or survivorship. Lastly, the hypothesis will be
tested whether arctic-breeding songbirds are more resilient to metabolic,
cognitive, hormonal, and immunological costs of sleep loss compared with
temperate-breeding birds in captivity. Broader impacts include a Future Teachers
of Science program that fosters training of science teachers to develop teaching
modules for K-12 students of rural Alaska and a cross-cultural research program
for high school students of Alaska and Kentucky to assist with field research.
Results from the research will contribute to our understanding of how arctic-
dwelling species, including humans, cope with continuous periods of arctic
light.