* 1557890
* Reassessing the Biological Functions of the Plant Type I H+-PPase
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Roberto Gaxiola, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 675,000.00

Plants use water and the energy from sunlight to make energy-dense sugars. After
production in the leaves, the sugar needs to be moved to other parts of the
plant where this energy is consumed. These consuming tissues are termed 'sinks'.
Analogous to our circulatory systems, plants have a network of cells called the
phloem that allow the movement of sugars from source (leaves) to the sink
tissues. Scientists have long sought to increase the yield of crops by
regulating the movement of sugars, the theory being that if supplies are
increased, yield can be increased while the input of costly and environmentally
problematic fertilizers is diminished. Previous work has identified a
transporter within the phloem and this proposal aims to characterize the
function of this key regulator in sugar transport. Specifying how this
transporter moves sugar to various tissues within the plant will allow
scientists to develop strategies to optimize sugar translocation in crops that
increase yield while reducing the environmental impacts of production
agriculture. The Hispanic roots of the lead scientist for this project give this
team an edge in engaging Hispanic audiences by communicating complex scientific
topics in Spanish to ignite interest in science among the general public and
among students. The scientists involved in this project will organize an
international meeting on agricultural biotechnology and society, and will also
develop bilingual web-based teaching tools to promote scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partitioning of photoassimilates between
their sites of production and utilization is a key determinant of plant growth
and development. Emerging evidence suggests regulation of photoassimilate
partitioning is mediated in part by a type I H+-PPase. A role for this
transporter has been established at the tonoplast; however, this exclusive
function has been unsettled by recent work showing plasma membrane (PM)
localization of this transporter and establishing that it is prominently
expressed in phloem companion cells (CC). The researchers propose this enzyme
has two opposing roles, PPi hydrolysis and synthesis that contribute to a
cascade of events that energize plant growth. They will test the capacity of the
Arabidopsis thaliana H+-PPase to synthetize PPi in a heterologous system
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and in plants. Concurrently, a series of genetic,
immunohistochemical and physiological experiments will determine how this pump
affects the partitioning of assimilates. This fundamental research will catalog
that H+-PPases as a central mediator involved in the allocation and metabolism
of photosynthates.