* 1557007
* NSF DEB-NERC: Phylogenomics and Sensory Systems Evolution in Silkmoths and Relatives
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ian Kitching, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 08/31/2022
* USD 820,932.00

Nearly all animals use sight and smell to sense their surroundings. It is
assumed that when a species evolves to become diurnal or nocturnal, its eyes,
olfactory organs, and the genes associated with these structures also evolve.
However, this concept remains largely untested, because a comprehensive
evolutionary tree and associated comparative data are not available. Silkmoths
and relatives are some of the most conspicuous moths, and they provide an
excellent opportunity to study how two potentially complementary sensory systems
-- sight and smell -- have evolved. The group includes many model organisms,
such as the domesticated silkmoth and tobacco hornworm, which play key roles in
many areas of the biological sciences. Some silkmoths and relatives are damaging
to agriculture, and they are frequently used as an educational tool because of
their large size, charisma, and ability to captivate children in classrooms.
Despite their role in science and education, this model group still lacks a
robust estimate of evolutionary relationships. With collaborative research teams
in the United States and the United Kingdom, this project will assemble an
extensive genetic dataset and reconstruct a robust evolutionary tree for the
group. Two postdoctoral researchers, two graduates students, several
undergraduates, and dozens of elementary, middle and high school students will
be trained, including many students from under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will produce a comprehensive phylogeny of a
model insect group, the silkmoths and relatives (Lepidoptera: Bombycoidea) and
use it to study the evolution of two principal sensory systems: vision and
olfaction. The project will develop a US-UK collaborative partnership across
five institutions to initially generate a target capture-based backbone
phylogeny based on 700 genetic loci and 1000 species of Bombycoidea. Scanning
electron microscopy and 3D Micro-computed Tomography scanning will then be used
to quantify sensory morphology of two key organs (eye and antenna) that are
central to insect vision and olfaction. The molecular evolution of vision and
olfactory gene sequences isolated from sensory organ transcriptomes will be
analyzed to test for evidence of selection between related diurnal and nocturnal
species. Gene sequences will be isolated from frozen and museum specimens using
new methodologies, thereby making this tool useful to the broader community of
scientists.