* 1557940
* A Critical Examination of the Model for Insect Body Size Determination: the Mechanisms of Body Size Variation in Bees
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,06/30/2021
* George Yocum, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 673,606.00

Growth rate and the timing of when growth stops determine body size, an
important trait for survival and reproduction. The cues that stop growth are not
fully understood, even in well-studied model species. Solitary bees provision
their offspring, restricting the food available for larval growth. Experiments
indicate that the complete consumption of these provisions induces
metamorphosis. Studying the cues to metamorphosis in solitary bees provides a
unique opportunity to physiologically compare individuals of the same age and
size that either have or have not transitioned to metamorphosis. The proposed
research will investigate (1) whether the hormonal cues underlying starvation-
triggered metamorphosis in solitary bees are the same as those found in insects
that metamorphose upon reaching a particular size, (2) how variation in the
timing of metamorphosis predicts body size variation in natural populations and
different bee species, and (3) how the determinants of adult size in bees shape
differences between queens and workers in honeybees. Bee body size predicts
pollination performance, and a physiological understanding of body size control
has direct implications for pollinator health and performance in both natural
and managed bee species, whether solitary or social. Undergraduates, graduate
students and a postdoctoral fellow will participate in this research, and K-12
learning modules on pollinator life cycles will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Body size is an important organismal trait that
correlates with most aspects of performance and fitness. In determinant-growing
organisms, body size becomes fixed at maturation; therefore the mechanisms
regulating maturation also influence size variation among individuals. Insects
grow as larvae until attainment of a critical weight, at which point the
mechanisms regulating metamorphosis are irreversibly initiated. This established
model of body size control may not be generalizable to species with larval
ecologies that differ from model insect species. Preliminary data demonstrate
that completely consuming the larval provision initiates metamorphosis in the
solidary bee Osmia lignaria. This result challenges the existing conceptual
model for insect body size by suggesting that the critical weight is not a
universal trait in insects. The proposed research will address three central
aims: 1) characterizing the physiological regulation of metamorphosis in the
solitary bee Osmia lignaria, 2) characterizing factors determining body size
variation among populations and species of solitary bees that share similar
larval ecologies; and 3) testing the degree to which diet quantity contributes
to caste differences in eusocial bees. These mechanisms have the potential to
explain much of the body size variation observed among Hymenopterans. Finally,
the proposed research will develop a mechanistically explicit understanding of
body size determination for bees, which are key pollinators for natural and
managed ecosystems. A deeper, mechanistic understanding of body size variation
may yield insights into improving pollinator health at the scale of individuals
or even populations. Results from these studies will be disseminated in peer
reviewed journals and through presentations at scientific meetings.