* 1557053
* Collaborative Research: Discovery and analysis in the cradle of speciation theory: biotic surveys of Melanesia's terrestrial vertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Rafe Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,011,266.00

Land animals of Southwest Pacific island chains exhibit unique patterns of
diversification. Explanations for these patterns have influenced the fields of
ecology and evolution, yet the processes that produced these patterns are little
studied. Furthermore, few scientists have visited many of the more remote and
rugged parts of this island region, and animals in these areas are poorly known.
This project contains two major components: (1) fieldwork to survey vertebrate
communities (birds, frogs, lizards, snakes and mammals) and collect specimen
material across the diverse biological communities of the Southwest Pacific; and
(2) laboratory-based genetic analysis to study the evolutionary history of these
animal groups as well as contemporary interactions among island populations.
Field and laboratory work will enable the description of new species, redefine
patterns of biodiversity, and provide much-needed comparative material for
world-class global collections. Importantly, training and education of US
university students is integrated throughout this work. US undergraduate and
graduate students will work closely with students from host countries,
implementing field research projects under the guidance of team leaders and
senior graduate students. This collaboration between US and local scientists,
students, and non-government stakeholders will help clarify regional patterns of
vertebrate biodiversity within this poorly known biodiversity hotspot.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern terrestrial vertebrate collections from the
Southwest Pacific archipelagos will allow testing and reinterpretation of
fundamental ecological and evolutionary hypotheses. Biodiversity surveys will
focus on collections of birds, mammals, reptiles, and amphibians. Georeferenced
collections will include multiple preparation types, genetic samples, blood
smears, gastrointestinal contents, and associated parasite faunas. High quality
audio recordings of species vocalizations will document these often overlooked
aspects of the phenotype. Audio data will include targeted recordings of
individual birds, bats, frogs, and geckos, as well as environmental recordings
of dawn and dusk choruses. Reduced representation genomic sampling of
populations (RAD-seq and sequence capture) will be used to reconstruct
phylogenetic relationships among species and populations, as well as to assess
levels of gene flow among island populations with varying degrees of geographic
isolation. Data will be made available through open-access repositories and
results will be synthesized in a comparative framework across all terrestrial
vertebrates.