* 1557755
* The Role of Transient Striatal Dopamine Release Events in Negative Reinforcement Processes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Erik Oleson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2020
* USD 402,998.00

Evaluating and avoiding negative outcomes is critical for optimal decision-
making and, ultimately, animal survival. A chemical in the brain called dopamine
is well known to promote advantageous behavior when animals are pursuing reward;
however, little is known regarding the role of dopamine when animals are
avoiding harm. The principal investigator's lab is able to measure real-time
dopamine levels in the brain of behaving animals using a tool called
voltammetry, and turn dopamine neurons on/off using a tool called optogenetics.
Using these tools, the investigator's research team will perform a thorough
assessment of how dopamine levels within the brains of behaving rats are
involved in the avoidance of footshock. Additional experiments serve to
determine whether dopamine is involved in assessing the value of avoiding
different intensities of footshock. It is predicted that dopamine levels will
change over the course of learning in a manner that promotes successful
footshock avoidance and scale with the value of the footshock avoided. All
aspects of the proposed project will involve undergraduate trainees, especially
trainees from underrepresented populations. By using cutting-edge technologies
to investigate the role of dopamine in the avoidance of harm, the principal
investigator and his students will uncover novel information about the
neurobiological mechanisms underlying behavior while simultaneously developing a
future, diverse population of scientists.

The principal investigator recently demonstrated that a warning signal
predicting the avoidance of an aversive event evokes transient surges in
dopamine concentration within the ventral striatum. This finding suggests that
the transient dopamine signal represents environmental stimuli predicting the
avoidance of something bad similarly to those predicting the receipt of
something good. Furthermore, preliminary optogenetics data reveal that
facilitating midbrain dopamine neural activity during warning signal
presentation promotes avoidance outcomes in well-trained rats. Despite these
important advances, the precise role(s) that transient dopamine release events
play in negative reinforcement processes remains unknown. In this project, the
investigator and his research team will use fast-scan cyclic voltammetry and
optogenetics to assess the role of transient dopamine release events in the
nucleus accumbens core, dorsomedial striatum, and dorsolateral striatum during:
1) avoidance learning, 2) maintenance and extinction of avoidance, and 3)
positive vs. negative reinforcement value assessment. The collection of these
data will generate presently unknown mechanistic detail regarding how the brain
processes negative reinforcement-- information that may contribute to a more
nuanced understanding of the role of dopamine in animal behavior. To accomplish
these goals, the investigator will involve undergraduate students, particularly
those from underrepresented backgrounds, in all aspects of data collection and
dissemination. In addition, the investigator will develop an international
neuroscience conference experience program for undergraduate students from
underrepresented minorities and a neuroscience outreach program in which
undergraduate students from underrepresented minorities visit Denver city
museums and schools to teach the general public about the brain.