* 1557341
* The Physiological Basis of Allometry
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* H Nijhout, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 856,570.00

The shapes and sizes of their body parts are the most important features by
which different species of animals are recognized and defined. The shapes and
relative sizes of body parts, however, change continually during development. As
a result, individuals with different final adult body sizes typically differ in
the proportions of sizes of their body parts. This phenomenon is called
allometry. Although allometry has been extensively described and studied for
more than a century, those studies have been largely descriptive and have made
simple and unrealistic assumptions about how different body parts grow. This is
in part because the physiological processes responsible for producing
allometries are still poorly understood and because the theoretical tools used
to analyze and interpret allometries cannot deduce growth processes correctly.
As a result, the mechanisms that control size, shape and the relative sizes of
body parts remain among the great unsolved puzzles in Biology. The proposed work
will develop new practical and theoretical tools for the analysis of how, and
why, the relative sizes of body parts vary. Understanding how organs grow to
their correct size and shape has profound implications for understanding the
causes and mechanisms of normal development and of developmental abnormalities.
User-friendly software will be developed and freely distributed that will allow
students and researchers to implement the equations developed in this research
and analyze allometries in novel and more productive ways. This project will
provide interdisciplinary training in biological mathematics and physiology for
a graduate student and a diverse group of undergraduates. Outreach to local
schools and regional science museums, with talks and hands-on exercises on
insect biology, laboratory visits by junior-high school students from
underserved schools, and continuing participation and mentorship with the North
Carolina Museum of Life and Science on the biology of insects are integral parts
of the Principal Investigator's commitment to disseminating science and making
the resources provided by NSF more broadly available to the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three principal aims:
(1) to develop an improved theory and new equations for static allometry, (2) to
test and validate the theory against rich and diverse data sets from insects and
mammals, and (3) to investigate the physiological factors that give rise to
allometric relationships. The experimental work will focus on wing-body
allometry in Lepidoptera, where the control of growth and size is best
understood. Growth and size are controlled by developmental hormones and by the
timing and duration of hormone secretion. This work will use several genetic
strains of Manduca sexta that differ in body size and that can be reared under
different environmental conditions of temperature and nutrition, which also
affect size and allometry. This will produce a rich data set that will permit a
functional interpretation of the effects of genes and environment on growth
patterns and on the resulting allometries. The results of this work will allow
researchers to analyze the causes of complex non-linear allometries, and deduce
the underlying growth patterns that give rise to those allometries. This work
will also provide new insights into the physiological mechanisms by which
variation in genetic background and environment alters size, shape and
allometry.