* 1557936
* Lobes or Gills, Exploring the Origin of Insect Wings
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Yoshinori Tomoyasu, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 04/30/2020
* USD 531,845.00

The world is full of a fascinating diversity of life. Understanding the
mechanism that has driven (and continues to drive) this amazing diversity is
important, not only for science, but also for life itself. Knowledge of the
history of life affects our way of thinking, our culture, and our society. Only
recently, scientists have finally begun to understand how new body structures
(novel structures) emerge during evolution. This project uses a core example of
this novelty to explore a century-long question; where did the insect wing come
from? Acquisition of wings has allowed the tremendously successful expansion of
insects over the globe. However, the origin of insect wings remains a mystery
and is regarded as a chief conundrum in biology. Through molecular and
developmental analyses, wing-related tissues will be identified from a wide set
of insects and other arthropods, which will allow for a reconstruction of the
evolutionary history of insect wings. Gaining a comprehensive view of insect
wing evolution will in turn advance our knowledge of the developmental basis
underlying the development of new structures in general. The research will also
further establish several organisms as alternative models for further genetic
studies. In addition, this project will enhance undergraduate science education
through establishing an infrastructure for student-oriented crowdsourcing
efforts allowing researchers and students to publicly share the results of their
gene disruption analyses and thus facilitate collaboration opportunities.

Over a century of debates and observations have culminated into two prominent
hypotheses on the insect wing origin. One hypothesis, termed the paranotal
hypothesis, connects the origin to the lateral extension of the dorsal thorax,
the paranotal lobe. The second hypothesis, the exite hypothesis, connects the
origin to the proximal leg segments and the branches (exites) stemming from
these segments. Despite accumulating efforts to unveil the origin of insect
wings, neither hypothesis has been able to surpass the other. A previous
analysis in the Tomoyasu laboratory using Tribolium beetles has led to a
combinational wing origin hypothesis, which states that insect wings have a dual
origin, and that the merger of two unrelated tissues has been a key step in
developing this morphologically novel structure during evolution. Further
evidence for this hypothesis will be explored via (i) elucidating how the two
tissues merge to form a complete wing structure in Tribolium, and (ii)
identifying wing (serial) homologs from three additional species (a diving
beetle, a cockroach, and a crustacean) to gain support of the hypothesis from a
wider taxonomic breadth. RNA interference and expression analyses, along with
CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing techniques, will be used to identify and follow
the development of wing-related tissues in these organisms. The morphological
comparison of the identified wing (serial) homologs in these organisms with
those of Tribolium, as well as with the proposed wing origins will allow for the
construction of a more complete history of the evolution of insect wings.