* 1557000
* Collaborative Research: Fire-fungal-plant feedbacks in pyrogenic ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Benjamin Sikes, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2021
* USD 449,700.00

Unlike most natural disturbances, such as hurricanes or floods, characteristics
and effects of fires depend on the plants present and the fuels they produce,
both live flammable leaves and dead tissues that are released into the
surrounding environment. Plants that live where fire occurs frequently are often
capable of surviving fires. Some of these plants produce fuels that change the
likelihood and characteristics of future fires, producing conditions favorable
to them and/or their offspring. Soil organisms also affect plant fuels, and some
are capable of surviving fires. They represent an important but unrecognized
driver capable of altering fuels and future fires, especially in habitats with
frequent fires. Soil fungi are a key example of such soil organisms, directly
affecting fuel loads by decomposing dead plant tissues and indirectly affecting
fuel production through their effects on plant growth. Because fungi differ in
fire susceptibility, repeated fires may shape the fungi present, altering direct
and indirect effects on fuels (and thus future fires). Knowledge of these fungal
effects is important for managing natural fire-frequented habitats such as
savannas and grasslands and forecasting the characteristics (such as the
likelihood and intensity) of future fires in most terrestrial habitats. This
research examines how changes in fires (severity, frequency, suppression)
influence fungi and their effects on new fuels, both directly through fuel
breakdown and indirectly through plants, then models how these differences may
affect future fires. This research will also develop two educational modules on
fire, fungi and plants: 1) undergraduate students will test different fire
traits of cultured fungi and 2) K-5 classrooms will use inquiry-based learning
kits that are developed on fire, fungi and plants, and that directly address
next generation science standards. The research will be conducted in pine
savannas, highly diverse and threatened southeastern habitats dependent on
frequent fire. Initial research showed that fire alters soil fungi and results
in 40% slower decomposition by microbes of dead plant leaves newly deposited on
the ground. Slower decomposition causes fuels to accumulate more quickly in the
environment, increasing chances and intensities of future fires. This research
uses large-scale field experiments with fire, next generation DNA sequencing,
and computer modeling to determine how soil microbes like fungi respond to fire,
and if they play an unrecognized role by influencing likelihoods and
characteristics of future fires. Because these effects are tested over a
spectrum of fire severities, the model based on experimental results can be used
in other pyrogenic habitats and can be used to forecast likelihoods and effects
of future fires.