* 1557307
* Mathematics Education Intensive Residency Project Focusing on Veterans
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* William Farber, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,165,182.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Mathematics Education Intensive Residency Project
Focusing on Veterans will recruit veterans with strong mathematics backgrounds
and prepare them to become grade 7-12 grade mathematics teachers. The project
will fund twenty scholarships/fellowships over four years. In this project,
Mercy College will collaborate with the Yonkers Public School District. The
program will implement a clinically rich master's degree program in secondary
mathematics education to investigate the nexus between theory and practice, and
will benefit Noyce Scholars through the partnership between school practitioners
and college faculty. The program will provide recipients with the content and
methodology necessary to work effectively in inclusive and traditional
mathematics classrooms. Particular emphasis will be given to helping candidates
understand the spirit, intent, and content of the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics, and will investigate multiple strategies for implementing
successful research-based mathematics education in high-need classrooms. At the
conclusion of this 14-month master's degree program, candidates will be eligible
for certification and employment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
correlate with current education reform practice to support a cohort model,
clinical residency and follow-up induction services as a means for preparing and
retaining successful teachers, and will follow the professional development
model suggested by data from the Council for the Accreditation of Educator
Preparation (CAEP) and the Center for Teaching Quality. It will guide each
cohort through a sequence of activities designed to integrate theory and
practice, including research-based courses in teaching, the use of technology in
the classroom, differentiated teaching strategies, and implementing the Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics. The program will provide a coherent
curriculum and sequenced courses requiring increasing levels of knowledge for
application to the clinical residency and emphasize authentic classroom teaching
under the mentorship of a well-qualified mathematics teacher and guidance from
visiting Mercy College clinical faculty. A year of follow-up support for each
cohort will be provided through online seminars, SKYPE and after-school learning
workshops. Through multiple sources -- coursework, the internship, certification
tests, and the awarding of the degree -- the project will verify candidates'
level of competence to teach mathematics curricula in secondary schools, and
will evaluate the progress of student achievement in their classes. Data
collected from this project will provide an understanding of 1) whether veterans
can serve as successful role models for at-risk youngsters by bringing the
value-added strengths of maturity and teamwork skills to secondary school
teaching and school capacity-building and 2) whether an ongoing learning
community will empower a successful transition to civilian life, enable veterans
to become effective teachers upon entering the profession, and work productively
with diverse populations of secondary school students and educator colleagues.