* 1557733
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Precision medicine and the management of infectious diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Eric Laber, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 47,144.00

Infectious diseases place an enormous toll on public health, societies, and
economies across the world. Effective control of an infectious disease is made
challenging by complex disease dynamics, limited resources, and the need to
continually adapt interventions to the evolving status of an epidemic. Driven by
widespread recognition of the potential of big data, recent technological
advances have made it possible to collect, curate, and access heterogeneous data
on the evolution of an infectious disease in real-time. In light of recent and
anticipated advances in big data, this project envisions that future management
of infectious diseases will rely on knowledge-transfer systems that map real-
time, heterogeneous data streams to recommendations for policy-makers managing
an infectious disease. These recommendations might identify subgroups in the
population that should be given highest priority for interventions or other
resource allocations. However, science is years away from creating such a system
as its implementation will require significant innovations in disease modeling,
data-driven decision making, computing, and optimization. This award supports
initiation of a collaborative research project that takes critical first steps
toward these innovations by creating a blueprint for using big data and
precision medicine to inform management of an infectious disease.

The proposed research will develop a novel class of dynamical systems models
that identifies subgroups in the population with homogeneous disease dynamics.
Parameters indexing these models are estimated using maximum likelihood; then,
by computing draws from the sampling distribution of these parameters, we apply
Thompson sampling and model-based policy-search algorithms from precision
medicine to identify optimal resource allocations to manage the spread of an
epidemic. The proposed research bridges dynamical systems models with subgroup
identification and data-driven resource allocation. This will create new
knowledge and new lines of research in applied mathematics, statistics, and
computer science. This award is supported by the National Institutes of Health
Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in partnership with the National Science
Foundation Division of Mathematical Sciences.