* 1557290
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Outcomes in Texas
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ann Cavallo, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,994.00

In the 2010 National Research Council's report, Preparing Teachers: Building
Evidence for Sound Policy, areas related to STEM teacher preparation that lacked
a sufficient research base were highlighted. This Noyce Track 4A research
project will engage eight universities in Texas in a collaborative research
study of the characteristics of Noyce pre-service teacher programs related to
effective recruitment, preparation, and retention. The University of Houston,
Stephen F. Austin State University, the University of Houston-Clear Lake, the
University of Houston-Downtown, the University of Texas at Austin, the
University of Texas at Arlington, Texas State University, and Texas A&amp;M
University-Kingsville will collaborate to promote rigorous evaluation of
components of their respective Noyce STEM pre-service education programs. The
institutions in the partnership represent a broad array of programs encompassing
differences in characteristics such as setting (rural vs. urban), disciplinary
focus (e.g., mathematics, general STEM education), and students recruited into
the program (undergraduates, post-baccalaureate students, career changers). In
addition, they vary in implementation methodology and program components.
Through this research partnership, these programs will collect and share data,
collaborating with the University of Houston's Institute for Educational Policy
Research and Evaluation (IEPRE) and the Center for Research, Evaluation, and
Advancement of Teacher Education (CREATE), a multi-system consortium comprised
of fifty-six teacher education institutions across Texas, to enable a large
study that will allow for investigation of components leading to increasing the
number of effective STEM teachers in high-need classrooms. In particular, data
sharing between the programs and CREATE, which provides access to administrative
data regarding teacher movement and data connecting classroom teachers to
student achievement, will facilitate connection of program characteristics to
teacher effectiveness, movement, and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This eight
institution collaborative partnership will seek to answer the following four
broad research questions: 1) Among participants in implemented Noyce programs,
what are the characteristics of the associated university-based programs? 2) For
teacher candidates who enter and remain in the teaching profession, how do Noyce
and non-Noyce participants compare with respect to a variety of individual and
receiving campus characteristics? 3) Relative to their non-participating peers,
to what extent and in what ways does teacher participation in Noyce-based
preparation have subsequent influence on K-12 student academic performance? and
4) How are state policies influencing recruiting and retaining teachers? These
questions will be addressed through both qualitative and quantitative methods,
including descriptive analysis of interviews, geographic information system
(GIS) mapping, event history analysis, and propensity score analysis to create
matched samples of Noyce and non-Noyce prepared teachers that are similar on
baseline characteristics to enable comparison of measures of teacher
effectiveness. The final question will be addressed through policy analysis.
This unique research partnership that joins several Noyce programs in a single
state will provide a model for evaluating provider practices from retention
through induction to identify program components promoting effective
recruitment, training, and retention of STEM teachers in high needs schools. The
results of this multi-institutional study will have the potential to inform
teacher education programs across the country, particularly related to
recruiting, preparing, and retaining teachers of STEM disciplines who teach
students in high need settings, as well as policies that enhance or inhibit
this.