* 1557324
* Regulatory and Functional Characterization of Modular Photoprotective Proteins in the Context of Cyanobacterial Ecology and Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Cheryl Kerfeld, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,124,328.00

Photosynthetic organisms convert light energy to chemical energy in the process
of photosynthesis. However, absorption of light in excess of that which can be
used for photosynthesis can lead to light-induced damage. Thus, photoprotective
mechanisms have evolved in photosynthetic organisms to deal with excess light
absorption or stressful conditions, including fluctuating light. Photoprotective
mechanisms used by cyanobacteria have only recently begun to be characterized. A
key factor involved in cyanobacterial photoprotection is the Orange Carotenoid
Protein (OCP) that works together with the Fluorescence Recovery Protein (FRP)
to convert excess light energy to heat to protect the photosynthetic reaction
centers from photodamage, thereby maintaining photosynthetic efficiency and
productivity. The proposed work will contribute to a greater understanding of
the range of variants of these proteins that are present in ecologically
distinct cyanobacteria. In addition to training students and postdoctoral
scientists in diverse methods, broader impacts of the research include
understanding the mechanisms used by cyanobacteria to protect themselves from
excess light absorption and associated light-induced damage. Such knowledge will
enhance efforts to increase the efficiency of light capture and reduce
photodamage in bioenergy or production strains of cyanobacteria. The project
also includes structured mentoring in hands-on research for undergraduates from
groups underrepresented in the sciences and participation in an annual
Microbiology Day at a local science museum targeting primary and middle school
students.

In contrast to those of plants, the photoprotective mechanisms of cyanobacteria
have only recently begun to be characterized. One of the most prevalent, the
OCP/FRP (Orange Carotenoid Protein/Fluorescence Recovery Protein) system
responds to high light by dissipating excess energy captured by the light
harvesting antenna (phycobilisome or PBS). The OCP is a soluble, 35 kDa protein
that binds a single carotenoid molecule. It is the only known photoactive
protein that uses a carotenoid as its sole chromophore. The absorption of blue-
green light causes the OCP to convert from a dark stable orange form, OCPO, to a
light-activated red form, OCPR. OCPR directly participates in photoprotection by
binding to the PBS. Recovery from the energy-dissipative state is catalyzed by
the FRP. Structurally, the OCP consists of two domains, one serving as a
sensor/regulatory domain whereas the other functions directly in energy
dissipation. We have identified a family of paralogous genes encoding the
separate domains in Fremyella diplosiphon and hypothesize that they reflect the
evolution of the OCP and that they provide flexibility in tuning photoprotection
in Fremyella under dynamic environmental conditions. A combination of in vivo
approaches in Fremyella and in vitro analysis of the isolated proteins will be
used in conjunction with bioinformatics to test these hypotheses. In addition to
training students and postdoctoral scientists in diverse methods, broader
impacts of the research include an in-depth understanding of the flexibility of
photoprotective mechanisms that may be useful in bioengineering of
cyanobacteria.