* 1557430
* Collaborative Research: Physiological Plasticity and Response of Benthic Foraminifera to Oceanic Deoxygenation
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Joan Bernhard, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 765,834.00

With the current expansion of oxygen-depleted habitats in oceans around the
world, the capacity for organisms to adapt and persist in such conditions will
be essential to sustain life. Single-celled organisms called foraminifera
present a unique and relevant opportunity in which to study the physiological
response of marine life to oxygen-depletion. Additionally, given the ability to
modify their metabolism under changing environments and because fossil
foraminifera are used extensively for interpretations of historical climate
conditions, an improved understanding of their physiological responses will
bolster our ability to understand past, and predict future, responses to
environmental change in Earth's oceans. This collaborative project also includes
education and outreach activities. Along with providing partial financial and
full training support to two Postdoctoral Investigators, at least three
undergraduate students will gain first-hand oceanographic experience by joining
a research cruise. We also plan to recruit an undergraduate student from an
underrepresented group to join the project for a summer internship. Lastly, a
Science-through-Art collaboration will produce a traveling art exhibition
depicting the plight of marine species living in low-oxygen settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify how the integrative genetic,
metabolic, and physiological response of foraminifera allows their survival
under environmentally induced fluctuations in oxygen. The goal is to determine
the physiological and metabolic responses of ecophysiologically distinct
foraminifera to oxygen availability. In sediments that range from oxic to
dysoxic to anoxic to sulfidic, three foraminiferal species will be investigated.
Initially, a single-cell genomic analysis will reveal their physiological and
metabolic potential. Identifying the metabolic functions encoded within the
genome will enable predictions regarding their physiological response to
changing molecular oxygen conditions, and allow for comparisons of the metabolic
potential between these different ecotypes. Subsequent experimental conditions
will specifically test and validate the genome-enabled predictions of the
adaptations to changing oxygen concentrations. Integrating the genomic data with
physiological and chemical measurements, models will be constructed to represent
the metabolic activities of the holobionts under different oxygen regimes and
geochemistry. These models will elucidate the metabolic mechanisms that
contribute to the adaptation of foraminifera under aerated, dysoxic, anoxic, and
euxinic conditions, and the predicted changes in key C, N, O, and S metabolic
pathways will be further evaluated using qPCR analyses and physiological assays.
Hypotheses will be addressed with these objectives: 1) Determine the
physiological and metabolic potential of foraminifera under different oxygen
regimes; 2) Identify the metabolic responses of each species incubated under
different oxygen regimes, following periodic and extended exposure, and; 3)
Define the impact of oxidative stress and ROS production on the health and
physiology of the different foraminifera under different oxygen regimes.