* 1557595
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach Towards Understanding Iron Uptake in Marine Eukaryotic Phytoplankton
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Mark Hildebrand, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2019
* USD 210,032.00

Marine algae are responsible for about half of the annual removal of carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere through photosynthesis, but their ability to do so
is often hampered by low iron availability. Exactly how different species
compete with each other for this iron is poorly understood. This project uses
state-of-the-art methods to evaluate whether one well established mechanism in
brewer's yeast may also be operating in marine diatoms or whether these
organisms use novel, previously undescribed, mechanisms for iron uptake. The
collection of massive data sets on thousands of proteins will reveal proteins
that are turned on in response to low iron conditions, and newly emerging
genetic tools will allow us to robustly test which proteins could be directly
responsible for iron uptake. This will dramatically improve the understanding of
these ecologically important organisms. More broadly speaking, this may lead to
a better understanding of iron uptake in other related organisms, which include
human and agricultural pathogens. The investigators will work closely with high
school students from under-represented groups and engage them in STEM activities
tightly linked to the project. Hands on experiments will be conducted to
communicate the concepts of nutrient uptake, using lakes across an urban-rural
gradient as the classroom. Additional exercises will introduce students to the
cutting-edge approaches that identify thousands of proteins. Select HS students
will work in the investigator's laboratories. The attitudes and perceptions of
these students will be evaluated to gauge the effect of the experience on their
understanding of, and desire to engage in, STEM disciplines.

The chromalveolates, which include diatoms and haptophytes, are the most
successful and biogeochemically significant eukaryotic phytoplankton in the
contemporary ocean. The evidence for iron (Fe) limitation in the oceans has led
to an emphasis to understand how phytoplankton compete for and acquire Fe, but
this is in its adolescence (diatoms) or infancy (Phaeocystis). This work will
resolve long-standing controversies regarding the mechanisms of Fe uptake in a
model diatom, T. pseudonana, and the haptophyte Phaeocystis globosa. Objectives
include to quantify the proteomes of these species grown under low and high Fe
(with recent advances in proteomic methodology), further utilize robust emergent
reverse genetics tools to evaluate the localization of key proteins and couple
these approaches with kinetics to determine which proteins and redox states are
important for Fe uptake. MS^E-based proteomics with ion mobility spectrometry,
ideally suited for quantifying cell surface proteins, will be used. Then, for T.
pseudonana, knockdown and over-expression clones will be used to confirm
localization and test phenotypic responses under varied conditions. Fe uptake
and Fe(II) production rates by these clones will help determine which proteins
and Fe redox states are important for Fe uptake. Manipulations of gene
expression for putative diatom Fe acquisition proteins will be emphasized to
address specific hypotheses, but these approaches may also be adapted to take
advantage of any novel proteins derived from proteomics. Full participation of
under-represented minorities in STEM disciplines will be realized at various
educational levels, and the success of these efforts with HS students will be
evaluated.