* 1557527
* Exosomal Trafficking in Xenopus Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Michael Danilchik, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2020
* USD 650,000.00

Development of the embryonic body plan is a complex process, requiring
integration of autonomous cellular activities with both local and long-range
intercellular signaling to specify various tissues and organs. This project
investigates whether the early embryo uses extracellular microvesicles
(exosomes), as tissue-specifying signaling agents. Exosomes are a recently
discovered class of small, membrane-bound particles secreted from cells. It is
now known that exosomes carry proteins involved with cell-cell recognition and
signaling on their surfaces, and also that they contain microRNAs and mRNAs with
the potential to alter gene expression patterns of cells receiving them. The
ability of exosomes secreted from one cell type to "reprogram" other cells at a
distance has been demonstrated in tissue culture, but whether this exciting
property is utilized during normal embryonic development is not known. The
current project investigates this possibility by pursuing the observation that
blood formation requires exosomes. The goals of this research are to investigate
the cell biology of exosomal exchange in during embryogenesis in frogs. The
project will address whether qualitative or quantitative changes in the exosomal
proteins occur during early development? Which tissues secrete exosomes? Are
specific tissues in the early frog embryo targeted by exosomes; if so, how do
those tissues respond? Can altering the secretion or specificity of exosome
uptake alter embryonic blood development? Answering these questions will advance
the nascent, rapidly growing field of exosomal cell biology, and expand our
understanding of the repertoire of signaling mechanisms used by embryonic cells
early in normal development. Many aspects of this research present excellent
hands-on opportunities for students and trainees at all levels, and thus can
serve as a critical starting point or advancement step for developing careers in
biology or biomedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the novel
hypothesis that the early Xenopus embryo uses extracellular microvesicles,
specifically exosomes, for embryonic tissue patterning. Exosomes have recently
been recognized as potent conveyors of membrane-associated signaling ligands and
receptors, functional microRNAs and mRNAs, but most such demonstrations have
been in limited tissue-culture situations. Recent work demonstrated that an
extracellular compartment in the intact early Xenopus embryo is highly enriched
with exosomes. Mass spectroscopic proteomic analysis confirms an abundance of
exosomal markers, and electron microscopy confirms an abundance of particles in
the size range typical of exosomes. Embryos reared deprived of microvesicles
develop with a characteristic set of morphological defects, particularly a
profound reduction in hematopoiesis, suggesting a fundamental role for exosome-
dependent signaling during tissue specification steps of early development. This
significant cell-biological activity has not previously been explored in a
vertebrate embryo, so the goals of this project are to characterize exosomes,
including the time course of their appearance, their cargo and the surface
proteins that potentially define their tissue target specificity. This
information will be used to develop probes and reagents to investigate their
tissue origins and potential tissue targets.