* 1557350
* Noyce Professional Engagement for Educators in Mathematics &amp; Science Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joshua Premo, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,050,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, Utah Valley University (UVU), in partnership with two-year
institution Snow College, will implement a Phase 2 project to assist high-need
school districts in Utah schools with addressing a critical shortage in
mathematics and science teachers. During the 5-year period, UVU will award 65
scholarships of $10,000 to approximately 45 talented juniors and seniors
majoring in mathematics, biology, or earth science. Recruitment efforts will
include high school students in concurrent enrollment programs and members of
groups typically underrepresented as mathematics and science educators. Through
a strong pre-service training and in-service support program focused on
professional engagement, recipients will be well-prepared to teach in high-need
school districts and inspire a new generation of students in mathematics and
science disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will build on UVU's
previous successful Noyce Scholarship program to increase the number of 7th-12th
grade STEM teachers in Utah by: (1) providing scholarship support to additional
cohorts of talented science and mathematics majors; (2) conducting longitudinal
evaluation and research activities on previous and new cohorts of scholarship
recipients; and (3) expanding outreach efforts to Snow College and to UVU's
Community College Division. Program activities will focus around cultivating a
community of teachers and scholars, including participation in state and
national professional organizations through which novice teachers work with
practicing educators to energize their efforts and help them succeed in their
early years of teaching and beyond.