* 1557186
* RCN: Coastal Rainforest Margins Research Network - understanding materials flux in linked terrestrial and marine ecosystems in the face of climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2023
* USD 498,970.00

Coastal margins are dynamic zones at the interface between land and ocean, where
fresh water and nutrients, like carbon, iron and nitrogen, flow downstream from
coastal watersheds into the nearshore marine environment. The links between
terrestrial and marine ecosystems are especially tight in the coastal temperate
rainforests of Alaska and British Columbia. Abundant rainfall moves nutrients
held in glaciers, dense forests, and wetlands to estuaries and fjords,
supporting productive fisheries and robust marine mammal populations. This
region includes the largest remaining old-growth forests in North America; has
among the highest rates of glacier melt on the planet; supports billion-dollar
fishing and tourism industries; and is home to tens of thousands of people who
depend on natural resources for their livelihoods. Because the movement of fresh
water and nutrients plays a key role in these linked ecosystems, climate-driven
changes in this flow may impact coastal ecosystems and the human communities
that depend on them. The Coastal Rainforest Margins Research Network is an
international research collaborative that will facilitate a better understanding
of these processes and impacts. This Network will establish a core community of
scientists and stakeholders to function as an information and guidance resource
for ecosystem management and community adaptation into the future. An improved
understanding of this ecosystem will help build resilience in local communities
and ecosystems in a warming and increasingly variable climate. Additionally, it
will provide a foundation for understanding climate-driven changes within
coastal temperate rainforests and coastal margins
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Coastal Rainforest Margins Research Network
will be composed of research communities organized within key disciplines,
including hydrology, forest ecology, soil science, biogeochemistry, and near-
shore marine ecology. These disciplinary communities will address critical
information gaps, develop regional collaborations, and synthesize knowledge
regarding water, carbon, and nutrient fluxes in a landscape where intense
transformations and rapid transfers between terrestrial and freshwater
environments control the delivery of these materials to the coastal ocean. The
Network will achieve these goals through three main activities: 1) structured
information exchanges among Network participants, including regular
teleconferences, research webinars, field site visits, web-hosted meetings, and
annual multi-day workshops that bring the entire Network together; 2) creation
of working groups to develop data collection, management and sharing protocols;
and 3) development of outreach products useful to Network members as well as
policy-makers and resource managers.