* 1557163
* SG: Ecological Drivers of Life History Shifts in Invasive Social Wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Erin Wilson Rankin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2020
* USD 149,929.00

Invasive species are one of the main drivers of global environmental change.
Consequently, there is growing interest in understanding how invaders damage
ecosystems and in developing management strategies to minimize their effects.
Through manipulative field experiments and native-introduced range comparisons,
this research will investigate how and when invasive yellowjackets express
variation in their life cycle, specifically, whether their colonies die back
(senescence) each year, or are perennial colonies. This project contributes to
understanding of life cycle variation in insects, how such flexibility mediates
ecological processes at the landscape scale, and what factors interact to
influence perenniality. The research will help inform predictions as to how
impacts of species invasions may respond to climate change. Furthermore, this
project will provide insights into transmission of common diseases of wasps and
their bee prey. As yellowjackets can be public nuisances, revealing the causes
of perenniality may lead to the development of control methods that prevent the
emergence of perenniality in this species and potentially in other species. In
addition to providing research opportunities for undergraduates, the researchers
will develop an educational activity on invasive social insects for K-6 children
about the biology and potential hazards posed by social
wasps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on invasive social wasps that
have structural effects on the ecosystems that they invade. These wasps express
plasticity in key life history traits (e.g. annual or perennial colony
phenology), which greatly magnifies their ecological impacts. The researchers
explicitly test how ecological and climatic factors interact to affect shifts in
invader life history traits and ultimately modify invasion impacts. Specifically
this research investigates how yellowjacket foraging behavior and colony
phenology shift in response to diet subsidies, artificial warming of the nest to
simulate mild climate, or both subsidies and artificial warming. Coupling such
manipulations with landscape-scale prey population sampling, this project also
quantifies subsequent invasion impacts on native prey. These experiments will
provide insights as to how yellowjackets may respond to changes in pollinator
populations and climate change. Furthermore, researchers will determine whether
wasp consumption of honey bees influences pathogen load; this is particularly
important as honey bee pathogens are increasingly detected in non-honey bee
species. Pathogen screening will help distinguish whether (a) wasps increase
their pathogen load by consuming bees, (b) whether wasps transmit pathogens
through predation and raiding of beehives, and (c) identify differences in
pathology between annual and perennial colonies. Understanding the factors
affecting life history is vital for predicting how trait evolution or plasticity
may respond to future global climate change.