* 1557499
* Neural Bases of Song Preference and Reproductive Behavior in a Female Songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Kostas Daniilidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2020
* USD 800,000.00

For many decades, neuroscientists and evolutionary biologists have been
interested in the mechanics and function of the songbird's "song system": the
interconnected neural circuit that connects the higher-order auditory areas in
the brain with the motor circuits in the brainstem that drive behavior. This
work predominantly has focused on how the song system allows male songbirds to
learn and produce song. The role of this circuit in female songbirds, which do
not sing, has largely been ignored. Rather than acting as a circuit that
generates vocal behavior, this work investigates the hypothesis that the "song
system" in females serves to organize preferences for males' songs and guides
their behavioral reactions to song in the form of a copulation solicitation
display that ensures survival of the species. The project capitalize on the
robustness, selectivity, and social malleability of the copulatory behavior in
the brown-headed cowbird, to investigate how the song system transforms a
sensory stimulus (the song) into a motor command that controls a postural
response. The project also provides opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students to engage in interdisciplinary research, and it includes science
education activities aimed at elementary school children as well as a
comprehensive summer course in neuroscience for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work integrates disparate fields of
science, including neuroscience, behavior, and engineering to provide unique
insight into the evolution of neural circuits that control behavior. In the
first aim, the investigators use a combination of classic pathway tracing
techniques and recently developed transsynaptic tracer (vesicular stomatitis
virus) to map the connectivity from the forebrain to the individual muscle
groups that are activated during the production of a copulation solicitation
display (CSD). In the second aim, the investigators record neural activity in
forebrain song control nuclei HVC and RA during the production of CSD in female
cowbirds to quantify the nature of the forebrain motor commands that control
this highly selective sexual behavior. To evaluate the relationship between
recorded neural activity patterns and the behavior, we will use a computer
vision approach to quantify the copulatory behavior. In the final aim of the
proposal, the investigators record neural responses to song in higher-order
auditory forebrain areas (NCM, NIf, CM) within the context of CSD production.
These experiments serve to test the hypothesis that these forebrain areas, which
have known projections to song control nuclei, encode song valence and provide a
direct link between song quality and the females' behavioral response. The
neural and behavioral data will be made available at public internet site
dedicated to Song Bird Science.