* 1557045
* LTREB: Genetic analysis of metapopulation processes in the Silene-microbotryum host-pathogen system
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Janis Antonovics, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 449,999.00

In nature, populations of organisms are generally clustered into distinct
patches that, over time, exchange migrants and perhaps suffer extinction and
later recolonization. The genetic consequences of this dynamic population
fragmentation has been studied in theory, but experimental studies have lagged
behind because of the large quantity of long-term data that are required. The
proposed research will close this gap using nearly three decades of data
collected from hundreds of populations of a plant (white campion) and an
associated disease (anther smut). With these data, we will be able to follow the
genetics of local populations as they are born, exchange migrants, and possibly
go extinct. These observations are important for understanding how genetics
affects extinction and colonization success. More broadly, understanding the
dynamics of interconnected populations is fundamental to predicting how disease
outbreaks can occur from local patches, how invasive species spread, or how the
genetics of species can be altered when they are rare or occur in fragmented
habitats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of the proposed research is
to follow the process of extinction and colonization in interconnected
populations and study how these processes create and destroy genetic diversity.
This proposal builds on a now 28-year study of the numerical dynamics of Silene
latifolia (white campion) and its pathogen Microbotryum violaceum (anther smut).
This project uses a long-term population genetic approach to characterize
numerous colonization and extinction events and to follow populations through
time. Methods used will include long-term monitoring (eventually more than over
800 populations for &gt;30 yrs) and continued genetic sampling (eventually
&gt;15yrs). High throughput genomic studies of Silene populations will provide
unprecedented resolution of changes in genetic divergence, the parentage of
newly established populations, gene flow during population expansion or
contraction, the genetic consequences of seed banks and the importance of
inbreeding and genetic rescue for population persistence. Also, broad
demographic shifts have occurred during the course of this study, opening up the
potential to explore the population genetics of non-equilibrium systems of both
the host plant and the disease. The Silene/Microbotryum system has become a
model for numerous labs, and this research will provide a publicly available
long-term data set of demographic and genomic data, living collections, and DNA
samples. This study will provide scientific training in timely important fields
of ecology, genomics, bioinformatics, and computational biology.