* 1557987
* Basal Ganglia Activity Timing Underlying Habitual Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kyle Smith, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,093,400.00

Habits are a part of all animal life. Despite their ubiquity, it remains poorly
understood how habits are formed and maintained in the brain. This research
project will study how habits are represented in brain activity and how changing
that activity can change habits. Science generally lacks an understanding of how
fluctuating patterns of brain activity control behaviors like habits because,
until recently, tools were not available to manipulate those brain patterns.
Using cutting-edge techniques to do so, this work tests a central hypothesis
that habits are controlled by the timing of brain activity related to when a
habit is initiated and executed. Specifically, prior studies have uncovered a
burst of brain activity as a behavior starts that correlates with how habitual
the behavior is. This research evaluates how this pattern arises in the brain
and whether it controls how habitual a behavior is by using tools to both
monitor and manipulate the brain at the sub-second time-scale. Results will
provide a rich understanding of how habits arise out of precisely timed bursts
of brain activity. As part of this project, the cutting-edge research techniques
are taught to undergraduate neuroscience students, which is a vital but lacking
ingredient in their education. These techniques, and the brain basis of habits
in general, also are taught to grade-schools and the public through outreach
activities to convey progress science is making on understanding habits.
Underrepresented individuals participate in all aspects of the research and
outreach.

In the brain, the dorsolateral striatum (DLS) and its dopamine input from the
substantia nigra have long been implicated in habits. Neural recording studies
have uncovered an activity pattern in these areas that characterizes habits,
which involves a spiking burst at the start of behavior and diminished spiking
mid-behavior. These dynamics suggest that it is the timing of brain activity
that helps dictate whether or not a learned behavior occurs habitually. To test
this, rats are exposed to lever-pressing and maze-running tasks that provide a
screen of behavioral measures for habits. Activity in the DLS is recorded using
electrodes as animals form habits and then modify them. Using optogenetics, in
which DLS activity can be manipulated using pulses of light, the strength of the
DLS activity is manipulated and consequences on habitual behavior and ongoing
DLS dynamics assessed. The first and second objectives are to test if the
strength of DLS activity at the start of a behavior is sufficient and necessary
for that behavior to be expressed as a habit and for habit-related DLS activity
to be maintained over time. The third objective is to test if start-related
activity of dopamine input to the DLS is also critical for habits and for the
start-related DLS activity that represents habits. Collectively, this work
answers a long-standing question of how step-to-step fluctuations in DLS
activity guide a behavior towards habitual expression and will merge isolated
behavioral and neuroscience approaches to do so.