* 1557396
* Collaborative Noyce Border Scholars Project along the Arizona-Mexico Border
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Henrietta Kralovec, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,446,892.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the University of Arizona South/Cochise College Noyce
Border Scholars project will recruit 36 recent undergraduates in STEM
disciplines and 18 STEM professionals, and prepare them to become secondary and
middle-school STEM teachers. In this project, the University of Arizona South
(UAS) will be collaborating with 13 high-need school districts along the
Arizona-Mexico border. The total student population is 35,000 in these
districts. Utilizing such innovative professional development pathways as field
experiences at University of Arizona's Biosphere 2, Math Teacher's Circles, and
monthly Teacher Education Seminars, the project will improve STEM education
within underserved border school districts and will provide insights that may be
extended to similar border and rural settings around the nation. Scholars will
receive the support of university coaches to provide guidance and support. The
Noyce Border Scholars project will increase the number of highly qualified STEM
teachers in border schools, with an emphasis on underrepresented minority
teachers, encourage more STEM professionals to enter the profession, provide
targeted teacher preparation through a redesigned Intern Certification track of
the UAS M.Ed. program, support new teachers throughout a two-year induction
period, with high quality professional development in STEM, and contribute to
the body of research on innovation in teacher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With its focus on culturally relevant
professional development in support of culturally relevant teaching, the project
will further develop the field of context-specific teacher education for STEM
teachers in rural and border schools, address the critical shortage of STEM
teachers in border area schools, advance knowledge through context-specific
teacher education, and help to build the infrastructure of border schools to
recruit and retain ethnically diverse and culturally competent STEM teachers.
The project's emphasis on integrating research and education, backed with
culturally competent pedagogy, will provide communities with teachers armed with
the skills to impart the appreciation of STEM to their students. Societal
benefits will include advancing student potential in a region characterized by
poverty, a prevalence of English learners, and low educational achievement
levels. Findings will be disseminated in publications and presentations reaching
STEM educators in other underserved regions, and curricula and techniques will
be shared with other professionals in teacher education programs, especially
those that serve border and rural school districts. The project's intellectual
merits will build on the successful teacher preparation program of the
University of Arizona South's Transition to Teaching program. Throughout the
life of the project, Noyce Border Scholars will report increased STEM content
knowledge, increased knowledge and skills related to teaching in a multicultural
environment, and increased STEM teaching self-efficacy, thereby improving the
teaching environment in the culturally varied, economically challenged areas
served by partner school districts.