* 1557232
* Integrated geological, geophysical, and hydrological study of field-scale fault-zone cementation and permeability
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* John Wilson, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 567,594.00

Because faults can be barriers to underground fluid flow, they influence
groundwater supply, contaminant transport, petroleum production, and underground
waste storage. Natural cements commonly precipitate along fault zones; these
cements can dramatically inhibit fluid flow across a fault. However, determining
the distribution of fault zone cements is difficult. As a result, fault-zone
cementation is typically not accounted for in estimates of the impact of faults
on fluid flow. This study aims to take advantage of unique electrical properties
of natural cements to characterize the three-dimensional spatial distribution of
cement for an exceptionally well-exposed fault zone. Then, the hypothesis that
the degree and continuity of fault-zone cementation is a key control on fluid
flow will be tested by drawing water from wells adjacent to the fault. The
results of this project can be applied to better understand contaminant
transport in faulted aquifers, the characterization of hydrocarbon reservoirs,
and induced seismicity associated with wastewater injection. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved with all stages of the project, which will
enhance education for underrepresented minorities at New Mexico Tech (NMT), a
Hispanic-serving institution with a focus on science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. In addition, the geophysical equipment and
groundwater wells used in this project will be long-lasting teaching resources
both for NMT and for summer field courses sponsored by other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to
characterize field-scale permeability across a fault and link the hydrogeologic
behavior of the fault to spatial variations in the degree of fault-zone
cementation. The central hypotheses are: 1) there are more pronounced variations
in the degree of cementation down-dip than along the strike of the fault because
the up/down-section variations in grain size are larger than those along strike,
and 2) extensive cementation does not reduce cross-fault permeability at the
field-scale (i.e. the de facto hypothesis for hydrogeologic models that neglect
the potential effects of fault-zone cementation). The proposed project
comprises: 1) characterizing the degree and extent of cementation along the
surface exposure of the fault; 2) collecting resistivity and chargeability data
in transects across the fault, deriving empirical relationships between the
degree of fault-zone cementation and normalized chargeability for shallow
portions of the fault, and using those relationships to map the estimated degree
of cementation for deeper portions of the fault; 3) coring the fault at depth to
confirm the degree of cementation; and 4) conducting well tests to determine
permeability across the fault in both strongly- and weakly-cemented sections.
The study will generate geologically based geophysical observations, providing a
unique 3D map of cementation patterns from the land surface to ~30 m depth, in
transects covering &gt;700 m along the strike of the Loma Blanca fault.
Interpreting well tests across the fault in the context provided by the geologic
and geophysical observations will allow for the development of a holistic view
of fault-zone permeability, improving predictive models of the hydrogeologic
impacts of faults.&lt;br/&gt;