* 1557397
* The Milwaukee Master Teacher Partnership
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Craig Berg, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,372,870.00

This Noyce Master Teaching Fellowship project will address the need for
sustained, content-focused professional development for teams of secondary
mathematics and science teachers in Milwaukee Public Schools. The project will
include pathways for master teachers to (a) build content knowledge for teaching
in focused areas of mathematics and science, (b) implement research-based best
pedagogical practices to improve student learning, and (c) develop teams to
design and conduct action research projects that lead to iterative cycles of
professional development. The master teachers will acquire micro-credentials
across three levels in content or pedagogical topic (such as the design of
meaningful science lab experiences, or the teaching of statistics in high school
mathematics courses), mentoring and
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acknowledging that the Wisconsin Strategic Plan
identifies an ongoing professional skills gap for teachers across the state and
that over 60% of the school districts in Wisconsin are currently designated as
high-needs districts in mathematics and science, this project will create
alternative incentives for the development of master teachers, which can be
adapted by school systems across the state. A unique feature of this project is
that the master teachers will be encouraged to customize their own professional
development throughout the micro-credentialing process, making the teachers'
voice central to all of the training activities. Moreover, the credentialing
processes for leadership and mentoring have been designed to require master
teachers to work with other teachers in their schools or districts on action
research projects. The products of these activities are expected to be modular,
transportable, and replicable so that the master teachers will be able to
conduct similar activities with other groups of teachers, further extending the
impact of the project. Project evaluation will serve to provide documentation of
the extent to which the project's core activities occur as intended, collect
formative and summative feedback on the fellows' experiences with project
activities, and provide research support, which may include assistance with
instrument or rubric development or provision of a reliability check on coding
for a sample of data.