* 1557838
* Collaborative Research: Hydrodynamic and Muscular Mechanical Investigation of Maneuverability in Cephalopods throughout Ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Joseph Thompson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 273,039.00

Squids and cuttlefishes are impressive swimmers, having the ability to hover,
change direction rapidly, and even swim forward and backward with ease. The key
to their locomotive prowess is coordination among their pulsed jet, flapping
fins, and flexible arms, but little is presently known about how these units
work together throughout these animals' lives as they encounter different
physical environments, change developmentally, and experience dissimilar
ecosystems. This project focuses on understanding how the jet, fins, and arms
operate in concert to produce the necessary forces for exceptional turning, both
in terms of muscle capabilities and hydrodynamics, in squid and cuttlefish of
different developmental stages (hatchlings to adults). This work will involve
cutting edge 3D flow visualization approaches, high-speed video analysis, and
advanced mathematical tools that highlight the essential components of high-
performance turns. This project promises to (1) advance our understanding of how
highly maneuverable marine animals navigate through their complex habitats and
(2) reveal key performance characteristics, structures, and behaviors that can
be integrated potentially into the design of mechanical bio-inspired systems,
such as autonomous underwater vehicles, to improve their turning/docking
capabilities. This project incorporates a number of outreach projects, including
demonstrations in local schools, participation in robotics competitions,
development of web-based tutorials and summer camps, and presentations at
aquariums and museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maneuvering in the aquatic
environment is a significant component of routine swimming, with proficient
maneuvering being essential for predator avoidance, prey capture, and
navigation. Despite its importance, understanding of the biomechanics of
maneuvering behaviors is limited. An investigation of maneuvering performance in
three morphologically distinct species of cephalopods is proposed here. The
investigation explores three broad questions: (1) how are the fins, arms, and
funnel-jet complex used in concert to maximize turning performance in adult
cephalopods; (2) do the relative importance of turning rate and turning radius
change over ontogeny and are fewer turning modes observed in young cephalopods;
and (3) do fin, arm, and funnel musculoskeletal mechanics change over ontogeny
and are such changes associated with differences in maneuvering? These questions
will be addressed by collecting measurements of 3D high-speed kinematics and
2D/3D hydrodynamics of wake flows; performing mathematical analyses to
quantitatively identify and categorize turning patterns; and measuring both the
dynamic passive and active length-force relationship and maximum shortening
velocity of muscle fibers that drive the movements used during turning and jet
vectoring. The proposed work will: (1) provide data on how an ecologically
important marine animal coordinates its novel dual-mode system (jet and fins)
and arms to achieve high turning performance, (2) highlight the essential
kinematic and hydrodynamic elements of turns, (3) offer insights into how
maneuvering capabilities change over a broad ontogenetic range, and (4) provide
novel data on the muscle properties of muscular hydrostatic organs and their
role in turning.