* 1557593
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Interactive Ensemble clustering for mixed data with application to mood disorders
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2017
* David Gotz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 21,500.00

The Big Data era has given rise to data of unprecedented size and complexity.
However, fully leveraging Big Data resources for knowledge and discovery is an
open challenge due to the fact that conventional methods of data processing and
analysis often fail or are inappropriate. This project develops an innovative
approach that utilizes Big Data to improve the classification of mood disorders
for the purpose of improving diagnosis and outcomes for psychiatric patients.
Big Data issues are inherently more severe for mental disorders because of their
elusive nature. The psychiatric community has recognized the critical need for a
more precise, evidence-based approach for the diagnosis and treatment of
disease. In fact, recent studies funded by the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH) have found that psychiatric interventions were effective in less
than 25% of patients presenting with an acute episode. This low efficacy rate is
especially problematic given the prevalence of mental disorders. Mood disorders
alone (e.g., depression) will be experienced by 1 in 5 adults in the United
States at some point in their lives. This project is motivated by the hypothesis
that a more precise and personalized classification of mental health disease can
be obtained through the development of novel clustering methods that identify
clinically significant structures with these large population data sets.
However, such an approach must overcome a large number of methodological
challenges introduced by the complexity of the problem and the nature of large-
scale real-world electronic health data. These challenges include, among others,
complex and unknown structure, high dimensionality, heterogeneity, complex
mixtures of variables, missing data, and sparsity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports initiation of a collaborative research project, carried out by a
team with interdisciplinary and complimentary skill sets, to develop methods for
big data that address challenges inherent in the integration of biomedical data
of this type. Collective expertise of the team spans the areas of biomedical
informatics, biostatistics, computer and information science, electrical and
computer engineering, mathematics, and psychiatry. A novel methodology is
developed in a flexible and fully integrated framework that can be extended to
other biomedical data and diseases. Within this framework, clustering methods
that capture different aspects of relatedness in the data are integrated in a
rigorous way that not only accounts for model uncertainty, but also results in
an interactive visualization that is accessible with strong model
interpretability for the non-expert. Specifically, the methodology will rely on
novel modifications to bootstrap estimators of generalization error for the
purpose of assembling a consensus over an ensemble of clusters inferred from
topology-based and machine learning approaches. The framework also supports
iterative refinement of the consensus solution based on user input (via the
visualization) to incorporate domain expertise. The rigorous identification of
sub-groups of individuals within heterogeneous populations will facilitate
accurate and targeted diagnosis for mood disorders, and provide opportunity for
personalized evidence-based interventions. Applications focus on clustering
individuals with mood disorders (bipolar disorder and major depression) from
data collected in the Bipolar Disorder Research Network (BDRN). Despite this
focus, the methodology is generalizable to other diseases that face similar
challenges for diagnosis and treatment. In fact, this project supports the first
steps of a long-term vision of generalizing the methods to more complex and less
curated data, such as electronic health records, social media, and other
sources. This award is supported by the National Institutes of Health Big Data
to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in partnership with the National Science
Foundation Division of Mathematical Sciences.