* 1557063
* LTREB Renewal: Trajectory for the Recovery of Stream Ecosystem Structure and Function during Reforestation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Bernard Sweeney, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 07/31/2022
* USD 481,043.00

Reforestation of riparian areas is widely considered a best management practice
for restoring and improving water and habitat quality of streams and rivers
throughout the United States. Millions of dollars are invested in riparian
forest restoration each year by state, federal, and private agencies and
institutions. However, little is known about how long it takes for the physical,
chemical, and biological aspects of a stream ecosystem to be restored so that
the ecosystem can once again provide the services that humans need (i.e. it is
swimmable, fishable, drinkable). Nor is there much known about the stages that
the stream ecosystem passes through during that restoration process and the
stream?s relative functionality at each stage. This project will document the
time frames of various stages of stream ecosystem restoration, characterize the
sequence of those changes through time, and reveal whether the trajectory of
recovery of stream ecosystem structure (physical, chemical, biological)
parallels that of ecosystem function (delivery of service to humans). This
information, in turn, will help provide the technical basis for better managing
riparian corridors so that both the quantity and quality of fresh water for both
humans and wildlife can be sustained at a high level for future
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The negative effects of eliminating riparian
forest along stream ecosystems are well documented. Yet, the science of stream
ecosystem recovery to riparian forest restoration is weak at best. This project
quantifies the trajectory of stream ecosystem recovery in terms of its physical
structure, flow of energy, cycling of nutrients, and the composition of
biological communities following reforestation of meadows or pastures with
native deciduous trees. As the planted forest grows and matures, research will
focus on the time frames over which stream ecosystem variables change compared
to reference- endpoints of a mature forested- and meadow stream reach. The
project is interdisciplinary, and brings together research in fluvial
geomorphology, hydrology, biogeochemistry, organic and isotope geochemistry,
nutrient cycling, and community ecology of heterotrophic and autotrophic
microorganisms, macroinvertebrates, and fishes to describe the trajectory of
stream change as a forested riparian matures. Key research questions include:
the change over time and order of change of different biophysical variables,
such as light, temperature, channel geomorphology, bed complexity and hyporheic
zone exchange, to documenting the efficiency and magnitude of food-web
processing of organic Carbon as organic inputs change during reforestation and
the relationship between the level of ecosystem services such as Carbon and
Nitrogen processing scale and the degree of stream ecosystem restoration. The
project includes several innovative approaches including large wood debris
inventories and fate-tracking, hyporheic exchange studies, LIDAR
earth/vegetation surveys, molecular fingerprint analysis of microbial
communities, species level analysis of macroinvertebrate community structure,
fish biomass and productivity measures, and stable isotope analysis of food and
functional feeding animal groups. Ongoing and active outreach citizen based
scientists, municipal employees and farmers by Stroud researchers will allow
public participation using low cost, open source sensors deployed in the WCC
LTREB for water quality parameters.