* 1557082
* Reshaping and Modeling the Criminal Justice System through Science, Technology, and Systems Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Bruce Hoffman, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 146,057.00

SES-1557082&lt;br/&gt;Bruce Hoffman&lt;br/&gt;Ohio
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses archival materials from the
Presidents Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice (1965-67)
and interviews with commission staff to investigate the use of empirical science
and technologies of systems analysis to rationalize and reshape traditional
criminal justice practice. Regarded as a defining moment in the organization of
criminal justice and criminological science due to its creation of federal
institutions to fund criminal justice research, other contributions of the
commission have been less appreciated, including its impact on criminal justice
education by creating a disciplinary field of criminal justice distinct from
sociology and its use of systems analysis to create models of the criminal
justice process as an integrated system whose varied components were coordinated
towards the common goal of crime control. This project will conduct the first
sustained analysis of the Crime Commission, investigating how diverse visions of
crime prevention and criminal justice were introduced, negotiated, packaged, and
enacted over the course of the commission and by other groups in its immediate
aftermath; how knowledge production was shaped through organizational dynamics
between commissioners and the staff of the commissions nine task force panels;
and the specific impact of the Science and Technology Task Force, which brought
systems analysis to the field of "civil defense" and the "war on crime."
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's focus on science and technology provides a
nuanced challenge to interpretations of the commission as extending Great
Society agendas in uncomplicated ways. It explores how initial commission
concerns with poverty and social causation dropped out of the commission's
mappings and models of the criminal justice process, anticipating and shaping
subsequent approaches and policy, and helps illuminate the subsequent extension
of criminal justice technologies into everyday life. The analysis of extensive
transcripts of meetings spanning a sixteenth month period adds to our
understanding of the construction of scientific advisory reports, showing how
diverse understandings of scientific aims and political interests are negotiated
and packaged for perceived audiences. The project also serves as the last
opportunity to preserve the memories and contemporary evaluations of justice
practices by commission staff whose careers that began with the possibilities of
the Crime Commission and witnessed unprecedented transformations in criminal
justice practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based in the empirical
collection and analysis of three types of data. First, the study will use the
tools of contemporary science studies to engage in a careful textual analysis of
the public documents of the crime commission, interpreting these technical
reports as public performances through which scientific credibility is
communicated and maintained. Second, the analysis of official accounts will be
complemented by the analysis of internal accounts collected at NARA sites and
related collections. The archives are believed to contain a variety of relevant
documents, including transcripts from commission meetings, notes from advisory
panels, internal letters and memoranda, drafts of reports, and early maps and
models of the criminal justice process. Both the public documents and internal
documents will be coded using similar coding mechanisms enabling larger themes
and developments to emerge. Third, the investigator will seek to contact and
conduct audiotaped or videotaped interviews of all available staff connected
with the commission. The goal of these interviews is to collect general
perspectives of recollected operations, aspirations, and tensions within the
crime commission across multiple organizational roles and standpoints, which can
be cross-referenced with archival documents and other interviews. The
investigator will also seek to record and gain participants' insights into
previously unrecognized connections between the systems model being set forth
and the subsequent development of criminal justice and criminology, as well as
their interpretation and evaluation of later
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design an interactive
website designed for classroom use. The site will use techniques of science and
technology studies to translate the project's central themes concerning science
and the origins of the criminal justice system. At a time of heightened interest
and criticism of US policies of mass incarceration and institutionalized
criminal justice responses to racial inequality and popular protest, the project
and website serves as an important "history of the present" that contextualizes
how contemporary configurations of criminological science and criminal justice
practices emerged and illuminates alternative paths not taken. The study also
trains a team of undergraduates in archival research, the organization and
analysis of primary source documents, and the development and presentation of
research at professional meetings.