* 1557250
* Ohio STEM Teachers for 21st Century Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Lawrence Krissek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,386,421.00

This Noyce Teaching Fellows project is a collaborative effort between the Ohio
State University College of Education and Human Ecology, College of Arts and
Sciences, Columbus City Schools, and Center for Science and Industry (COSI) that
aims to produce leaders in STEM teaching for high-needs, grade 7-12 schools. The
objectives of the project are to (a) prepare 16 highly qualified STEM teacher
leaders for high-needs, urban classrooms, (b) recruit participants from
underrepresented populations, (c) develop close connections between informal
science learning venues and teachers in high-needs schools, and (d) provide
leadership training. Summer field placements at COSI will introduce the fellows
to the challenges of presenting discovery-based, hands-on learning experiences
to members of the general public, including everyone from young children to
knowledgeable adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central theme of this proposal is
extending the impact of the STEM teaching network within high-needs communities.
Thus, the fellows' training will include an Urban Teaching Seminar that
emphasizes culturally relevant pedagogy, an approach that research has shown to
be especially effective when working with high-needs learners. The central theme
will also be supported through the integration of informal learning into the
fellows' professional development activities. Through COSI, the fellows will do
summer field placements, design and implement new STEM themed Discovery Carts,
and develop summer workshops that utilize the site's resources. The task of
creating Discovery Carts will enrich the fellows' understanding of STEM topics
and allow them to participate in the informal education of high-needs community
members of all ages. Formative and summative evaluation will rely on a variety
of surveys and interviews that will investigate the fellows' expectations and
study the extent and effectiveness of their preparation. Fellows will be
assessed for content knowledge, understanding of pedagogy (the Education Teacher
Performance Assessment), and development as leaders (annual portfolio). The
investigators will prepare and submit manuscripts related to this work to
professional journals such as the Journal of Teaching and Teacher Education, The
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, the Science Educator, and The
Mathematics Educator. The project will also host a website to distribute
findings.