* 1557414
* Defining the Role of RACK1 in Ephrin Reverse Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Philip Copenhaver, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 05/31/2020
* USD 567,399.00

Developing nerve cells must often migrate through the brain to form the circuits
that control behavior, but how this process is controlled is not understood. One
group of molecules that are important for nerve cell migration (called Ephrins)
exist as multiple types in mammals, making their detailed functions difficult to
study. Taking advantage of the fact that insects (including the tobacco hornworm
Manduca used here) produce a single type of Ephrin protein, a molecule (RACK1)
that Ephrin interacts with in a major way during nerve cell development has been
identified. This project will determine how RACK1 works together with Ephrin to
regulate nerve cell migration and circuit development. The new discoveries made
during this project will provide valuable information about how Ephrins function
during nervous system development in more complex animals, including the human
brain. The project will also provide unique opportunities for undergraduate
students to learn advanced methods for investigating how specific proteins
regulate nerve cell growth. Students will conduct experiments in Manduca to test
the role of Ephrin and RACK1 in this process, and to identify other proteins
that are required for Ephrin function. The data and resources produced by this
project will be presented at major scientific conferences, published in
scientific journals, and be posted on web sites that are freely available to
other scientists and to the public. In addition, discoveries from this project
will be presented to more general audiences at the Oregon Health and Science
University Brain Fair, an interactive educational opportunity that is held
annually at the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate how type-A Ephrins (which are attached to cells by GPI
lipid anchors) can regulate the activity of intracellular tyrosine kinases in
the Src family, and how this signaling pathway controls the migratory behavior
of developing neurons. Preliminary studies indicate that the adapter protein
RACK1 (Receptor of Activated Protein Kinase C) functions as a molecular rheostat
that restricts Src signaling until MsEphrin signaling is initiated. Studies will
be carried out using a well-characterized assay of neuronal migration in
cultured Manduca embryos. Targeted manipulations of gene expression will test
whether RACK1 is essential for the activation of a specific Src kinase (Src42)
by type-A Ephrins. Biochemical assays of Src activity and Src-RACK1 interactions
will test whether RACK1 functions as both a regulator and substrate for Src42 in
this process. Time-lapse imaging and quantitative assays of neuronal migration
will be used to investigate how this signaling pathway affects specific aspects
of neuronal behavior in the developing nervous system. Similar methods will test
whether a toll family protein (Toll-7) functions as a novel co-receptor for
type-A Ephrins in this pathway. These experiments will also permit the
downstream effectors of type-A Ephrins to be identified in related projects that
will be conducted by selected undergraduate participants.