* 1557439
* Molecular Mechanism of Plant Response to Wounding: Impact of JA Catabolism
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Marcelle Siegel, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 615,462.00

Plants can perceive tissue damage inflicted by insect feeding, and they rapidly
activate several key defense responses. Jasmonate (JA) is the plant hormone that
orchestrates these defense responses and dictates an inhibition of growth for
plants under stress conditions. JA is also a powerful inducer of many
specialized metabolites that have important ecological functions. These
metabolites are also a renewable source of many high-value natural products for
human use such as nutraceuticals. This project will elucidate how JA levels are
precisely regulated to accommodate the various stress adaptive mechanisms of
plants. The long term goal of this research is to help reduce or eliminate the
need for chemical pesticides and to increase global food production through new
approaches to pest control. This research promotes a better understanding of
plant defense mechanisms, which can benefit both farmers and horticulturists.
This project seeks to improve STEM education by providing multidisciplinary
training to college students, graduates and postgraduates. Students from
traditionally underrepresented groups in science will be sought through
participation in the scientist's institutional outreach programs set up for that
purpose. A science literacy program called Sci-LiFT (Science Literacy for Future
Teachers) will be developed for students who are in training to become secondary
school science teachers. Participating students will engage in real laboratory
research on topics relevant to this project and develop a high school teaching
module. The Sci-LiFT program is expected to leave an indelible mark on program
participants and will positively impact their future teaching in secondary
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the core JA biosynthetic pathway has
been delineated, how JA biosynthesis is initiated, maintained, or terminated is
unclear. The major scientific goal of this project is to gain a better
understanding of the termination of JA signal and to investigate its role in
plant responses to wounding. Mutants were isolated that are defective in JA
catabolism, and as a result, overaccumulate JA. Highly elevated JA concentration
in these mutants was expected to constitutively activate JA-mediated defense
responses. Contrary to this expectation, the mutants displayed opposite
symptoms, becoming desensitized to JA, thus revealing an important link between
JA catabolism and the plant?s long-term responses to stress conditions. This
project will use a variety of mutants that are altered in endogenous JA profiles
to investigate the dynamic relationship between the relative levels of JA
derivatives and plant response to wounding in a well-established Arabidopsis
genetic system. The specific aims of this project are: i) to determine the roles
of JA turnover and oxidized-JA derivatives in plant response to wounding, ii) to
delineate the signaling pathways important for wound response in JA catabolic
mutants, and iii) to characterize the function of a new gene identified through
a mutant screen for JA catabolism. The proposed project has the potential to
identify previously unrecognized regulatory mechanisms of JA signaling and JA-
dependent wound responses. This project is also expected to provide new
information about how plants prioritize growth versus defense by studying the
mutants that appear to defy the growth-defense-tradeoff rule.