* 1557818
* Slowing the pace: Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Bradycardia in the Anoxic Turtle (Trachemys scripta)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jonathan Stecyk, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 580,000.00

The vast majority of vertebrate species are unable to survive without access to
oxygen. Death quickly ensues from oxygen lack due to the failure of organs, such
as the heart, which require a constant supply of oxygen to create the metabolic
energy necessary to support their continued function. However, in stark contrast
to "normal" vertebrates, a few vertebrate species have evolved the remarkable
ability to survive for prolonged periods in the complete absence of oxygen
(termed anoxia). This research focuses on elucidating how the heart of one of
the vertebrate champions of anoxia survival, the red-eared slider turtle
(Trachemys scripta), can continue to beat rhythmically during anoxia, albeit
more slowly. Previous research has revealed that the intrinsic rate at which the
turtle heart beats is vastly slowed by anoxia exposure. However, the mechanisms
that act to suppress the intrinsic heart rate during anoxia remain unknown. In
the vertebrate heart, intrinsic heart rate is determined by cells located in a
specialized region, termed the cardiac pacemaker. The pacemaker cells initiate
cardiac contraction by producing electrical impulses, called pacemaker action
potentials, the rate of which sets intrinsic heart rate. This research will
utilize a multi-tiered and multidisciplinary approach to investigate the
physiological mechanisms by which anoxia and low temperature modulates pacemaker
rate. Ultimately, by probing how a vertebrate heart can continue to beat in the
absence of oxygen, this research will develop a deeper understanding of the
connections between oxygen, metabolism and electrical excitation, which are a
crucial aspect of basic cardiac biology. In addition, the intimate intertwining
of research activities with training, education and mentoring opportunities in
contemporary physiology and cell biology for students at UAA as well as those of
the broader Alaskan community will broaden exposure and enhance opportunity in
scientific research for individuals that are underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remarkably, the heart of one of the
vertebrate champions of anoxia survival, the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys
scripta) can continue to beat rhythmically during anoxia, albeit more slowly.
Previous research has revealed that a dramatic and rapid resetting of the
intrinsic pacemaker contributes to the bradycardia displayed by the anoxic
turtle. However, the mechanism by which anoxia modulates pacemaker rate remains
unknown. The overarching objective of this research is to exploit the turtle
heart as a model to elucidate the physiological and cellular mechanisms of
cardiac pacemaker regulation. This research will utilize a multi-tiered and
multidisciplinary approach to systematically investigate in the organ
(contractile properties of isolated heart chambers; in vitro recordings of
pacemaker action potentials) and cell (electrophysiological measures of ionic
currents in isolated cardiomyocytes) the alterations of the cardiac pacemaker
that underlies the resetting of intrinsic heart rate by anoxia. The proposed
research will provide important insights into the molecular mechanisms of
cardiac pacemaking in conditions of low oxygen and temperature. Both have
pertinence to basic cardiac biology as well as human pathology, and the anoxic
turtle provides a remarkable model of how these processes persist in conditions
of substantial stress.