* 1557339
* Structural Basis of Self-recognition in Hydroid Allorecognition Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Carlos Camacho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2020
* USD 726,738.00

Many organisms across the tree of life can distinguish between themselves and
other members of their species via cell-cell contact. In vertebrates, this
process controls graft rejection and auto-immune responses. In colonial
invertebrates -- animals like marine sponges, corals, and sea squirts -- this
ability is called allorecognition. Allorecognition controls whether colonies
aggressively compete for space or peacefully coexist when they encounter one
another as they grow. Despite the biological significance of this phenomenon,
the genes and proteins that underlie it remain poorly understood. In this
project, the investigators will study the molecular basis of allorecognition in
a cnidarian, Hydractinia symbiolongicarpus. Recently, two genes controlling
allorecognition in Hydractinia have been identified. The investigators will
determine how the proteins encoded by these genes allow Hydractinia to properly
distinguish self from non-self. To do this, the investigators will combine
biochemical experiments with computer modeling and x-ray crystallography to
build a structural model of the proteins, which will reveal how they enable
Hydractinia to discriminate between self and non-self. This knowledge will fill
a significant gap in our understanding of invertebrate allorecognition and form
the basis of future work to investigate how these phenomena evolve. As part of
their work, the investigators will train two undergraduates, two graduate
students, and one postdoc in protein biochemistry and structure determination.
They will provide opportunities for three high school students to conduct
independent research projects in their laboratories. They will also develop and
implement an educational program about Hydractinia for elementary school
students in southwestern Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Hydractinia, two
allorecognition proteins, Alr1 and Alr2, discriminate between self and non-self.
Preliminary studies indicate these proteins engage in isoform-specific binding
across cell membranes. This binding is hypothesized to be a general feature of
both proteins and to be mediated by trans interactions between immunoglobulin
superfamily-like (IgSF-like) domains in their extracellular regions and the
formation of disulphide-linked cis multimers. Aim 1 will identify segments in
the extracellular regions of each protein that control binding specificity and
test whether the proteins form cis multimers via disulphide bonds. Aim 2 will
identify amino acid positions within these segments that determine their binding
profiles and use computational modeling to explore hypothesized binding
mechanisms. Together, Aims 1 and 2 will be used to create a structural model of
isoform-specific binding. Aim 3 will validate this model by determining the
crystal structures of the extracellular domains of Alr1 and Alr2. Our team
combines three PIs with expertise in invertebrate allorecognition, computational
biology, and x-ray crystallography. The expected outcome of this project will be
the first mechanistic understanding of how allorecognition proteins discriminate
between self and non-self in any invertebrate. Comparison of this structural
mechanism with those in other self-recognition systems will reveal which aspects
of molecular recognition are unique to Hydractinia and which are shared with
other species. The data generated in this project will guide future projects
investigating how sequence evolution at allorecognition genes leads to novel
allorecognition specificities and how signaling through the allorecognition
proteins regulates allorecognition responses.