* 1557309
* Learning through Informal and Formal Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,734,895.00

The goal of this Noyce Teacher Scholarship and Stipend, Phase II project is to
train 40 highly qualified secondary STEM teachers to teach in the metropolitan
Houston area. This project will build on a current Phase I project that has
established a summer internship program, in which first and second year students
teach under the supervision of master teachers, and key principals of research
in education and learning sciences have been integrated into STEM coursework.
Through this project, the internship program will be continued and a new
pipeline will be created to recruit students from an area community college,
Wharton County Junior College. The scholarship recipients will participate in
(a) a professional development workshop that includes interns and Noyce
graduates, (b) new biology and chemistry inquiry courses, and (c) a pre-
induction/induction mentoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
several elements (such as early advisement) that are designed to create a
seamless transfer for community college students and support their retention as
pre-service STEM teachers. Using an enhanced UTeach model, potential Noyce
scholars already at the institution will receive exposure to teaching through
intensive field experiences that focus on approaches to teaching and inquiry-
based lesson design during their first two years of college. All scholars will
have the opportunity to participate in summer institutes that will address the
improvement of content knowledge and instructional approaches while they are
undergraduates and after they have been placed as teachers. During these
institutes, scholars will be advised by mentors, providing professional
development opportunities for each group. Two new courses (Biology by Inquiry
and Chemistry by Inquiry) will be developed based on a successful course that is
being used for upper-level, pre-service Physics teachers. Both formative and
summative assessments will be performed to determine the extent to which the
project goals are met in the short- and long-term and, where applicable, how the
project elements may need to be adapted to maximize student benefits. Evaluation
will be implemented through surveys, interviews and focus groups. Presentations,
demonstrations, digital stories, and publications, will be disseminated at STEM
conferences sponsored by the National Science Teachers Association, The American
Physics Association, and the American Chemical Society.