* 1557796
* A Systems Biology-aided Investigation of Pathogen-mediated Manipulation of Sugar Metabolism in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Shahid Mukhtar, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2021
* USD 800,000.00

The plant-microbe pathosystem constitutes a very complex biological network in
which the molecular players from both the pathogen and the host engage in a
battle for dominance. Specialized pathogens have evolved suites of molecules
called effectors that modulate host cell physiology and support parasitism. Over
the past decades, a plethora of literature has documented the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the induction of effective immune responses and
subversion of effector-mediated host defenses. However, a key unresolved
question is how pathogens alter cellular metabolism, including manipulation of
the source-sink relationships, to acquire nutrients. This interdisciplinary
project extends significantly beyond wet-lab techniques by integrating both
biology and the rapidly evolving field of computer science for the advancement
of research, education, and community-based scientific engagement. Mechanistic
understanding of effector-mediated perturbations to mobilize sugars from the
central vacuole will be pursued. Elucidating how pathogen infection modulates
the global transcriptional dynamics and alters the flow of biological
information is of prime focus. Equally paramount, cross-talk between metabolic,
hormonal, circadian and immune signaling pathways, involving signals from
pathogenic and non-pathogenic bacterial strains, will be revealed. Situated in
the heart of Alabama, at a nationally recognized university for diversity, this
project's scope extends into educational avenues as students in advanced level
genomics courses will gain experience with relevant bioinformatic analyses,
urban high school teachers in the PI's-led BioTeach program will gain exposure
to the genetic innovations of today, and zealous recruiting efforts will seek to
engage neighboring HBCU-minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
framework of this proposal, understanding how plant pathogens acquire sugars
through the virulence activities of their effectors, presents a substantial
advancement over the previously limiting dimensions of a one pathogen: one
protein analysis approach. Specifically, this project is focused on a pathogen
effector, HopD1, that physically interacts with a set of host proteins forming a
functional module, termed 'vacuolar invertase (Vac-INV) module.' The mechanisms
by which HopD1 perturbs the Vac-INV module to mobilize sugars stored in the
central vacuole while slowing down the resorption of apoplastic sugars into the
host cell will be investigated. HopD1's immune response suppression through
interference of a conserved aquaporin-mediated stomatal regulation mechanism
will also be investigated. Based on the in silico modeling of Vac-INV?dependent
transcriptional circuits, a high resolution global dynamic transcriptional
regulatory network in plant-pathogen interactions will also also constructed.
Having already developed a web-based interface, OOCEAN, for promoter and
bioinformatics analyses, this project will continue to extend its utility in the
fast-evolving world of Systems Biology. Novel network biology-based analyses
will help obtain a broad understanding of how single effectors simultaneously
target different branches of plant immunity and metabolism for the pathogen's
advantage. This work will also result in a system that can be applied to other
important questions pertaining to plant defense and metabolism as well.
Collectively, this systems-level project will solidify global understanding of
effector-host interactions, effector-mediated perturbations, and subsequently,
dynamic transcriptional regulation.