* 1557389
* A Grow-Your-Own Pipeline Program for Pre-Service Underrepresented High School Science Teachers at Rider University
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Peter Hester, Rider University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,450,000.00

This Noyce Teacher Scholarship and Stipend project will train 24 STEM teachers
to teach in high-needs high schools in central and southern New Jersey. The goal
of the project is to develop sound, adaptable, and sustainable strategies for
increasing the number and quality of K-12 science and math educators from
underrepresented groups, particularly Latinos, in these traditionally low income
communities. The objectives are to (a) recruit student cohorts from Rider
University and partner community colleges, (b) deliver sustainable academic and
extracurricular programming that supports the development of highly qualified
and culturally responsive high school STEM teachers, (c) provide frequent
opportunities for faculty development across campus to institutionalize an
emergent culture of civic engagement into STEM courses, as a tool to increase
retention of the participants, and (d) support these teachers during an
induction period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase the number of
high-quality high school science and math teachers from underrepresented groups,
particularly Latinos. Relying on social science research, the project clearly
identifies challenges (inadequate mathematics and science preparation, poor
self-efficacy, negative sociocultural factors, hostile campus climate, and
economic burdens) that underrepresented students face as they attempt to attain
STEM degrees and describes how these challenges will be addressed. Central to
the project are the development of culturally responsive teachers through the
incorporation of Science Education for New Civic Engagements &amp;
Responsibilities (SENCER) techniques into their STEM curriculum, the creation of
a grow-your-own recruitment plan that integrates elements such as family-
centered and bilingual and bicultural engagement, and the use of established
inquiry-based professional development institutes during the induction period.
Project evaluation will focus on the effectiveness of the educational strategies
used for the Noyce scholars before graduation and during induction. Affective
outcomes such as STEM teaching self-efficacy will be examined along with
academic success, and retention in the field. The effectiveness of the scholars'
teaching practices will also be assessed using teaching evaluation scores from
AchieveNJ, the state educator evaluation agency. Project curricula will be
disseminated through the SENCER website and results will be submitted to the
Journal of STEM Education or the Journal of Research in Science Teaching.