* 1557254
* Collaborative Research and Teacher Preparation Program Leveraging the Strengths of a Research University and a Premier Teacher Preparation University
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Wendy Adams, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2022
* USD 887,453.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, the Colorado School of Mines-University of Northern
Colorado STEM Teacher Preparation Noyce Scholarship Program is recruiting
undergraduate majors in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines and preparing them to become grades 7-12 STEM teachers. The project
is funding 18 scholarships and 30 internships over 5 years. In this project,
Colorado School of Mines (CSM) and the University of Northern Colorado (UNC) are
collaborating with Denver Public School District, Jefferson County School
District, and St. Vrain Valley School District to educate and prepare STEM
teachers. This project will: provide insight into how a partnership between a
strong engineering school and a strong teacher education school can increase
recruitment and retention of STEM majors who consider teaching as a profession;
assess CSM students' perceptions of teaching as a profession; evaluate the
impact of early support (e.g., mentoring and professional development seminars)
on teacher retention; and, ultimately, meet the need for providing more highly-
qualified STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mines-UNC STEM Teacher
Preparation Program is a unique partnership between CSM and UNC that offers a
path toward secondary teaching licensure in science or math for CSM students.
The program plays on the strengths of the two institutions to produce highly-
educated graduates through an integrated program that is part of the students'
undergraduate degree. CSM (a highly selective, small public research university)
is fully responsible for STEM content preparation, while UNC (a strong teacher
preparation institution) delivers the Professional Teacher Education Program.
This project will add an important component to the teacher preparation program
by making secondary teaching a more visible, accessible, and attractive career
option for these students. The specific goals of this project are to: 1)
increase the number of CSM graduates who become STEM teachers and teach in high-
need school districts; 2) create early STEM education experiences for CSM
students to encourage more to consider teaching of STEM subjects as a career; 3)
provide ongoing mentoring and professional development support of STEM teachers
during their induction year in high-need schools; 4) actively address ideas
about teaching as a career to maintain a healthy supportive culture at CSM
toward the profession; and 5) assess, disseminate, and sustain the best
recruitment and retention practices. In addition to the immediate production of
18 teachers who have baccalaureate degrees in science or mathematics over five
years, this project has the potential to serve as a model for similar
collaborative work between institutions known for their STEM programs and those
with strong teacher preparation programs.