* 1557482
* QuBBD: Collaborative Research: Personalized Predictive Neuromarkers for Stress-Related Health Risks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2016
* Peter Gianaros, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 8,835.00

Coronary heart disease (CHD) remains the leading cause of premature death among
adults in the U.S. and other postindustrial nations. Predicting CHD risk -
especially for a particular individual - remains a fundamental challenge. This
project will investigate the application of statistical machine learning
approaches to multimodal brain imaging, behavioral, biological, and related data
to enhance the prediction of CHD risk. It specifically addresses the question of
whether particular patterns of human brain activity during psychological stress
reliably predict known risk markers of CHD; namely, stress-related rises in
blood pressure and arterial morphology. From a basic science perspective, this
research will advance our mechanistic understanding of how the brain relates to
our physical health. From a public health perspective, this research will help
to identify markers of brain activity that could be objectively identified and
possibly targeted for modification in otherwise healthy people at risk for
future CHD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge with mapping neuroimaging
data to CHD risk lies in being able to very precisely regress observed
psychological stress reactions on the time-series of brain activity recorded in
thousands of voxels, and identify which brain regions are most relevant for the
regression. Conventional analytic approaches involve forming coarse temporal
summaries by committing to specific parametric models, such as a generalized
linear model and a fixed model for hemodynamic response, that result in poor
accuracy. This award supports initiation of a collaborative research project
that brings together a highly cross-disciplinary team of statistical machine
learning, neuroimaging and health psychology researchers to tackle the following
two goals: 1) identify a generalizable model and neuromarkers that predict
individual differences in cardiovascular risk factors based on neural dynamics
under psychological stress. This will be enabled through novel methods for
functions-to-real and functions-to-function lasso regression; 2) characterize
how neural patterns can be integrated with other physiological and
anthropometric factors to personalize individual risk scores and neuro-
biomarkers. This award is supported by the National Institutes of Health Big
Data to Knowledge (BD2K) Initiative in partnership with the National Science
Foundation Division of Mathematical Sciences.