* 1558483
* Characterizing the contribution of bacteria from the SUP05 clade to autotrophic and heterotrophic carbon cycling across ocean gradients
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Anitra Ingalls, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2021
* USD 845,578.00

Life in the ocean is dominated by diverse communities of microorganisms that are
fueled by the remains of algae. The relative activity of different microbial
community members can determine the extent of greenhouse gas capture, recycling
of nutrients and food production by the ocean. Currently, there is a critical
gap in our ability to quantify the balance between these processes. A major
roadblock in our ability to understand the microbial players is our inability to
grow even the most abundant organisms in the lab and study their physiology.
With the recent cultivation of three bacteria common to the ocean, the
possibility exists to make major advances in our understanding of their
contribution to ocean processes and how they might change in the future. This
project will characterize these three bacteria in culture to develop tools to
determine their activities in the field. Because these bacteria are common in
low oxygen environments, this work is particularly well poised to address how
microbial communities respond to oxygen-depleted waters. This project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in an important research area through
collaboration with the University of Washington Integrative Graduate Education
and Research Traineeship program, the Program for Climate change and the
University of Washington's Educational Outreach Program. Results will be
presented at national and international meetings and through publication. All
data will be freely available through the Biological and Chemical Oceanographic
Data Management Office (BCO-DMO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The balance between
autotrophy and heterotrophy determines the size of the ocean's carbon sink and
the flux of material and energy available to food chains. Despite efforts to
identify the contributions of major bacterial and archaeal lineages to carbon
fluxes, little is known about the environmental conditions that determine the
underlying metabolisms controlling carbon flux. Members of the SUP05 clade of
sulfur oxidizing gamma-proteobacteria are abundant in the dark ocean and can
dominate expanding suboxic and anoxic zones, where they have the potential to
both produce and consume organic matter. The recent cultivation of 3
representatives from the SUP05 clade has revealed striking metabolic diversity
within the clade. These isolates represent an unprecedented opportunity to
elucidate the effects of carbon limitation, energy limitation and oxygen tension
on the production and consumption of organic matter by a critical group of
marine bacteria. The work proposed here would 1) determine the balance between
autotrophic carbon fixation and heterotrophic organic matter assimilation in
diverse cultured representatives under varying environmental conditions 2)
determine the kinetics of reactions fueling autotrophy 3) characterize
biomarkers along gradients of autotrophic and heterotrophic production induced
by varying environmental conditions and 4) detect these molecular markers in the
field along with cell abundances to determine the contribution of autotrophy,
heterotrophy, sulfur oxidation and denitrification to SUP05 metabolism in a
field site that transects an oxygen minimum zone in the North Pacific Ocean.
This project will advance understanding of SUP05, a biological driver of
elemental cycling in the mesopelagic, one of the largest habitats on earth and
one that is experiencing large climate driven changes, including expansion of
oxygen minimum zones.