* 1558964
* Conference: Annual Meeting of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists to be held in Pacific Grove, CA.  December 11-13, 2015 and December 9-11, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Alfred Spormann, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 11/30/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This Conference award will help to offset registration costs for advanced
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to attend the 2015
and 2016 West Coast Bacterial Physiologists Meeting. At this meeting,
approximately 90% of the talks will be presented by undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral fellows. Junior Faculty initiating their
research programs will be invited in order to facilitate their integration into
the broader scientific community. The scientific focus of the meeting,
foundational aspects of microbial physiology, will be relevant to
biotechnological applications (bioremediation, biofuels), metabolomics and other
systems-level -omics approaches, genome to phenome studies, and synthetic
biology. Meeting organizers will work towards a gender and minority balance in
lecturers and conveners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The West Coast Bacterial
Physiologists Meeting will be held in December of 2015 and 2016 at the Asilomar
Conference Center in Pacific Grove, California. The meeting will be organized
into four scientific sessions over a three-day period. Each of the four sessions
will begin with an invited "John Ingraham Lecturers in Microbial Physiology"
which will span the range of microbial physiology fields and include new and
emerging topics (including genome to phenome relationships, computational
modeling, advanced DNA sequencing methodologies). The meeting program and
abstracts will be made publicly available on the meeting website. The meeting
will give young researchers the opportunity to give an oral presentation at a
scientific conference, and will help to integrate junior Faculty into the
research community, which will create new collaborative research opportunities.