* 1558389
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: ARCTIC-ERA: ARCTIC climate change and its impact on Environment, infrastructures and Resource Availability
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2015,08/31/2021
* Dmitry Streletskiy, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 178,297.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively&lt;br/&gt;selected by a 14-country initiative on global change
research through the Belmont&lt;br/&gt;Forum. The Belmont Forum is a high level
group of the world?s major and emerging&lt;br/&gt;funders of global
environmental change research and international science councils.
It&lt;br/&gt;aims to accelerate delivery of the international environmental
research most urgently&lt;br/&gt;needed to remove critical barriers to
sustainability by aligning and mobilizing&lt;br/&gt;international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers&lt;br/&gt;within a
consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders.
This&lt;br/&gt;approach facilitates effective leveraging of national resources
to support excellent&lt;br/&gt;research on topics of global relevance best
tackled through a multinational approach,&lt;br/&gt;recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this
Collaborative Research Action, the partner agencies have&lt;br/&gt;provided
support for research projects that utilize existing Arctic observing
systems,&lt;br/&gt;datasets and models to evaluate key sustainability challenges
and opportunities in the&lt;br/&gt;Arctic region, to innovate new sustainability
science theory and approaches to these&lt;br/&gt;challenges and opportunities,
and support decision-making towards a sustainable Arctic&lt;br/&gt;environment.
This award provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate
in&lt;br/&gt;consortia that consist of partners from at least three of the
participating countries and&lt;br/&gt;that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and end users (e.g., policy&lt;br/&gt;makers, regulators,
NGOs, communities and industry).&lt;br/&gt;ARCTIC-ERA unites a core team of
experts from the United States, France and Russia.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to address critical aspects of human well-being
and&lt;br/&gt;sustainable use of Arctic infrastructure and resources under
current and projected&lt;br/&gt;conditions. This projects seeks to analyze
critical data that will help develop&lt;br/&gt;recommendations on adaptation of
coastal settlements and ports, transportation,&lt;br/&gt;fishery, oil and gas
exploitation to the ongoing and future changes and mitigation of
their&lt;br/&gt;negative effects, and to identify new opportunities associated
with the "Opening of the&lt;br/&gt;Arctic". In addition to publications and
presentations, the results of the project will be&lt;br/&gt;disseminated through
a series of dialogues between the researchers, decision makers,&lt;br/&gt;and
end-users. These dialogues will focus on co-design and co-production of options.