* 1558830
* Silicic melt evolution in the early Izu-Bonin arc recorded in detrital zircons
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Andrew Barth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 12/31/2019
* USD 101,032.00

Understanding the movement of tectonic plates across Earth's surface and the
eventual return of these plates to the interior of our planet is central to our
knowledge of Earth and its natural hazards such as earthquakes, tsunamis, and
volcanic eruptions. This research focuses on understanding the formation, growth
and eventual demise of volcanoes that mark the process of subduction, where
tectonic plates return to Earth's interior. Minerals recovered from deep beneath
the western Pacific Ocean floor by the International Ocean Discovery Program
will be examined to decipher the history of volcano growth above an evolving
subduction zone. The goals of the research are to use the chemistry of these
minerals, called zircons, to better understand the life cycle of volcanoes,
especially the timing of explosive volcanic eruptions. This research involves
strong integration of research and education by involving undergraduate
university students both in the laboratory and in field-based research projects
at similar ocean floor volcanic systems that are now exposed on land in the
Sierra Nevada mountains in the western United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this study is to better understand the generation of silicic melts in a
new and evolving intra-oceanic volcanic arc by searching for petrologic links
between silicic volcanism and tonalitic arc plutonism and using this to better
understand the evolution of the related magmatic processes through time. The
primary goal of the research is to test whether (or to what extent) detrital
zircons in drill cores, recovered by the International Ocean Drilling Program
Expedition 351 and other legacy ocean drilling cores from a relatively primitive
oceanic arc setting, record the regional and/or secular variation in silicic
melts that crystallized magmatic zircon. Geochronology and trace element
geochemistry of the zircons will allow comparisons between the thermal and melt
chemical evolution recorded by arc-derived detrital zircons and by igneous
zircons recovered in dredge samples of contemporaneous arc tonalite. This study
will also generate an internally-consistent database of geochemical parameters
for arc-derived zircons from a compositional range of marine arcs that will be
useful for comparative zircon provenance studies, as these studies evolve to
more commonly include key geochemical provenance indicators.