* 1558907
* Computerized Adaptive Testing for Survey Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Jacob Montgomery, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2021
* USD 291,644.00

This project will advance computerized adaptive testing (CAT) as an alternative
approach to static-reduced batteries. A common way that social scientists learn
about individuals' traits and beliefs is to have people answer many closely
related questions about the same topic. These large multi-item batteries are
used to measure constructs like personality traits, psychological illnesses,
political ideology, personal values, levels of knowledge, and more. Public
opinion researchers, however, often choose not to use these widely respected
multi-item batteries because of concerns regarding respondent burden or the
costs of long surveys. The standard solution is to select a subset of the
available items, which then are administered to all respondents. Such static-
reduced batteries are well known to increase bias and lower measurement
precision, however. CAT ameliorates much of the decreased measurement precision
and accuracy associated with static-reduced scales. The project builds on
existing work in the fields of educational testing and psychometrics to develop
software and an online webservice that adopts and adjusts CAT for the specific
needs of public opinion researchers.

This research project will apply CAT algorithms to the domain of survey research
and provide practical resources and theoretical guidance specific to the needs
of public opinion researchers. CAT algorithms adapt dynamically to measure
latent constructs while minimizing the number of questions each respondent must
answer. This approach uses information about the qualities of each question item
to respond to individuals' prior answers by choosing subsequent questions that
will place them on the latent dimension with maximum precision and a minimum
number of questions. That is, it chooses questions for each respondent based on
their previous responses so that researchers can learn as much as possible about
the opinions of a respondent. The project will provide basic software
infrastructure necessary for developing CAT batteries and administering them on
surveys. This includes the completion and hosting of a cloud-based webservice
easily integrated into survey-administration software. The project also will
provide solutions to problems likely to confront survey researchers fielding
adaptive batteries including appropriately handling high levels of measurement
error and diagnosing flawed question-item calibrations. Finally, the project
will collect data to build adaptive batteries measuring important concepts in
the social sciences, with a special emphasis on personality inventories, using a
combination of large convenience samples, a nationally representative sample,
and existing datasets. The distribution of these calibrations will allow
researchers to use CAT techniques without the added cost of extensive pre-
testing.