* 1558372
* Collaborative Research: Sea level induced hydrothermal activity as a trigger for glacial terminations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2018
* USD 70,125.00

The last million years of earth's history are characterized the growth and decay
of continental ice sheets that covered large portions of North America and
Europe. Growth of the ice sheets transferred water from the ocean to the
continents and caused sea level to drop by nearly 400 feet. While it has long
been known that the pacing of the ice ages is related to changes in the Earth's
orbit around the sun, the triggering mechanism for the end ice ages, known as
terminations, has yet to be fully explained. Lowering of sea level releases
pressure on the global mid-ocean ridge system, a nearly continuous chain of
submerged volcanoes that span 30,000 miles of the sea floor. The pressure
release should drive enhanced submarine volcanism, which may in turn influence
climate by introducing heat and carbon dioxide into the deep ocean. The aim of
the proposed work is to assess magmatism along mid-ocean ridges in the eastern
South Pacific using geologic archives of volcanic activity. Sediment cores
retrieved from the East Pacific Rise (EPR) and Pacific Antarctic Ridge (PAR)
will be used to assess hydrothermal plume activity near the ridge crest.
Hydrothermal plumes are created through superheating of cold deep ocean water by
hot oceanic crust, which is itself heated by magma. Thus, sedimentary archives
can be used to assess glacial-interglacial changes in magmatism and test whether
enhanced submarine volcanism occurs during glacial terminations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will focus on a series of cores from
10°S to 40°S along the EPR and PAR. Preliminary oxygen isotope data indicates
that sediments in this region accumulate at a rate sufficient to constrain
glacial-interglacial timescales. Hydrothermal activity will be inferred by
estimating the flux of Fe, Mn, V, and As to ridge crest sediments. All fluxes
will be constrained using the 3He normalization technique. A finding of coherent
variations in metal flux at multiple sites would indicate there were regional
changes in magmatic activity. Additionally, the timing of anomalous metal fluxes
will be compared with climate proxies to assess the feasibility that mid-ocean
ridge magmatism acts as a negative feedback on ice sheet size. Finally, a
petrologic model will be used to simulate the impact of sea level variations on
CO2-bearing melt production in the upper mantle. Simulations of carbon flux from
the global mid-ocean ridge system will be used to assess whether variations in
carbon flux could have feasibly driven atmospheric CO2 on glacial-interglacial
timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work could transform our
understanding of the climate system by constraining the interactions between the
fluid and solid earth on glacial-interglacial timescales. The broader
educational impacts of the proposed work includes the participation of a
postdoctoral scholar and two undergraduates at the University of Connecticut,
plus an additional undergraduate at Caltech.