* 1558535
* Reinforcement learning in the human brain: Dimensions, features, and contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Timothy Vickery, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 457,999.00

Human decision-making depends not only upon logical reasoning about the world,
but also trial-and-error learning to associate features and actions with
rewarding and punishing outcomes. These reinforcement-learning mechanisms have
well-known neural correlates, and theories of such learning provide excellent
accounts for human behavior in limited contexts. However, trial-and-error
learning has typically been studied in laboratory tasks in which value-
associated features are known and are the only stimulus aspects presented to
subjects. Thus, theories of how this type of learning is accomplished in the
real world face a key problem: there are a multitude of potentially relevant
aspects of experience that co-occur with any given decision or outcome, so which
associations should be learned and guide future behavior? This project explores
how humans cope with a multidimensional world when making experience-guided
decisions. A better understanding of human decision-making behavior will
facilitate more complete theories of learning, enable us to better predict and
enhance real-world decision-making, and improve understanding of how such
decision-making might break down due to mental disorders. This project will
provide research opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students, and include broad public outreach in the form of online demonstrations
and explanations of models of learning and decision-making. Further, the
proposed activity includes a yearly workshop on MRI methods, which will provide
training opportunities in new methods and outreach to students and faculty
across fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will use computational
modeling of behavior and model-based fMRI to assess how humans learn about
relevant and irrelevant features of the world during reward-guided decision-
making. The first study will address whether irrelevant stimulus dimensions are
tracked with respect to value, both in terms of choice behavior and in terms of
neural representations of value. Specifically, the project will ask whether
reward prediction error signals in ventral striatum and elsewhere in the brain
are explained solely by relevant feature-value associations, or whether
irrelevant feature-value associations are also tracked neurally and influence
behavior. The second study will examine whether learned statistical
contingencies in one domain, visual perception, arbitrarily influence value
learning both in terms of behavior and brain activity. Findings from this study
will illuminate how distinct associative learning mechanisms interact to guide
behavior. Finally, a third study will examine the role of context in reward-
guided decision-making, examining how well contextual features can be
incorporated into decision-making. The results of this work will guide
development of human reinforcement learning theories towards accommodating the
complexity of real-world decision-making environments. This project will
illuminate the degree to which control over which particular associations guide
behavior is exerted during learning or at the time of choice.