* 1558580
* Testing the sponge-loop hypothesis for Caribbean coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Patrick Erwin, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2021
* USD 818,016.00

Sponges are bottom-dwelling animals that dominate Caribbean reefs now that reef-
building corals have been declining for decades. Sponges feed by filtering huge
volumes of seawater, providing a mechanism for recycling organic material back
to the reef. A new theory has been proposed called the "sponge-loop hypothesis"
that is potentially the most important new concept in marine ecology in many
years, because it seeks to explain Darwin's Paradox: how do highly productive
and diverse coral reefs grow in desert-like tropical seas? The sponge loop
hypothesis proposes that sponges on coral reefs absorb the large quantities of
dissolved organic carbon (molecules such as carbohydrates) that are released by
seaweeds and corals and return it to the reef as particles in the form of living
and dead cells, or other cellular debris. This project will use a rigorous set
of techniques to test the sponge-loop hypothesis in the field on ten of the
largest and most common sponges on Caribbean reefs. For each species, the
contributions of particles and dissolved organic carbon to sponge nutrition will
be measured, as well as the production of cellular particles in the seawater
flowing out of the sponge. For selected sponge species, the concentration of
dissolved organic carbon entering the sponge will be experimentally enhanced to
determine the capacity of the sponge to absorb this potential food source, and
to gauge its effect on the production of cellular particles. This project will
provide STEM education and training for postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate
students and public outreach in the form of easily accessible educational
videos. Further, this project is important for understanding the carbon cycle on
coral reefs where the effects of climate change and ocean acidification may be
tipping the competitive balance toward non-reef-building organisms, such as
sponges.

The cycling of carbon from the water-column to the benthos is central to marine
ecosystem function; for coral reefs, this process begins with photosynthesis by
seaweeds and coral symbionts, which then exude a substantial portion of fixed
carbon as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) that may be lost to currents and tides.
But if sponges, with their enormous water filtering capacity, can return DOC
from the water column to the reef, it would represent a major unrecognized
source of carbon cycling. The "sponge-loop hypothesis" has the potential to
transform our understanding of carbon cycling on coral reefs. Building on
preliminary data from studies of the giant barrel sponge, this project will
investigate each of the three components of the sponge-loop hypothesis for ten
common barrel, vase and tube-forming species that span a range of associations
with microbial symbionts, from high microbial abundance (HMA) to low microbial
abundance (LMA) in the sponge tissue. Specifically, the experimental approach
will include InEx techniques (comparative sampling of seawater immediately
before and after passage through the sponge), velocimetry, and flow cytometry to
determine whether each species consumes DOC and produces particulate organic
carbon (POC) in the form of cellular detritus. Then, for species that consume
DOC, the same techniques will be used in manipulative experiments that augment
the amount of DOC from three categories (labile, semi-labile and refractory) to
determine the types of DOC consumed by sponges. In addition to testing the
sponge-loop hypothesis, this project will use molecular techniques to
investigate the differences among HMA and LMA sponge species, targeting the
microbial symbionts that may be responsible for DOC uptake.