* 1558809
* Collaborative Research: Physical-Biological Processes of Gulf Stream Warm Core Rings: Vertical Nutrient Delivery and Ecosystem Response
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Peter Gaube, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 179,228.00

Warm core rings acting between western boundary currents and the continental
shelf exert significant impact on the physical and biological environments of
the slope seas and coastal oceans, which are major contributors to the global
primary production. However, compared to that of eddies in the open ocean, the
role of Gulf Stream warm core rings in the biophysical processes of the shelf-
slope system has received less attention, and contrasting results exist. This
study will elucidate the key biophysical mechanisms by investigating the biomass
characteristics and the dominant physical mechanisms controlling the vertical
nutrient delivery associated with Gulf Stream warm core rings. The improved
understanding on nutrient dynamics from this research will contribute to the
stewardship of living marine resources, and better ecosystem management.
Research findings will be presented to the general public through public
lectures. This project will also support the training of undergraduate students
outside of oceanography through the Summer Undergraduate Research Program at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

This project investigates the physical-biological processes associated with the
evolution of Gulf Stream warm core rings in the shelf-slope system of the
Northwest Atlantic, with a focus on the dominant physical processes controlling
vertical nutrient delivery. The research will include analyses of satellite
data, historical in situ data, and numerical simulations. For better
understanding of the relative importance of several mesoscale biophysical
processes, the photoautotrophic biomass within the warm core rings will be
characterized first using satellite observed sea surface height and chlorophyll
concentration. The investigators will then conduct idealized numerical modeling
experiments to identify the dominant physical processes responsible for vertical
nutrient delivery including vertical mixing and vertical advection induced by
frictional decay, eddy-induced Ekman pumping, and wind-sea surface temperature
interaction. The findings from the idealized modeling will be further
synthesized in a realistic coupled biophysical model for the Northwest Atlantic
region.