* 1558824
* Collaborative Research:  Geothermal heating of the Panama Basin and crustal evolution of the Costa Rica Rift
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Robert Harris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2019
* USD 91,055.00

Heat and mass transfer between the oceanic crust and the deep ocean has global
implications for the cooling of the earth, the movement of critical
biogeochemical species, and the maintenance of ocean bottom biological
communities. Moreover, recent studies show that geothermal heating is an
important driver of deep ocean circulation, which is a major component of the
ocean-atmosphere system. As a part of a large multidisciplinary and
international research program, this project will develop the first high-
resolution models of how crustal heat and mass transfer impact deep ocean
circulation. The proposed work will lead to a better understanding of deep ocean
circulation and its connection with the global ocean-atmosphere system. The
proposed work also will yield an important advance in understanding how crustal
heat and mass transfer evolves as the oceanic crust ages. The project supports
the training of graduate and undergraduate students.

The proposed research forms an integral component of the large multi-
disciplinary, multi-institutional project led by the University of Durham,
England. This research will use recently collected physical oceanographic,
geophysical, and conductive heat flow data, together with existing data sets
from the Panama Basin in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, to construct hydrothermal
heat and mass flux models from the Costa Rica Rift (CRR) axis to sediment-
covered, 6 million year old crust. The goals are: (1) to understand how
hydrothermal heat transfer evolves with crustal structure as the lithospheric
ages; and (2) to develop high resolution models that show how hydrothermal heat
and mass transfer impacts deep ocean circulation on a regional scale. To achieve
these goals, 85 new conductive heat flow measurements have been obtained in
sediment-covered crust at ages between 1.3 and 5.3 Ma co-located with a multi-
channel seismic line. These data will be used together with existing heat flow
data, and the geophysical and oceanographic data from the British-led project,
to construct mathematical and numerical models of hydrothermal heat transfer in
young sediment-covered crust. In addition, other geophysical data on the
distribution of melt and partial melt in axial and near-axial regions, coupled
with water samples for helium analysis and oceanographic data characterizing the
ocean bottom boundary layer and hydrothermal plume structure at the CRR, will
constrain models of hydrothermal circulation at the ridge axis and in near-axial
regions. These analyses will provide the first estimates of hydrothermal heat
output at the CRR and near-axis region, and will guide future exploration of
hydrothermal activity, geochemical transport, and the biological communities at
the CRR. Finally, the hydrothermal models will serve as input to high-resolution
models of ocean circulation using the detailed suite of oceanographic data
collected during the British-led project.