* 1558067
* Epigenetic regulation of early development of the vertebrate nervous system
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Chenbei Chang, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2019
* USD 660,000.00

The nervous system is one of our most important organs. It senses our surrounds,
enables us to respond to stimuli with complex motor behaviors, and provides us
with cognitive and emotional capacity. To improve our understanding of nervous
system development, this project uses a vertebrate animal model to study how a
specific group of nuclear proteins affect genes expressed in the nervous system.
These proteins regulate how DNA is packaged. Thus, they control the transition
of DNA from a tightly packed form to loosely packed form, and consequently from
inaccessible to accessible for subsequent gene transcription. Mistakes in these
proteins can result in defective structure or function of the nervous system.
This project will explain how these proteins function, and what parts of the
nervous system they regulate. This project will be performed by students,
including summer high school and college students, thus providing an excellent
opportunity to train the next generation of scientists.

This project investigates how distinct epigenetic factors regulate neural and
neural crest development in vertebrates, and how they do so in collaboration
with transcription factors and other nuclear proteins. Epigenetic factors
regulate gene expression by modulating chromatin structures, often via histone
modification and DNA methylation. Epigenetic mechanisms are known to be crucial
in stem cell maintenance and differentiation, but their roles in neural
development during vertebrate embryogenesis are not understood in depth. ChIP-
sequencing analysis will be performed to map the changing epigenetic landscapes
in developing neural tissues in early Xenopus embryos, and proteomics studies
will be conducted to identify nuclear binding partners of the specific
epigenetic factors HP1 and SETD8, two proteins that are often associated with
repressive chromatin structure. The project will then examine the function and
the crosstalk of three epigenetic pathways: the polycomb repressive complexes,
the histone H3K9 methylation/HP1 cascade, and the histone H4K20 methylation
pathway. Results from these studies will help shed light on how epigenetic
mechanisms influence neural specification, differentiation and morphogenesis to
control proper formation of the nervous system in vertebrate embryos.