* 1558003
* Getting to the Root of Flexible Stems: The Primary Cilia as a Proximate Mechanism of Plasticity and Evolution of the Cichlid Jaw
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Rolf Karlstrom, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 12/31/2019
* USD 747,000.00

How biodiversity arises and is maintained over time remains an important area of
study. Adaptive radiations represent extreme instances of morphological
evolution in response to discrete ecological shifts, and are thought to have
made significant contributions to biodiversityon this planet. This research
seeks to identify and characterize the genetic and cellular mechanisms that
promote adaptive radiations, and thus to provide novel insights into the origins
of biodiversity. This highly interdisciplinary project provides a rich
intellectual landscape to train students in various methods and theories. It
also offers an explicit framework to develop pedagogical tools for conveying
evolutionary principals to the public. This will be part of on-going efforts to
develop a series of animated and interactive evolutionary "origin stories" that
detail the genetic mechanisms that underlie the development and evolution of
notable traits, including turtle shells, bat wings, and limb loss in whales.
Here the team proposes a new chapter-- Making faces: How the fish changes its
skull.

A focal point of this project is phenotypic plasticity, which refers to the
ability of an organism to change its appearance in response to a change in the
environment. The ability of an individual to change its phenotype in different
environments may increase its fitness in changing and/or fluctuating
environments, which suggests that plasticity may be adaptive and therefore
subject to selection itself. It is predicted that species that live in
fluctuating environments will maintain a high degree of plasticity. Conversely,
species that live in more stable environments are predicted to loose the ability
to mount a plastic response, and exhibit fixed phenotypes. Unfortunately, a
strict genetic basis for phenotypic plasticity has remained elusive, and thus
the evolutionary potential for this trait remains largely unknown. The goal of
this research is to characterize the molecular basis for phenotypic plasticity
of the teleost jaw. An emphasis on the jaws has direct ecological consequences,
as different jaw shapes will determine where a fish lives and what it feeds on.
Mutant and transgenic zebrafish will be used to assess the degree to which key
molecules involved in bone formation, including those that underlie the primary
cilia and Hedgehog signaling, are necessary to promote phenotypic plasticity in
the skull and jaws. The molecular mechanisms that underlie plasticity will then
be compared to patterns of genetic evolution in a textbook adaptive radiation,
East African cichlid fishes, which exhibit extensive diversity in the shape of
their jaws. It is predicted that the genes that underlie plasticity of the
feeding apparatus, also underlie evolution of the jaws. This is because genetic
variation that leads to plasticity is predicted to become "fixed" as populations
adapt to new environments over time. In all, research under this award will
facilitate a better understand of how the genome and environment interact to
promote biodiversity.