* 1558957
* The biotic and abiotic controls on the Silicon cycle in the northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Krause, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 497,512.00

The Louisiana Shelf system in the northern Gulf of Mexico is fed by the
Mississippi River and its many tributaries which contribute large quantities of
nutrients from agricultural fertilizer to the region. Input of these nutrients,
especially nitrogen, has led to eutrophication. Eutrophication is the process
wherein a body of water such as the Louisiana Shelf becomes enriched in
dissolved nutrients that increase phytoplankton growth which eventually leads to
decreased oxygen levels in bottom waters. This has certainly been observed in
this area, and diatoms, a phytoplankton which represents the base of the food
chain, have shown variable silicon/nitrogen (Si/N) ratios. Because diatoms
create their shells from silicon, their growth is controlled not only by
nitrogen inputs but the availability of silicon. Lower Si/N ratios are showing
that silicon may be playing an increasingly important role in regulating diatom
production in the system. For this reason, a scientist from the University of
South Alabama will determine the biogeochemical processes controlling changes in
Si/N ratios in the Louisiana Shelf system. One graduate student on their way to
a doctorate degree and three undergraduate students will be supported and
trained as part of this project. Also, four scholarships for low-income, high
school students from Title 1 schools will get to participate in a month-long
summer Marine Science course at the Dauphin Island Sea Laboratory and be
included in the research project. The study has significant societal benefits
given this is an area where $2.4 trillion gross domestic product revenue is tied
up in coastal resources. Since diatoms are at the base of the food chain that is
the biotic control on said coastal resources, the growth of diatoms in response
to eutrophication is important to study.

Eutrophication of the Mississippi River and its tributaries has the potential to
alter the biological landscape of the Louisiana Shelf system in the northern
Gulf of Mexico by influencing the Si/N ratios below those that are optimal for
diatom growth. A scientist from the University of South Alabama believes the
observed changes in the Si/N ratio may indicate silicon now plays an important
role in regulating diatom production in the system. As such, understanding the
biotic and abiotic processes controlling the silicon cycle is crucial because
diatoms dominate at the base of the food chain in this highly productive region.
The study will focus on following issues: (1) the importance of recycled silicon
sources on diatom production; (2) can heavily-silicified diatoms adapt to
changing Si/N ratios more effectively than lightly-silicified diatoms; and (3)
the role of reverse weathering in sequestering silicon thereby reducing
diffusive pore-water transport. To attain these goals, a new analytical
approach, the PDMPO method (compound
2-(4-pyridyl)-5-((4-(2-dimethylaminoethylamino-carbamoyl)methoxy)phenyl)oxazole)
that quantitatively measures taxa-specific silica production would be used.