* 1558083
* Identification and Characterization of Transcription Factors Regulating Carotenoid Pigmentation During Mimulus Flower Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Yaowu Yuan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 02/28/2019
* USD 510,000.00

Carotenoids are yellow, orange, and red pigments that contribute to the
beautiful colors and nutritive value of many flowers (e.g., daffodils,
daylilies, sunflowers) and fruits (e.g., oranges, tomatoes, mangos). They serve
an important function in the ecology and evolution of plants as visual pigments
to attract animals for pollination and seed dispersal. The tremendous diversity
of carotenoid pigmentation patterns found in flowers and fruits is primarily
determined by regulatory genes that control when and where the carotenoid
pigments are produced. However, little is known about the identity and function
of these regulatory genes. This study employs a new plant genetic model system,
monkeyflowers, to identify carotenoid-regulating genes and to characterize their
function. The discovery and characterization of these regulatory genes are
crucial to understanding how carotenoid production is controlled during flower
development and how carotenoid-based flower color variation is generated during
evolution. From a practical perspective, because carotenoids are also essential
components of human diets as precursors for vitamin A biosynthesis, the
regulatory genes discovered in this study have the potential for high
translational impact in plant breeding to enhance carotenoid production in crop
plants. The plant materials will be incorporated into a live plant exhibit at
the University of Connecticut to demonstrate concepts of genetics and evolution
for student and public education. Furthermore, the flower images, pollination
videos, and interactive, multimedia illustrations resulting from this project
will be developed into a new Plant Biology section on the nationally and
internationally recognized Learn.Genetics website as online educational
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study leverages recently developed genomic
resources, stable transgenic tools, and chemically induced mutants of
monkeyflowers (Mimulus) to identify and characterize transcription factors that
regulate flower carotenoid pigmentation. Results from preliminary work in the
PIs laboratory allows the formulation of the central hypothesis: a
transcriptional regulatory complex, containing at least an R2R3-MYB and a
tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) protein, directly activates carotenoid
biosynthetic genes during flower development in Mimulus, and differential
expression of the regulatory genes contributes to pigment pattern variation
between species. In this proposed project, additional components of the
transcriptional regulatory complex will be identified by bulk segregant analysis
of another non-allelic mutant and by yeast two-hybrid screening using the MYB
and TPR proteins as baits. The functional mechanisms of the MYB and TPR genes in
the regulation of carotenoid pigmentation will be determined by protein-protein
and protein-DNA interaction assays. The role of these regulatory genes in
producing flower color variation will be examined by gene expression analysis
and transgenic experiments in Mimulus species that display distinct carotenoid
pigmentation patterns.