* 1558776
* Conference: SnowPAC 2016: The Galaxy/Halo Connection; Snowbird, Utah; March 13-18, 2016
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Uros Seljak, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,900.00

Funds are provided for participant support for the 6th annual Snowbird Workshop
on Particle Astrophysics, Astronomy, and Cosmology (SnowPAC 2016), organized by
the Department of Physics and Astronomy of The University of Utah. The award
will support participation (via lodging and registration subsidy) by 30
individuals who would otherwise be unable to attend the meeting, with a
particular emphasis on broadening participation by junior researchers and groups
traditionally underrepresented in astronomy and astrophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SnowPAC workshop is an international meeting that
reviews recent developments in particle astrophysics, dark matter, dark energy,
astronomy, and cosmology. It seeks to establish new connections between these
disciplines and establish new collaborative ties between individuals working in
these research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SnowPAC 2016 conference is a
topical conference on "The Galaxy-Halo Connection," and will bring together
members of the observational, theoretical, and numerical simulation communities.
This conference will provide a venue to compare the results of the latest
simulations to analytic models, and to the observed clustering of matter. It
will provide direction for future efforts in the field of galaxy evolution and
clustering of large-scale structure.