* 1558308
* Testing and surpassing limits of adaptation in visual cortex
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2022
* Stephen Engel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 549,265.00

The brain has a remarkable ability to modify its own function. In the visual
system such neuroplasticity occurs routinely, for example when we move from
indoors to outside. Changing environments affects visual input dramatically, and
cortical neurons alter how they respond in order to keep us seeing well. This
type of neuroplasticity, called visual adaptation, occurs readily in the adult
brain. Its effects tend to be short-lasting, however, limiting its potential
applications in education, training, and health. To understand and overcome this
roadblock, Dr. Stephen Engel and colleagues at The University of Minnesota will
test the limits of adaptation, by extending laboratory studies an order of
magnitude in duration. Participants will adapt for up to a week continuously, by
viewing the world through virtual reality goggles that display modified output
of a head-mounted camera. The experiments will measure how long-lasting the
effects of adaptation can become, and test several factors that could be
limiting the growth of this type of neuroplasticity. These include competition
between the parts of the brain that benefit from neuroplasticity and the parts
that could be hurt by it, since they depend upon stability of the brain regions
that provide their input. Understanding adaptation should allow it to produce
beneficial neuroplasticity, which has many applications. It could become part of
training visual experts such as baggage scanner operators or imagery analysts.
It could become part of efforts to rewire the brains of patients suffering from
visual diseases, such as amblyopia ("lazy eye"). The work will also test
theories of neuroplasticity that are applicable in many domains. It will produce
educational materials for teaching of cognitive neuroscience, and will directly
support the training of a diverse set of graduate and undergraduate students in
cutting edge methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adult visual cortex can
alter its function dramatically in response to changes in the environment,
allowing it to function optimally, despite large changes in input. Critically,
the longer vision experiences an environment, the stronger and longer lasting
adaptation becomes. This suggests that long-term exposure to altered visual
input may produce long-lasting changes in cortex. Technical issues have
prevented the study of long adapting durations under controlled conditions,
however leaving it unknown whether some factors 'put on the brakes', restricting
its strength and durability. The PI developed methods to overcome this
roadblock, and examined effects of a 4-days of continuous adaptation, revealing
significant limits. The general goal of the grant is to understand the brakes
producing those limits. For vision as a whole, adaptation can produce costs, as
well as benefits, and this proposal will test whether observed limits are due to
them. A first set of experiments will test whether costs limit adaptation in
early visual areas, examining specific costs from the literature, removing them,
and observing whether limits on adaptation remain present. A second set of
experiments will examine longer-term adaptation. They will test the hypothesis
that long-term adaptation can overcome limits, reducing costs by correcting for
a "coding catastrophe" in later visual areas. The work will distinguish between
major theories of adaptation, using quantitative analysis of behavioral and
functional MRI (fMRI) data. It also represents a major empirical step forward;
dozens of studies have examined adaptation in visual cortex, but no previous
work has measured or tested adaptation's limits. Results of this research could
influence work in a diverse array of fields where visual plasticity is
important, from education to the military to public health. Results of the work
will be incorporated into educational materials (an introductory fMRI course and
text) that will be freely distributed. The grant will also provide training
opportunities for a diverse group of students.