* 1558868
* Investigating Structural Changes In Reef-Associated Biodiversity Along A Natural Gradient In Ocean Acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Nancy Knowlton, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2019
* USD 149,122.00

Recent research has revealed that ocean acidification, caused by carbon dioxide
dissolving into the ocean, has a broad range of negative consequences for marine
organisms, especially organisms that build calcium shells or skeletons such as
corals. However, most studies have focused on a limited number of species in
laboratory settings and have therefore ignored the many indirect effects
originating from more complex species interactions that occur in nature. Coral
reefs harbor more species than any other marine ecosystem. Moreover, they are
economically very important, providing food and other services such as touristic
attractions and pharmaceuticals. Because of the sensitivities of coral species
to ocean acidification, reef ecosystems are potentially severely threatened, but
we still have no idea how entire reef communities will respond. The project will
take advantage of a recently discovered, naturally acidified coral reef system
in Papua New Guinea that is bathed by waters of variable levels of acidity,
including levels comparable to those expected globally by the end of the 21st
century. This project investigates the consequences of ocean acidification for
the biodiversity of animals that live cryptically within the interstices of
coral reefs. These animals represent the bulk of coral reef diversity; they play
very important roles in the reef food chain but are poorly understood. Using DNA
markers and photo analysis, cryptic species living at three different acidity
levels (present day, expected in 50 years, expected in 100 years) will be
quantified and identified in order to elucidate the changes occurring in coral
reef communities as oceans acidify. Results will broaden understanding of the
consequences of ocean acidification and allow for more accurate monitoring and
effective management strategies for coral reefs. Scientific results will be
shared at international conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals, and
data collected will be made publicly available. The project will also foster
active collaborations among scientists, professional educators, and science
communicators from the Smithsonian Institution and Washington DC high school
students underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)
fields. The students will be trained in ocean acidification science and will be
involved in developing outreach products for Smithsonian onsite and online
audiences, expanding the ability of the Smithsonian to share these results with
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean acidification (OA) is now
affecting the fragile coral reef ecosystems already impacted by decades of local
pressures (e.g., pollution, overfishing). Numerous laboratory experiments have
shown deleterious effects of low pH on calcification, growth, and reproduction
of reef organisms. Studies have also highlighted differences in species'
responses depending on whether they are tested alone or in multi-species
assemblages, suggesting the importance of indirect effects in sensitivity to OA
that cannot be assessed from laboratory experiments. For this reason, shallow
tropical submarine carbon dioxide seeps provide invaluable opportunities to
assess the ecological consequences of long-term exposure to low pH for coral
reefs in situ by providing a natural gradient in pH across reef seascapes. Among
these are the reefs at Milne Bay Province, Papua New Guinea, which exhibit a
strong gradient from normal to low pH waters but otherwise resemble normal reef
conditions in terms of other chemical properties and temperature. Most work to
date on acidified reefs, including at Milne Bay, has focused on corals and other
conspicuous organisms. However, the vast majority of reef diversity is comprised
of the understudied cryptic communities living within the reef structure. These
trophically crucial groups are likely to be at risk from OA due to reduction in
three-dimensional complexity typical of acidified reefs, but there are scant
data. This research will measure structural changes in these communities across
the well-characterized pH gradients of the Milne Bay reefs. The investigators
will study diversity patterns in volumetrically standardized sampling structures
deployed at three pH regimes (regular ~8.0, medium ~7.8-7.9 and low ~7.6-7.8)
spanning the pH range predicted over the next one hundred years. Using photo
analysis, and DNA barcoding of the bigger motile and sessile taxa and
metabarcoding of the bulk sessile and small motile fractions , the investigators
will evaluate spatial coverage, diversity and abundance of the species present
across the pH gradient. The study will test the hypothesis that invertebrate
diversity will decrease with decreasing pH and that taxonomic composition will
shift to a community more resistant to acidified waters (e.g. non-calcifiers).
Thus, the project's overall goal is to assess the likely impacts of future ocean
acidification on the highly diverse cryptic fauna associated with coral reef
ecosystems. This research has implications for both our understanding of the
ecology of coral reefs and management strategies in the light of global changes.