* 1558225
* Collaborative Research: Uncertainty in Predictions of 21st Century Ocean Biogeochemical Change
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Nicole Lovenduski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2021
* USD 367,464.00

The biogeochemistry of the oceans is undergoing large-scale changes due to
anthropogenic climate change. Recent research suggests these changes are
occurring significantly on regional scales, but due to model uncertainties, it
is difficult to constrain the difference between anthropogenic and natural
influences. In studying climate change and its effect on ocean biogeochemistry
in the future, it is crucial to be able to distinguish between these influences;
therefore, it is critical to identify and quantify the uncertainty in Earth
System Models (ESMs). The researchers will use output from Community Earth
System Model (CESM) and models participating in the Fifth Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) to isolate prediction uncertainty due to 1)
internal variability, 2) model structure, and 3) emission scenario. This
research will bridge an existing gap between Earth System Models and
observational studies to assess how climate change will influence ocean
biogeochemistry. Additionally, this project will support an early-career
scientist and a graduate student, and the researchers are dedicated to mentoring
undergraduate students through various programs at Colorado University -
Boulder, National Center for Atmospheric Research, and the University of
Wisconsin.

Earth System Model (ESM) simulations used to predict future changes in ocean
biogeochemistry attributed to either natural or anthropogenic influences suffer
from uncertainties, particularly on regional scales. This is problematic
because, as the ocean continues to undergo large-scale change under the current
climate, it is crucial to have an accurate predictor of the future and to be
able to delineate between natural and anthropogenic forcing. This research aims
to quantify the uncertainty on three levels: uncertainty due to internal
variability, model structure, and emission scenario. Using output from the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) and models in the Fifth Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP5), this study will evaluate the degree to which
uncertainty has changed with newer models. Additionally, observations from
global databased, satellites, and time-series sites will be used to compare
models and assess the varying levels of skill in predicting the biogeochemistry
of a region. The researchers also plan to break down the various components of
the driving mechanisms behind prediction uncertainty, so that future models can
begin to take these factors into account.