* 1558577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Individual, Household, and Neighborhood-Level Factors Affecting the Health and Well-Being of Older Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Jessica Finlay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,990.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate how housing and
neighborhood designs affect the health and well-being of elder residents in U.S.
metropolitan areas. The project will focus on aging and the built environment at
the individual, household, and neighborhood level to address unique issues
occurring in different types of urban communities. The project will provide new
insights regarding how the built environment can be developed in specific ways
that are more consistent with the needs of elders. Project findings will
contribute to the spatial social sciences by expanding basic knowledge about the
health and well-being of elder residents in relation to their home and
neighborhood environments. The project will have practical implications by
promoting more inclusive and sustainable urban planning and design that better
meet the unique needs of diverse aging populations, with special emphasis on the
experiences and needs of low-income, minority, and disabled older adults. The
project will provide basic research exposure and experience to a diverse range
of individuals, with special efforts made to provide research opportunities for
students from underrepresented groups to participate in fieldwork and data
analysis. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will aim to
understand urban landscape challenges to "aging in place," an increasingly
common phenomenon where elder residents stay in their longtime homes and
communities instead of moving to institutional settings, such as assisted living
facilities. The doctoral student will identify personal, household, and
neighborhood level factors that affect elder residents' well-being and ability
to "age in place" in a safe and supportive environment. The student will bridges
theories and methods from geography and public health through a mixed-methods
study in three distinct regions of the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area.
The first phase of research will involve sit-down and mobile interviews with 125
community-dwelling elder residents as well as environmental audits and spatial
analyses of participants' homes and neighborhoods. The second phase will involve
semi-longitudinal ethnographic sessions with a subset of participants.
Interviews with civic staff and policy analysis in the third phase will focus on
local planning and policy efforts. This multi-level investigation will produce
new insights into the complex connections between elders and urban environments,
and project results will inform urban planning and community design that tries
to accommodate the distinctive needs of elder citizens in American society.