* 1558412
* The Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2020
* USD 2,352,663.00

The Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry (OCB) Program is an organized undertaking
to provide planning, coordination and collaborative opportunities that promote
team building and development of critical multidisciplinary research efforts
directed at the study of marine biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem processes
within the U.S. and with international partners. With original funding from NSF,
NASA, and NOAA, OCB was first established in 2006, locating the Project Office
at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Renewed funding for the OCB Project
Office over the next three years will allow a full range of activities including
(1) scientific and logistical support of the OCB Scientific Steering Committee
(SSC) and its subcommittees, (2) organization and execution of the OCB summer
workshop and Scoping Workshops to develop new research topics, (3) scientific
coordination within the OCB scientific community and with other U.S. and
international programs, (4) communication to both established and early career
researchers via OCB websites, newsletters, and email lists, and (5) development
and dissemination of education and public outreach materials. Based on 9 years
of experience and success with these same types of activities, as well as the
current strong community support for OCB, it is expected that these efforts will
create further opportunities for new collaborations, proposals and funded
projects, manuscripts, field opportunities, community input to scientific
planning initiatives, and scientific training for new investigators. OCB
provides unique broader impact in its ability to engage scientists that
represent almost the entire oceanographic community, as well as policy makers
and educators, in pursuit of the more complete understanding of climate change
related to evolving atmospheric and ocean chemistry, ocean biogeochemistry, and
ecosystem processes needed to develop improved predictions and sensible
adaptation strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OCB Project Office will work
over the next 3 years to continue the significant contributions they have made
in enabling the ocean biogeochemistry and ecological communities to discuss and
identify novel areas of interdisciplinary research. The OCB SSC and Program
Office personnel will work to re-focus their successful, well-attended summer
and scoping workshops on critical new research questions. Using a community-
driven approach, and by collecting the best ocean carbon cycle expertise in
smaller settings that foster meaningful discussions, OCB will continue to
provide services that the traditional scientific meeting format, designed only
to deliver the latest new science from individual PIs, cannot. OCB Project
Office staff will continue to respond to requests for information from
journalists, federal agency representatives, congressional staffers, and NGOs as
opportunities arise. With its responsive style, OCB will also continue to
facilitate timely scientific synthesis activities and strengthen partnerships
with U.S. and international partner programs.