* 1558497
* Whole Brain Functional Connectivity Measures of Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Marvin Chun, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 492,162.00

Attention affects nearly all aspects of perception, cognition, and performance.
Despite its central importance, researchers lack a simple way to measure a
person's attentional functioning. Although no mental process can be reduced to a
single number, both research and practical settings can benefit from starting
with standardized and quantifiable measures. For example, intelligence research
and education practice depends heavily on g, an index of fluid intelligence. A
comparable measure is lacking for attention. The goal of this project is to
develop an attention profile measure that can 1) quantify a person's attentional
function, 2) predict behavior, 3) and to facilitate comparison of attentional
performance across individuals, tasks, and sites, and, importantly, over time. A
quantifiable and standardized whole-brain attention measure can have
transformative utility for research and practical applications. The work should
have direct benefits for advancing the scientific understanding of attention and
the underlying neural mechanisms. This project will also benefit society through
education and research. Our brain imaging studies involve rigorous training of
analytic methods needed to process complex fMRI data, providing opportunities
for STEM training at high school levels and beyond, especially for women or
underrepresented minorities. The PI, Dr. Marvin Chun, has a strong record of
dedication to mentoring, teaching, and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new attention profile investigated here predicts a performance ranking for novel
individuals based on models of whole brain functional connectivity, which can be
measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during the resting
state, collected while participants lie passively in the scanner without
performing an explicit cognitive task. Models of intrinsic connectivity in a
whole brain attention network during the resting state are created to
significantly predict sustained attention task performance. This project will
develop further models to test other attention components such as alerting,
orienting, and executive function. Collectively, these whole brain functional
connectivity models will provide a quantitative attention profile for individual
participants. Because we can apply our models to novel subjects or independent
data sets from different sites, these new methods have broad applicability, and
they are predictive rather than just descriptive.