* 1558702
* Collaborative Research: Predicting the Spatiotemporal Distribution of Metabolic Function in the Global Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 176,386.00

Predicting how marine chemistry and biology will respond to global change is a
pressing issue for society. This project will develop new modeling techniques
for predicting such changes using ideas derived from physics in the
subdiscipline of thermodynamics that concerns how energy moves in a system.
Recent advancements in the thermodynamics of systems that change over time
indicate that systems will internally organize so as to maximize the flow and
dissipation of energy. For example, the temperature difference that develops
between the ocean and atmosphere over the summer drives the formation of
hurricanes (the organized structures) whose presence hastens the dissipation of
the temperature difference. This project utilizes this fundamental property but
extends it to microbial communities, such as bacteria and phytoplankton, which
form the base of the ocean food web and strongly influence ocean chemistry.
Based on information on how biology utilizes solar and chemical energy to
construct itself from carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and other elements in the
environment, the model can predict how metabolic functions, such as
photosynthesis or nitrogen fixation from the atmosphere, are expressed over time
and space within the ocean. These predictions can be compared to existing
oceanographic observations, including newly developed techniques that rely on
DNA and RNA sequencing to determine metabolic function of the microbial
community. This project will support one postdoctoral scholar in this new
interface between ocean biogeochemistry modeling, thermodynamics and molecular
observations. The project will also support summer internships as part of the
Woods Hole Partnership Education Program, a consortium of institutions committed
to increasing student diversity in Woods Hole, as well as support two
independent undergraduate research projects per year as part of the Semester in
Environmental Science Program at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL). A
workshop will be held in year 2 of the project to broaden exposure of
thermodynamic approaches in marine biogeochemistry and explore its place in the
broader context of recent advances in metabolic modeling and theory. Ocean model
code developed during the project will be open source and publicly
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the Darwin Project,
a trait and selection based modeling approach for describing marine plankton
communities and biogeochemical cycles. The approach relies on local competition
to select from a diverse population and determines the functional
characteristics of microorganisms that mediate biogeochemical cycles. The
project will combine this selection-based modeling approach with a distributed
metabolic network perspective previously developed to facilitate calculating
reaction thermodynamics. This will provide mechanistic and quantitative
description of key metabolic functions and allow the new model to be directly
mappable to omics-based observations. The project will utilize new modeling
design criteria based on the maximum entropy production (MEP) conjecture to
determine allocation of metabolic machinery and its expression, such as
metabolic switching between nitrogen fixation and ammonium uptake. Model testing
will rely on existing oceanographic surveys and observations. Once validated,
the coupled model will be used to investigate losses of functional biodiversity,
generalist versus specialists, temporal planktonic strategies as well as losses
in community complementarity on ecosystem biogeochemistry. A significant output
from the project will be a predicted global biogeography map of metabolic
function and expression (such as nitrogen fixation and ammonium oxidation) that
can be tested with, and used to interpret, directed omics observations.