* 1558689
* Collaborative Research: Subduction Initiation and Development of the Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc: An Investigation of Samples from Cores from Recent Ocean Drilling
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* John Shervais, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2019
* USD 96,271.00

The subduction of oceanic plates at deep-sea trenches around the globe leads to
powerful earthquakes, dangerous volcanic eruptions, and economically important
hydrothermal mineral deposits. This project will investigate some of the least
understood aspects this globally important process: what causes it to start,
what kind of crust is produced after subduction starts, and what materials are
released from the subducting slab as it initially sinks. The International Ocean
Discovery Program Expedition 352 drilled 1.22 kilometers of volcanic rocks at
water depths of 3.1-4.8 kilometers in the Bonin fore-arc in the western Pacific
Ocean to investigate the start of subduction. This research performs a complete
geochemical and petrological characterization of drilled fore-arc, seafloor,
mafic, volcanic rocks, (i.e., basalts and boninites) recovered during the
drilling expedition to better understand how subduction zone volcanism begins
and evolves. The rock sequences encountered in the Bonin fore-arc are remarkably
similar to those found in many ophiolites (ocean crust and upper mantle rocks
found on the continents), so this project will also provide insights into the
origin of ophiolites as well. This project supports and expands the extensive
international scientific collaborations developed during Expedition 352 to
include additional top-flight female scientists as well as undergraduate and
graduate researchers. Results from this project will become part of classroom
resources supported by an ongoing NSF-funded education project. It will also
provide funding to researchers at institutions in three EPSCoR states (Iowa,
Utah, and Rhode Island) and foster international collaboration with Australian
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
document the nature of the first crust produced after subduction initiation in
the Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc system. Samples collected from four sites drilled
during the International Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 352 to the Bonin
fore-arc will be analyzed. Drill cores from two of the sites primarily recovered
fore-arc basalts and two recovered boninites. This research, in collaboration
with that being done by other members of the shipboard scientific party, will
comprehensively analyze the recovered volcanic rocks, providing geochemical data
on the major and trace element compositions of volcanic glasses. It will also
complete analyses of oxygen isotopes, water and CO2 concentrations in the
volcanic glasses; measurements of water concentrations in pyroxenes; Fe ratios
in glasses; concentrations of fluid-mobile elements and B-Li isotopes in whole
rocks and glasses; radiogenic Re-Os isotopes and PGE abundances in whole rocks
and glasses; and major element and trace element compositions of whole rocks.
Resulting data will be used to constrain melting processes and understand
variations in the fluid, solid, and magma fluxes through the nascent mantle
wedge from subduction initiation onward as the mode of magma generation changes
from decompression melting to flux melting. The data will be used to address
four principle scientific questions: (1) are fore arc basalts generated by
decompression melting in a unique high temperature, low-pressure environment
during rapid sea-floor spreading related to subduction initiation; (2) are the
mantle sources of fore arc basalts and boninites unusually depleted and do they
exhibit signatures of ancient recycled mantle or continental components; (3)
were low- and high-Si boninites from drilling Sites U1439 and U1442 generated in
succession from depleted mantle left after generation of fore arc basalts as
spreading rates decreased and the involvement of subducted fluids increased; and
(4) did magma generation migrate landward with time and to lower pressures.
These questions align with the principal objectives of the NSF-funded
International Ocean Discovery Program's Initial Science Plan, including testing
the validity of the ophiolite model and understanding the initial origins of
continental crust. Additionally the work will address questions in the NSF-
funded GeoPRISMS science plan that focus on what the physical and chemical
conditions are that control subduction zone initiation and the early development
of arc systems.