* 1558970
* The Social Value of Financial Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Pablo Kurlat, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 271,000.00

This project seeks to develop a new measure of the value of time, effort, money,
and other resources devoted to the financial sector. Firms in this sector of the
economy develop expertise that allows them to participate in markets with
limited (asymmetric) information. For example, a mortgage company must assess
the credit-worthiness of potential borrowers. Property insurers evaluate the
chance of damage from natural disasters. Venture capitalists decide whether or
not to invest in a start-up business. Developing expertise is expensive; it
takes time and effort. Expertise is valuable to the individual firm, since more
expertise means better decisions and eventually higher returns. Expertise is
also valuable to the wider society as a whole. Society is better off when
credit-worthy people can get mortgages (but very risky loans are not made), when
insurers require that builders and owners mitigate natural disaster risks, and
when the best new firms can get capital to expand. In the language of economics,
this kind of expertise is socially valuable because it reduces the effects of
asymmetric information and allows us to realize gains from trade that are a net
benefit. The principal investigator plans to develop a method for measuring how
the social value of additional expertise compares to the private value. The
results could help us understand how financial markets contribute to US
prosperity, and whether the US economy would be better off if more talented
individuals went into medicine, technology, or research rather than into
financial sector jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to derive an expression
for the ratio of marginal social value to marginal private value of expertise.
If firms are optimizing, the marginal private value is equal to the marginal
cost of expertise, so it is possible to understand how social value compares to
costs. By focusing on the ratio of marginal social value to marginal private
value, he is able to avoid making any assumptions about the technology that
leads to expertise acquisition. He will use a sufficient statistic approach to
measure the ratio, decomposing the ration into parts that correspond to
measurable quantities for different branches of the financial sector. The
results will provide empirical evidence on whether or not talent and effort that
is now employed in the US financial sector might be more valuable in other
pursuits.