* 1558692
* Collaborative Research: Transformations of soluble Mn(III) along horizontal and vertical oxygen gradients
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Bradley Tebo, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 434,007.00

Manganese (Mn) is an important trace nutrient for biological growth in marine
organisms. In the past, all Mn dissolved in seawater was thought to exist in
only one chemical form: Mn(II). Recent work in waters and sediments with little
or no oxygen has shown that Mn(III) can be the dominant form of dissolved Mn and
can even be present in oxygenated water if attached to specific organic
molecules called ligands. This research will further investigate these
discoveries, aiming to quantify the chemical and microbiological processes
responsible for Mn(III) cycling under varying oxygen concentrations. The
research will compare field sites in the Broadkill River wetland, the Chesapeake
Bay, and the Lower St. Lawrence Estuary; measuring the water column and
sediments known to have strong oxygen gradients and different organic carbon
sources that could change the availability and binding strength of ligands that
would stabilize dissolved Mn(III). In some chemical forms, Mn tends to act like
iron, so this research may have broader implications by helping marine chemists
to understand more about iron cycling in similar oxygen gradients. With growing
concerns over diminished oxygen concentrations (hypoxia) in the ocean, and
particularly in coastal regions, understanding the reactions of Mn(III) with
organic ligands across oxygen gradients could become important for understanding
Mn availability to organisms. The project includes support for the participation
and mentoring of one graduate student and two postdoctoral researchers, and
there will be a U.S.-Canada collaboration. A variety of public outreach
activities are planned with a K-12 teacher to be selected as a participant on a
research cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mn(III) has only recently been recognized
as an important redox state for Mn in seawater. Previously, it was widely
accepted that all Mn that passes through a 0.2 or 0.4 µm filter is dissolved
Mn(II) while the retained portion is solid Mn(III, IV) oxide. Research in the
Black Sea, the Baltic Sea, and the Chesapeake Bay has shown that soluble Mn(III)
can be up to 100% of the dissolved Mn in the water column. Also, Mn(III) can
exist as complexes with organic ligands in oxygenated seawater. This project
will quantify and constrain the mechanisms surrounding weak and strong Mn(III)
ligand transformations across vertical and horizontal oxygen gradients. Field
sites to be studied include systems with a variety of organic carbon sources and
oxygen dynamics: the Lower St. Lawrence Estuary, Chesapeake Bay, and Broadkill
River wetland estuary. This research will continue to inform the fundamental
shift that is taking place in our current understanding of Mn biogeochemistry in
coastal systems. The results should also be applicable to redox processes
involving Fe(III) ligand transformations, since Mn and Fe tend to exhibit
similar redox chemistry under similar environmental conditions.