* 1558902
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Analysis of Care and Criminal Law in California's Mental Health Courts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Elizabeth Davis, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2017
* USD 13,860.00

With 2.2 million Americans in prisons and jails, the United States has one of
the highest rates of incarceration in the world. In light of emerging public
concerns about the cost, efficacy, and dignity of mass incarceration, counties
and states have developed innovative policies designed to reduce the number of
individuals behind bars. In 2011, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled (Brown v. Plata)
that California's practices of mass incarceration were unconstitutional, and
that the "cruel and unusual" punishment of being subject to California's
overcrowded prisons was particularly difficult for inmates with mental
illnesses. Following this court decision, California has experimented with
alternatives in criminal justice infrastructure. One such experiment has been
the development of mental health courts, which are criminal courtrooms that
aspire to take convicted individuals with mental illnesses out of jails and
place them in community psychiatric care. Mental health courts structurally
differ from other criminal courtrooms in that prosecution and defense attorneys
collaborate with psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, and the judges to
monitor offender' progress towards mental health. In this context,offenders
become "clients" of the courtroom. They are required to follow a court-developed
treatment plan, and if they deviate from that plan, the judge may return them to
jail. The research supported by this award asks what these alternative legal
programs might be accomplishing in addition to the promotion of decarceration?
Are there side effects or unintended consequences? Better understanding of the
practices and effects of mental health courts is critical for understanding the
strengths and weaknesses of programs designed to redress mass
incarceration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University doctoral candidate
Jessica Cooper, with the supervision of Dr. Elizabeth Davis, will conduct the
research in the mental health courts of Santa Clara and San Francisco counties
in California. She will carry out ethnographic observations in the two
courtrooms and in the court-sponsored clinics through which offender-clients
receive care. She will supplement these observational data with interviews of
courtroom and clinical professionals, as well as clients, and with analyses of
court records and transcripts. These data will allow her to identify and analyze
the relationships that develop between clients and state representatives to
investigate exactly how these relationships work to combine care and control in
order to provide public health services through a system designed for criminal
justice. Findings from Cooper's research also will illuminate the degree to
which structural change in the criminal justice system at the local level may
affect more general extra-local relationships, as well, such as the
relationships between mental health court professionals, their clients, and
multiple levels of government.