* 1558012
* Unraveling the Link between Carbohydrate Transport and Phosphate Use: Can We Improve Carbon Partitioning and Reduce Nutrient Use?
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Brian Ayre, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 564,315.00

Increasing crop productivity while reducing environmental impacts of agriculture
are prominent challenges. Phosphate is an essential nutrient, but is also a
major component of agricultural runoff and water pollution. Increased
photosynthesis and transport of sugars from leaves to growing organs was
hypothesized to increase overall growth, but new evidence argues that this
creates an imbalance in the ratio of photoassimilated carbon (the sugars
produced by photosynthesis) and available phosphate, and causes stunting. More
phosphate restores growth, but also contributes to more runoff. The implication
is that efforts to improve photosynthesis and growth while simultaneously
reducing phosphate requirements may be imperiled unless the interaction between
carbon and phosphate is understood and uncoupled. This proposal aims to
differentiate between two possibilities. 1) The carbon/phosphate interaction is
predominantly a biochemical limitation: more carbon in growing tissues triggers
a need for more phosphate-containing metabolites. 2) The plant measures the
carbon/phosphate balance, and excessive carbon is recognized as a phosphate
deficiency even though none exists. These will be tested through physiological,
genetic, and metabolic experiments to learn if the links between carbon
transport and phosphate needs can be uncoupled. This work will reveal strategies
that can be used to increase productivity while reducing fertilizer needs. In
addition to traditional training of students in the research laboratory, broader
undergraduate participation will be achieved by incorporating some aspects of
the project into the upper level Plant Physiology laboratory undergraduate
course. The approximately 30 students who take the course each year will learn
principles of genetics, molecular biology, and bioinformatics. This will not
only give hands-on biotechnology experience in an active-learning environment,
but also will be used as an opportunity to explore the Genetically Modified
Organisms 'GMO' debate with a group of undergraduates who might otherwise be
unlikely to engage with this important societal
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced sucrose transport from source
leaves to sink organs should improve crop yields by providing more resources for
growth while relieving product inhibition on photosynthesis. Over-expressing
sucrose transporters (SUTs) in the phloem enhances transport but causes stunted
growth originating from a perceived phosphorus (P) deficiency: P-starvation
genes are up-regulated and the effect is reversed by P supplementation. P is a
non-renewable essential element and a component of agricultural runoff, such
that reducing P requirements while maintaining yields are also prominent
challenges. One possibility is that more sucrose causes stunting by sequestering
too much P in metabolic intermediates. Another possibility is that signaling
between carbon (C) and P provokes preparation for P-limitation. These will be
tested through experiments that include 1) growth with phosphite as a phosphate
analog to separate signaling and biochemical effects; 2) reverse and forward
genetics to identify genes that modulate C:P interaction; 3) transcriptomics to
capture gene-expression reprioritization during Suc-induced P-limitations; 4)
metabolic analyses to capture metabolome remodeling during Suc-induced
P-limitations; and 5) physiological experiments with gain and loss of function
lines to learn if C:P links can be uncoupled.