* 1558221
* I-Corps:  Piezoelectric Actuation for Tooth Extraction and Dental Procedures
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Antonio Valdevit, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Tooth extraction procedures have gone relatively unchanged for decades involving
only minimal innovation focused around instrument refinement. Little progress
has been made in the changing of the extraction process. Traditional tooth
extractions require separation of the tooth from the surrounding gums by cutting
of the tissue. This is followed by the extraction that uses the neighboring
teeth as a fulcrum to wedge the tooth from the socket. As a result, partial
extraction (leaving the roots) and adjacent tooth breakage can occur, thereby
causing local trauma and extra healing time. In this proposal, a mechanism
employing vibratory motion to loosen the tooth from the gum tissue without
cutting and subsequently vibrate the tooth from the socket has been proposed.
The vibration mechanism will be integrated into existing dental instruments. The
result is a less traumatic removal of the tooth and a reduced time for healing.
With an annual market of 8 billion dollars in the dental field associated with
tooth extractions, the introduction of these devices is timely and viable.
Further, the use of this technology in the veterinary field where the market
potential may be twice that associated with human tooth extractions makes for a
less burdensome undertaking and can provide a validated method and process prior
to FDA regulatory compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks to achieve
tooth extraction via oscillatory motion. The loosening of the tooth is
accomplished by employing a piezoelectric actuator which displays displacement
proportional to the electric current applied. The displacement characteristics
of these actuators can be altered by varying the frequency and magnitude of the
current through the device. Due to their small geometry, they can be
incorporated into existing instruments currently utilized in the dental field.
In the new extraction process, the tooth is separated from the restraining
tissues using a non-cutting vibrating blade secured to a piezoelectric handle
(periotome). The tooth is secured using the traditional instrument (forceps)
equipped with the piezoelectric device and vibrated loose from the socket rather
than pulled in the traditional manner. The new extraction process employing
vibratory motion reduces local trauma, reduces healing time, and minimizes the
likelihood of adjacent tooth damage since surrounding teeth are often used as
lever arms to aid in the extraction process. Incorporation of the piezo-
actuation into the traditional dental instruments will permit a reduced learning
curve and improve the likelihood of acceptance by clinicians as minimal
deviations from conventional practice is involved.During the I-Corps curriculum,
the team will access the market opportunity, refine the minimum viable product
and outline commercialization plans for the device platform capable of
transforming an existing 6 billion dollar annual market.