* 1558343
* Characterizing Current and Wave Drag over Shallow Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 382,006.00

The defining hydrodynamic characteristic of coral reefs is that they are rough.
Consequently, the fundamental challenge in understanding and modeling the
dynamics of both currents and surface gravity waves over shallow coral reefs is
characterizing drag. This research is aimed at developing more accurate
circulation and wave models for coral reefs that are essential for properly
interpreting observations and modeling biochemical processes over reefs. A
better understanding of the hydrodynamics is also essential for making accurate
assessments of the impact of climate change on coral reefs. For example, the
dependence of drag coefficients on water depth clearly has implications to the
impact of sea level rise on coral reefs. This study will directly benefit
ongoing research on the impact of ocean acidification on the barrier reefs of
Palau (western tropical Pacific) and Dongsha (South China Sea) by providing a
better physical context for interpreting biochemical observations. The project
will inform the thesis work of two graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
advance the understanding of current and wave drag over coral reefs, this study
addresses four sets of questions: 1) Do drag coefficients based on depth-average
currents depend on water depth in a manner consistent with theory from open-
channel flow and does this dependence account for some of the scatter in coral
reef drag coefficients? 2) What is the relationship between surface gravity wave
friction factors over coral reefs and orbital displacements and is it consistent
with results from laboratory studies and existing theories? 3) Do wave-current
interactions significantly enhance current drag and wave dissipation over coral
reefs? 4) Are hydrodynamic roughness estimates for currents and surface waves
similar and what is their relationship to physical roughness over coral reefs?
These four sets of questions will be addressed use existing observations of
current profiles, pressures, and wave characteristics from three very different
coral reef systems, Palau's barrier reef, Dongsha Atoll, and three platform
reefs in the Red Sea. Spatial-average drag coefficients will be estimated by
integrating the momentum balance across the reefs to account for spatial (and
temporal) variations in water depth and determining the drag coefficient that
minimizes the residual error in the momentum balance. Wave friction factors will
be estimated by integrating the wave-energy balance across the reef and
minimizing the residual error. Since there are substantial spatial and temporal
variations in water depth over coral reefs determining the drag coefficient
dependence on water depth and providing a model for that dependence will be a
significant advance in the understanding of coral reef hydrodynamics. The
project will advance the understanding of wave-current interactions over coral
reefs, a potentially important unresolved problem. Accounting for these factors
influencing current and wave drag will allow accurate and consistent estimates
of hydrodynamic roughness that can then be related to coral reef physical
roughness.