* 1558046
* Flavonoid Regulation of Root Architecture and Reactive Oxygen Species Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Gloria Muday, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 671,486.00

Plants must have a highly branched root system for efficient moisture and
nutrient acquisition. As a result of global climate change, drought is becoming
more prevalent world-wide, driving the need for insight into root architecture
that maximizes water uptake that may lead to development of drought tolerant
crops. This project explores how root architecture is controlled by flavonoids,
which are chemicals made by plants that function as antioxidants. Flavonoid
antioxidants reduce the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which act as
signaling molecules to help plants adapt to stressful growth conditions, but can
become toxic at high levels. ROS signals play important roles in the response of
plants to changes in light, temperature, and drought. This project examines how
ROS-dependent signaling pathways are induced and how flavonoids limit these
signals to prevent oxidative damage. The planned experiments will use plants
with mutations that alter flavonoid synthesis to demonstrate when and where
flavonoids alter ROS levels in roots and how the accumulation of flavonoids
alters root architecture. This project will also explore the mechanisms by which
ROS modulates activity of proteins and expression of genes. This project will
also support the development of a case study exercise targeted to high school
students, which teaches plant genetics and how plants respond to drought and the
potential of conventional breeding and genetic engineering of plants to lead to
drought tolerant crop varieties. The team will bring college students to high
school classrooms to lead students through this curriculum to better understand
these concepts and how they apply to agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) as signaling
molecules that control root development and examine how flavonoids scavenge ROS
to modulate development. This project applies genetic, molecular biological, and
biochemical approaches to examine and manipulate the flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway in the model plant species of Arabidopsis thaliana to ask whether
flavonoid effects on root architecture are the result of their antioxidant
action. We have in hand mutants with defects at most steps in flavonoid
biosynthesis, which we will use to determine which flavonoids control root
architecture. We will localize and quantify ROS using confocal microscopy with a
probes that detect specific reactive oxygen species to determine whether ROS
accumulation and distribution are modulated by the different flavonoid
accumulation profiles found in these mutants. We will use genetic and chemical
approaches to manipulate the levels of ROS and ROS scavengers to demonstrate
that flavonoid/ROS interplay is directly linked to root development. Finally, we
will identify the mechanisms by which flavonoid-modulated ROS controls root
development by exploring changes in transcriptional networks and using an
unbiased proteomic approach to identify proteins that are reversibly modified by
ROS in a flavonol-dependent mechanism. The function of ROS regulated gene
products or ROS oxidized proteins will then be tested using a mutant approach.