* 1558240
* I-Corps:  DotLens smartphone microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Wei-Chuan Shih, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Currently, the access to microscopes is limited to laboratories. Although there
are low cost microscopes, these microscopes are generally of a low optical
quality, and are quite bulky to carry around. In many cases, these microscopes
only work with samples mounted on glass slides before being able to see what
needs to be seen. This I-Corps team believes there is an untapped market for
customers who want to bring around their own microscopes, both for curiosity and
for professional purposes. By coupling with a wireless-ready device, the
proposed technology ?DotLens Microscopy? enables easy sharing and documentation.
The primary motivation of the project is to enhance K-12 STEM education in the
US. DotLens microscopy will enrich the current science curriculum by lowing the
barrier of access to microscopes, both in the classroom and in the field,
thereby improving teaching effectiveness and student learning. Ultimately,
DotLens microscopy may help inspire a new generation of children and young
adults to consider STEM fields as their future career path, by demonstrating the
transformation of a smartphone into a microscope. The simplicity, versatility
and flexibility of DotLens microscopy on virtually any camera-ready mobile
electronic devices will enable a wide range of innovative formal and informal
education activities. As for industrial and professional applications, DotLens
microscopy provides imaging quality competitive to professional imaging systems
at a fraction of the cost and weight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DotLens is a
revolutionary polymer lens that can transform any smartphone or tablet camera
into a microscope with a magnification from 5 to 150 times and resolution
approaching 1/100th the width of a hair. DotLens can be simply attached to any
camera port in a fashion similar to contact lens for human eyes, and its
microscopy capabilities can find a variety of applications, for example, vision
aid for the elderly, biological imaging, and classroom usage in K-12 education.
DotLens is manufactured by a proprietary 3D printing method, producing high
quality lenses with precise magnification. The team's goal is to refine the
market research and develop strategies to address individual vertical segments,
including pricing analysis, competitor analysis, distribution channels, etc. The
team will engage in interviewing potential users such as researchers,
academicians, students, teachers, and other professionals their user experience
and acceptance. Ultimately, the team would like to introduce DotLens microscopy
to the international arena, and provide it at affordable cost for all whom can
benefit from it.