* 1558468
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on Interseismic Deformation Offshore Oregon from Calibrated Continuous Pressure Records
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2018
* USD 390,868.00

The Cascadia Subduction zone lies off the coast of the Pacific Northwest and is
of both scientific and public interest because it is the site of catastrophic
earthquakes similar to those that have occurred over the last decade in Japan,
Chile, and Sumatra. On land, networks of instruments are available to measure
the build-up of strain across the Cascadia subduction zone fault. Similar
observations are required offshore to understand the dynamics of the subduction
zone better, and to place stronger constraints on the earthquakes and tsunamis
the fault produces every few hundred years. This project uses calibrated
seafloor pressure sensors to make accurate measurements of the elevation of the
seafloor at six sites off the coast of central Oregon. The project will initiate
a decadal study that will measure changes in seafloor elevation that result from
the build-up, and potentially the release, of strain across the subduction zone
fault. The study will constrain the width of the locked portion of the fault
that will break in the next large subduction zone earthquake. The project will
involve two graduate students, and include at least four undergraduates on each
research expedition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-quality offshore vertical
geodetic measurements will be used to provide a baseline suitable for resolving
secular strain caused by locking across the Cascadia subduction zone, and for
detecting slow slip events. Several previous studies have shown that seafloor
pressure measurements can detect slow-slip events, but the drift of seafloor
pressure sensors has limited their application to measuring secular strain. The
University of Washington (UW) and Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) have
collaborated to build and successfully test a campaign version of the SIO
seafloor calibrated pressure recorder, the Absolute Seafloor Calibrated Pressure
Recorder (ASCPR). This instrument measures absolute pressures to an accuracy
equivalent to ~1 cm of water depth. Repeat measurements with the ASCPR on stable
seafloor benchmarks equipped with a continuously recording bottom pressure gauge
will be used to remove the drift from pressure time series and enable
measurements of secular strain. The UW and SIO have deployed a trench-
perpendicular profile of 6 benchmarks and bottom pressure recorders off central
Oregon. This project supports repeat campaign-style absolute pressure
measurements over two years on each benchmark to fully characterize the
repeatability of ASCPR measurements and initiate a decadal study required to
measure secular strain. By utilizing stable, undisturbed benchmarks to make
accurate absolute pressure measurements, this effort could transform our
capabilities for making long-term geodetic observations offshore. Complementary
geodetic and physical oceanographic modeling studies are being used to further
understand the expected geodetic signals and develop improved methods to
separate geodetic and oceanographic components of pressure.