* 1558980
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Effect of Internal Climate Variability on Sea Level in the Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Philip Thompson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 177,270.00

Some of the most densely populated and vulnerable coastal regions in the world
are located in the Indian Ocean basin, and there is considerable evidence that
the impact of Indian Ocean variability on climate extends beyond the basin to
global scales. Resulting largely from a short and sparse historical record, the
understanding of sea level in the Indian Ocean is lacking when compared to other
ocean basins. Studying the effect of internal climate variability on sea level
in the Indo-Pacific has therefore relied largely on model-based approaches that
have been unable to resolve several open questions about climate and sea level
variability in the region. In this project, an observation-driven approach is
employed to examine these questions and provide an improved understanding of the
relationship between internal climate variability and sea level in the Indo-
Pacific region. With a longer observational record and through the simultaneous
analysis of multiple climate variables and modeled data, this project will
improve the understanding of how internal climate variability affects Indian
Ocean sea level trends and variability. Established and tested statistical will
be used to extract the sea level variability associated with several different
climate signals in the Indo-Pacific region. By removing this internal
variability, the anthropogenic portion of the sea level trend can be uncovered,
reading to improved estimates and interpretation of both past and future sea
level rise in the region. Understanding the sea level contribution of internal
variability on inter-annual to decadal timescales can also lead to improved
prediction of future sea level, again aiding in adaptation and mitigation
efforts. Finally, providing an improved assessment of the effect of climate
signals on precipitation patterns could have significant impact to populations
across the globe. This project is led by two early career investigators and will
train two graduate students, thus enhancing the scientific and professional
development of young scientists in an area of study (sea level rise) that is of
growing concern.

This project has the potential to substantially improve sea level rise estimates
in the region and contribute to improved planning efforts for the Indian Ocean
coastlines most vulnerable to the effects of higher sea levels. By isolating the
anthropogenic portion of the sea level trends in the region, assessments can be
made regarding how human-activity is affecting sea level and may continue to do
so in the future. New and innovative statistical methods will be employed that
can better isolate internal oscillatory modes to better quantify Indian Ocean
sea level change and advance the current understanding of the Indian Ocean?s
role in regional and global climate variability. Using a multivariate
reconstruction approach based on cyclo-stationary empirical orthogonal functions
(CSEOFs), challenges provided by poor historical sampling can be overcome to
investigate sea level in the Indo-Pacific region. The CSEOF multivariate
reconstruction algorithm represents a significant advancement in the
reconstruction of climate variability. With an improved representation of
internal variability and by comparing the current state of sea level to past
states, valuable insight will be gained into both how sea level has changed as a
result of anthropogenic influences, and how it may change or continue to change
in the future. Only with a long, consistent sea level record (in addition to
other climate variables) is it possible to gain such an understanding.
Furthermore, by combining models with the long observational record, many open
questions regarding Indo-Pacific sea level can be investigated and subsequently
answered. An assessment of the quality of these models and historical data will
also be made, which will provide guidance to those seeking to study the region
in the future.