* 1558228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Investigating the Influence of Biotic and Abiotic Factors on Grasslands in the Great Plains Region of the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Kendra McLauchlan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 08/31/2017
* USD 11,267.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS) PROGRAM

ABSTRACT

This doctoral dissertation research project will evaluate the influence of
biotic and abiotic factors on grassland composition as exhibited through pollen
assemblages. The research will provide new insights into interpretations of
pollen from lake sediment cores that reveal changes in vegetation over time and
contribute important information about interannual variation in pollen
productivity and composition of a natural grassland environment. Although
conducted in a contemporary context, the project will help answer important
questions in paleoecological research by helping quantify the relationships
between pollen (as a vegetation proxy) and key drivers like fire, herbivory, and
topography. The project will enhance the value of a long-term dataset that is
the longest-running annual record of North American grassland pollen
composition. The doctoral student will work with a high school serving
underrepresented populations to integrate a research-based module into their
science curriculum. In addition, the project also will yield new information and
insights to more effectively refine allergy assessments in the health and
medical fields. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.

North American grasslands emerged about 25 million years ago and have persisted
despite dramatic changes in climate and fauna. Over time, and especially
throughout the Holocene Epoch, the species composition and the extent of the
biome has changed, but the role of the biotic and abiotic factors influencing
those changes remain unknown. The doctoral student will conduct this project in
a tallgrass prairie in Kansas. The study area is diverse, with variable
topography, and includes sites that have experienced a range of different
burning and grazing treatments. The research will focus on quantifying the
relationships between grassland pollen assemblages and the biotic and abiotic
variables influencing the region. This will be accomplished by identifying
pollen from multiple traps throughout the study to produce a multi-year set of
modern pollen data. The doctoral student will quantify these data in order to
assess interannual variations in grassland pollen through multivariate
statistical analyses. Outcomes from this research will enable better
interpretation of past vegetation cover and facilitate better predictions of
grassland response to human-induced shifts in fire and herbivory regimes during
a range of current and possible future climatic conditions.