* 1558585
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Brain Connectivity in Reasoning Development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Silvia Bunge, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 295,937.00

Abstract Collaborative Research: The Role of Brain Connectivity in Reasoning
Development

Understanding the patterns of communication between brain regions, and how they
develop across childhood, is critical for understanding the development of the
neural mechanisms that implement complex cognitive operations such as reasoning.
Functional connectivity, or correlations in patterns of brain activation
(measured via fMRI), is thought to reflect this inter-regional communication.
But communication between brain regions ultimately depends on structural
connectivity: the white matter tracts that, either directly or indirectly,
connect them. This proposal is aimed at resolving two open questions: 1) What
are the dynamic relationships between structural and functional connectivity,
for the key networks known to be involved in reasoning and other higher
cognitive processes, as these develop together across childhood?, and 2) How do
these dynamic relationships affect developmental improvements in reasoning
ability? The answers that we obtain will provide both fundamental insight into
the development of brain connectivity and mechanistic insight into the
development of reasoning ability. This knowledge could impact future research
both on educational and training programs designed to teach reasoning ability,
and on interventions or medical programs designed to correct problems in
reasoning.

To address these questions, we will combine fMRI, DTI, and behavioral data from
three longitudinal developmental datasets, collected at UC Berkeley, UC Davis,
and Vanderbilt University. By combining datasets, we are able to examine
longitudinal data from 400 children and young adults between the ages of 6 and
22. Our primary measures of interest include a) intrinsic functional
connectivity between specific regions of interest; b) structural connectivity,
measured via fractional anisotropy along tracts that connect these regions; and
c) reasoning ability, measured via standard cognitive tests. Our main analyses
will focus on connectivity within and between two brain networks, the fronto-
parietal network and cingulo-opercular network, which are most closely
associated with reasoning and other higher cognitive functions. Mixed-model
regression analyses will be employed to examine concurrent relationships among
structural and functional connectivity in these networks and reasoning ability.
Multivariate latent difference score models will be employed to examine lead-lag
relationships. The outcome of this research will be a model of interacting
structural and functional connectivity development across childhood, and of how
the co-development of these two indicators of neural communication relates to
developmental improvements in reasoning ability.