* 1558453
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Analytical Window Electrochemical Techniques and Meta-Omics Applied to Studies of Iron Recycling and Iron-Binding Ligands in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Christopher Dupont, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2021
* USD 301,715.00

The importance of iron (Fe) as a limiting micronutrient in the ocean is a
relatively new discovery. And while critical advances have been made in
understanding the marine iron cycle, a full description remains elusive due to
its biogeochemical complexity and the low concentrations of iron in the ocean.
The research funded in this project seeks to advance our understanding of the
chemical forms of Fe in seawater. This will be done by first refining a novel,
selective electrochemical analytical method for looking at Fe at natural
concentrations in seawater and then relating the resulting data to the genetic
composition of the microbial communities responsible for creating the organic
molecules that control the fate and chemical form of Fe in the ocean. We now
know that iron is an incredibly important micronutrient to biological
communities, and this new approach of linked genomic and analytical data has the
potential to provide important insights that will significantly advance the
study of iron composition in the ocean. This project will also support two
graduate students at Scripps Institute of Oceanography, both participating in a
new outreach program with 6th graders initiated by the Birch Aquarium at
Scripps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of iron as a limiting
micronutrient in the ocean has become a topic of avid research, and there have
been many advances in the field. However, characterizations of iron speciation
in seawater are still broad by nature due to the lack of precision in the
electrochemical analytical techniques. Competitive ligand exchange - adsorptive
cathodic stripping voltammetry (CLE-ACSV) has been a commonly used technique to
study iron speciation in seawater. This research seeks to improve this method by
applying CLE-ACSV at multiple analytical windows (MAW) to increase resolution at
the strong and weak ends of the iron-binding ligand spectrum. Additionally, by
relating data from this technique to data on the metagenomic composition of the
resident microbial community, the work should be able to make meaningful
connections between the microbial communities that produce the organic ligands
that we now know dominate iron speciation, solubility, and uptake in the ocean.
This research has the potential to make a significant contribution to the
current understanding of iron cycling in seawater, and it will help us to better
understand the larger global ocean biogeochemical processes that control the
distribution and availability of iron and its controls on global productivity.