* 1558062
* Zombie Ants: Towards a Mechanistic Understanding of the Precise Control of Animal Behavior by a Microbial Parasite
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Philip Smith, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2019
* USD 547,000.00

One of the most complex examples of symbiosis in nature is the precise
manipulation of animal behavior by a microbe. Ophiocordyceps is a fungus that
infects zombie ants. Infection of ant workers by thousands of these fungal cells
causes the workers to leave the colony and die attached by their mandibles to
plants that overhang the trails of ant colonies. There the fungus uses the dead
ant bodies to produce spores that infect other ants. The manipulation is complex
and spectacular given the fact that an organism without a brain controls the
behavior of one with a brain. In this project the research team will use an
integrative approach to ask how fungi change ants from being productive members
of their colony to "fungi in ant's clothing?". The project will use measurement
of gene expression, metabolism and tissue structure to ask how, during the 3
week period of infection, the fungi effectively take control of the ant. This
work will provide many general insights into the nature of parasitism and may
have broader societal relevance because these fungi are known to be important
sources of small molecules with medical relevance. The work is relevant to the
broader mission of NSF to increase scientific literacy as the zombie ant system
has been shown to be a very useful tool for communicating the elegance and
beauty of natural systems.

How can a microbe control the central nervous system of an animal? Animals are
intimately associated with microbes that span the symbiotic spectrum from
mutualism to parasitism. In some cases, microbial parasites of animals have
evolved to control animal behavior in ways that enhance parasite transmission.
The zombie ants represent one prominent example. In this system a fungal
parasite (Ophiocordyceps unilateralis) has evolved a precise level of behavioral
control over the ants it infects. Worker ants infected by O. unilateralis move
out from their colonies at precise times of day to highly specific locations on
leaves in forests, where they bite into vegetation before dying. This altered
behavior provides a platform for the eventual release of spores from a long
fungal stalk that grows from the cadaver of the ant. This striking system
involves an organism in one kingdom of life (Fungi) that controls the behavior
of an organism in another (Animalia). How does an organism without a brain
control the behavior of one with a brain? The investigators will address this
using time series infectionstudies to measure chemical changes in both the
parasite and its host. By using three different but complementary tools (serial
block face scanning electron microscopy, metabolomics and transcriptomics) to
examine these changes across time, the investigators hope to understand the
basis of these behavioral changes.