* 1558579
* REU Site: Integrative Molecular Plant Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Amy Grunden, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2019
* USD 273,021.00

This REU Site award to North Carolina State University, located in Raleigh, NC,
will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2016-2018. This project is supported by the Divisions of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) and Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) through the Plant
Genome Research Program. Students will be engaged in cutting edge research in
integrative molecular plant systems (IMPS) with foci on sustainable foods,
fuels, and model systems. Engaged departments include the Departments of Plant
and Microbial Biology, Plant Pathology, and Electrical and Computer Engineering.
The goal of the program is to inspire and empower undergraduate researchers to
pursue productive scientific careers. Students in the program will participate
in a 3-day 'Biotechnology Bootcamp' the first week of the program, learning
essential molecular biology laboratory skills, and then will pursue independent
research for the remainder of the summer under the guidance of a mentor.
Students will have multiple public-speaking opportunities to present their
research, including a poster presentation at the campus-wide undergraduate
research symposium at the end of the program. Students will also participate in
career-development activities, such as the responsible conduct in research,
professional communication skills, career opportunities in industry and
academia, and the graduate school application process. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student applications are reviewed
by a committee comprised of the PI, co-PI and Program Coordinator. Selections
are based on academic record, research interest, letters of recommendation, and
potential for outstanding research. It is anticipated that a total of 24
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students from underrepresented groups are especially
encouraged to apply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting https://pmb.cals.ncsu.edu/research/ or by
contacting the Assistant Director, Dr. Imara Perera (iperera@ncsu.edu) or the
PI, Dr. Sue Carson (sdcarson@ncsu.edu).