* 1558857
* Frictions in a Competitive, Regulated Market
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Alessandro Lizzeri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2021
* USD 343,978.00

Title: Frictions in a Competitive, Regulated Market.

This is a time of great transformation in taxi markets everywhere, with the rise
of new technology entrants such as Uber and Lyft. Taxi markets in places like
New York City resemble a competitive market in some important ways; particularly
the presence of a large number of independent participants who do not have
market power. However, they also feature impediments, or frictions, to the
smooth functioning of such competition. Some of these frictions are regulatory,
such as the limits to entry, pricing, and ownership. Some are features of the
way the products are delivered. For instance, there is an important "matching
friction" that derives from the fact that taxi drivers have limited knowledge
about the location of potential passengers, leading to wasteful search or
waiting. This project develops and estimates a model that attempts to measure
these frictions and discusses policies that may reduce these distortions. It
also considers the effects of entrants such as Uber. The PIs study New York City
because of the availability of extremely detailed data and because of some
interesting features of that market.

The first part of the project estimates a dynamic general equilibrium model with
matching frictions of the New York City taxi-cab market. The second part of the
project explores questions that rely more intensively on the detailed spatial
information in the data. The PIs discuss how well drivers coordinate their
decisions, and how well they use available information. They propose a novel
approach to deal with limitations on the potential to directly observe demand.
Because the amount of time a taxi searches for passengers is observed, the PIs
can recover the number of waiting customers by using the fact that search is a
well-defined spatial process. On the supply-side, potential drivers make a daily
entry decision and an hourly stopping decision. These must then be aggregated to
be consistent with equilibrium earnings. The wait time and the number of taxis
are jointly determined endogenously as part of the competitive equilibrium in
this market. The PIs use data from New York City with information on every
single cab trip from 2010 to 2013. They propose counterfactuals relaxing entry
and ownership restrictions. They also propose a counterfactual that changes the
matching technology: a centralized dispatcher who sends empty cabs to the
closest passenger. They examine gains in efficiency with reductions in wait
times for both passengers and taxis as a function of the fraction of the market
controlled by the dispatcher. This is relevant for thinking about the effect of
firms such as Uber. In the second part of the project the PIs propose to
systematically explore how outcomes change under different types of centralized
matching procedures to better understand the role and importance of various
frictions. They can also obtain information about the (equilibrium) degree of
coordination among taxis. There can be multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria with
different degrees of market segmentation. The project aims to evaluate the
effects of this market segmentation. This project has many potential impacts
beyond the obvious policy implications for the NYC taxi market. It can allow
researchers to quantify the distortions of some existing regulations, such as
the inflexibility of the fare structures. With recent advances in technology,
many markets are now faced with the possibility of alternative modes of
organization. This structural approach allows the PIs to explore the potential
for such alternative organization. These have relevance for other markets with
spatial frictions and a need for rapid delivery of service.