* 1558658
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecological Governance and the Dynamics of Risk and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Dilshanie Perera, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 26,000.00

Efforts to understand the dynamics of risk and resilience in response to
catastrophic environmental events often tend to focus on populations living in
low-lying coastal areas vulnerable to rising sea levels. As a result, these
communities have increasingly tended to become laboratories for developing
methods of governance to best manage, measure, and account for potentially
hazardous atmospheric phenomena. Many of these communities, however, have long
had to cope with and develop effective decision-making regimes in response to
such seasonal weather effects. This project, which trains a graduate student in
conducting rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork, explores the
interaction between the practices and knowledge that has been circulated among
coastal residents and meteorologists, and the more recent apparatus of
ecological governance that has been instituted in such contexts of climatic
vulnerability. The project would also enhance scientific understanding by
broadly disseminating findings to organizations, officials, and scientists
engaged in identifying effective models for assessing and coping with risk
associated with catastrophic environmental
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dilshanie Perera, under the supervision of Dr.
Sharika Thiranagama of Stanford University, will explore how meteorological
knowledge is produced and circulated in a context where weather-borne disaster
are regularly experienced. To do so, this project focuses on the statistical
abstraction of climate through the tangible experience of weather at a human
scale. The research takes place in Bangladesh, a low-lying deltaic country that
faces seasonal storms, monsoon rains, cyclones, and flooding on a yearly basis.
Now heralded as the epicenter of climate change, Bangladesh has become a
laboratory for global development initiatives trying to pioneer climate relief
efforts. As climate change becomes the primary justification for organizational
and state intervention into people's lives and livelihoods along the southwest
coast, top-down ways of articulating risk in the idiom of climate tend to
obscure the experiences of those who have been living with environmental
uncertainty in unstable landscapes for generations. This research strives to
analyze what the everyday experience of living with potentially catastrophic
weather entails. By asking how a new regime of ecological risk takes discursive,
programmatic, and material form in Bangladesh, this study explores how knowledge
about weather is produced at various scales, as well as how weather is framed a
problem of governance and management. By conducting ethnographic research with
Bangladesh state meteorologists, coastal farmers, local government officials,
and development practitioners, this project will contribute new ways of
analyzing environmental governance and social life amid conditions saturated by
the recurrent possibility of disaster.