* 1558506
* Collaborative Research: Defining the biogeochemical drivers of diatom physiological ecology in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Sonya Dyhrman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 447,683.00

About half of photosynthesis on earth is generated by marine phytoplankton,
single celled organisms that drift with tides and currents. Within the
phytoplankton, the diatoms conduct nearly half of this photosynthesis, exerting
profound control over global carbon cycling. Despite their importance, there are
surprisingly fundamental gaps in understanding how diatoms function in their
natural environment, in part because methods to assess in situ physiology are
lacking. This project focuses on the application of a powerful new approach,
called Quantitative Metabolic Fingerprinting (QMF), to address this knowledge
gap and examine species-specific physiology in the field. The project will
provide transformative insights into how ocean geochemistry controls the
distribution of diatoms, the metabolic responses of individual diatom species,
and how metabolic potential is partitioned between diatom species, thus
providing new insights into the structure and function of marine systems. The
overarching goal is to examine how diatom species respond to changes in
biogeochemistry across marine provinces, from the coast to the open ocean, by
following shifts in diatom physiology using QMF. This research is critical to
understand future changes in oceanic phytoplankton in response to climate and
environmental change. Furthermore, activities on this project will include
supporting a graduate student and postdoctoral fellow and delivering the
Artistic Oceanographer Program (AOP) to diverse middle school age children and
teachers in the NYC metropolitan area and to middle-school girls in the Girl
Scouts of RI, reaching an anticipated 60 children and 30 teachers annually. The
programs will foster multidisciplinary hands-on learning and will directly
impact STEM education at a critical point in the pipeline by targeting diverse
middle-school aged groups in both NY and RI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In laboratory
studies with cultured isolates, there are profound differences among diatom
species' responses to nutrient limitation. Thus, it is likely that different
species contribute differently to nutrient uptake, carbon flux and burial.
However, marine ecosystem models often rely on physiological attributes drawn
from just one species and apply those attributes globally (e.g. coastal species
used to model open ocean dynamics) or choose a single average value to represent
all species across the world's oceans. In part, this is due to a relatively poor
understanding of diatom physiological ecology and a limited tool set for
assessing in situ diatom physiological ecology. This research project will
address this specific challenge by explicitly tracking metabolic pathways,
measuring their regulation and determining their taxonomic distribution in a
suite of environmentally significant diatoms using a state of the art, species-
specific approach. A research expedition is set in the North Atlantic, a system
that plays a major role in carbon cycling. Starting with a New England coastal
shelf site, samples will be collected from the coast where diatoms thrive, to
the open ocean and a site of a long term ocean time series station (the Bermuda
Atlantic Time Series) where diatom growth is muted by nutrient limitation. This
research takes advantage of new ocean observatories initiative (OOI) and time
series information. Through the research expedition and downstream laboratory
experiments, the molecular pathways of nutrient metabolism and related gene
expression in a suite of environmentally significant diatoms will be identified.
Data will be combined to predict major limiting factors and potentially
important substrates for diatoms across marine provinces. Importantly, this
integrated approach takes advantage of new advances in molecular and
bioinformatics tools to examine in situ physiological ecology at the species-
specific level, a key knowledge gap in the field.