* 1558787
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Changing Temperature on the Gulf of Alaska Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Ryan Rykaczewski, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2018
* USD 109,314.00

This research has the potential to transform our understanding of how climate
affects marine ecosystems and improve efforts toward ecosystem-based fisheries
management. Investigators will analyze existing data to determine how shifts in
climate properties over time may have affected commercially important fishes in
the Gulf of Alaska (GOA). For several decades, significant relationships between
sea surface temperature (SST) and abundance of a broad group of marine organisms
in the GOA offered some promise for incorporating environmental data into
fisheries management strategies. However, many of these statistical connections
deteriorated abruptly in the late 1980s, while at the same time interactions
between GOA SST and other aspects of climate conditions changed as well. This
study will test the hypothesis that a switch in large-scale climate variability
in the 1980s led to reorganization of relationships among GOA atmospheric and
oceanographic properties, which in turn, produced a change in connection between
temperature and ocean biology. These types of "no-analogue climate states" are
well recognized in paleoecology and have been anticipated as a potential outcome
of climate change, but few studies of ecological response to such switches are
available. The project will support a postdoctoral scientist, as well as
graduate and undergraduate student researchers. It will facilitate cooperation
among scientists at three public universities, a non-profit research lab, and a
federal management agency in order to combine the range of expertise that will
be required to carry out this research.

This research has the potential to transform our understanding of how climate
affects marine ecosystems. It is based on preliminary analyses showing that the
statistical relationships between SST and community state in the Gulf of Alaska
appear to be nonstationary, with driver-response relationships that differ
markedly before and after 1988/89. Preliminary analyses also show that
correlations between SST and a number of other GOA climate parameters are
significantly different before and after 1988/89. Additionally, leading modes in
North Pacific SST anomalies for 1950-present changed their relative importance
before and after 1988/89, with the second mode (North Pacific Gyre Oscillation,
or NPGO) explaining more variability than the first mode (Pacific Decadal
Oscillation, or PDO) during the past three decades. This change is consistent
with a switch to a no-analogue climate state, characterized by markedly
different patterns of variability among basin-scale climate processes. The
proposed hypothesis will be tested with a combination of statistical ecological
models and numerical ocean models. The statistical approach (threshold
generalized additive models) will provide formal tests for nonstationary
relationships between SST variability and ecological characteristics at the
community and population level using time series data (1965-present) for 17
salmon, groundfish and crustacean populations from the GOA. In addition,
nonstationary relationships among atmospheric and hydrographic processes at
basin and regional scales will be tested with time series generated by ocean
data-assimilation and hindcast models. Finally, those nonstationary
relationships identified will be used to parameterize statistical models of
biological variability that account for non-analogous states in the system.