* 1558806
* Physical and Biological Exchange Processes and Lagrangian Pathways of Eel Larvae Between Deep Ocean and Shelf Regions of the Northwestern Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Joel Llopiz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 772,969.00

Exchange between waters over the continental shelf or slope and the deeper ocean
offshore is important for understanding the distribution of temperature,
salinity and other physical, chemical, and biological water properties in the
ocean. Despite their importance and the extensive number of previous studies,
these exchange processes are not well understood. This is because they occur
over short scales in time and space, which makes it a challenge to resolve them
with field measurements or numerical models. This comprehensive study will make
use of state-of-the-art realistic ocean circulation models in combination with
novel dynamical system tools to better understand and quantify these exchanges.
The study area will extend from Gulf of Maine and the Mid-Atlantic Bight to the
Gulf Stream and the Sargasso Sea, which is the spawning site for the American
eel, a species of great scientific interest and economic value. This fish
undertakes a remarkable spawning migration from freshwater habitats along the
North American coast to the Sargasso Sea, and its larvae then have to return to
coastal nursery habitats that predominantly occur along the eastern seaboard of
North America. Since the larvae have only limited swimming ability, they have to
navigate ocean circulation features to complete their migration. This study will
also explore how they achieve this remarkable feat. The project will support
three early-career scientists and will promote collaboration between physical
oceanographers and biologists. The project will also contribute to K-12
educational programs, including class visits and field trips targeting mostly
minority students. It will also continue efforts to bring science to the public
through art and dance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
the proposed study is to characterize and quantify, from a Lagrangian viewpoint,
water mass exchanges and property fluxes between the continental shelf and the
open ocean. Several physical mechanisms are expected to influence the exchange
processes in this region. These include topographic steering, wind forcing,
instabilities and meanders of the shelfbreak jet, and Gulf Stream meanders and
rings impinging on the shelf, each of which will be investigated and quantified.
Specific regions and features of interest for the proposed study include the
Mid-Atlantic Bight, the Gulf of Maine, the Slope Sea, the Gulf Stream and its
extension, and the Sargasso Sea. A focused application of the proposed effort
will be devoted to investigating the dispersal of eel larvae as an example of
semi-Lagrangian, biologically relevant particles. The study will be based on a
high-resolution regional model and a data-assimilative global model, and would
compare Eulerian flux estimates with their Lagrangian counterparts and combine
conventional statistical techniques with novel dynamical systems analysis. By
its interdisciplinary nature, this project will have impacts across a variety of
fields, including physical oceanography, marine biology, and dynamical systems.
The PIs will also collaborate with colleagues at the NOAA Northeast Fisheries
Science Center. Participation in K-12 educational programs will include (1)
efforts with established partner schools to introduce project results into their
earth science module, and (2) class visits and field trips for East Boston High
School (&gt;80% minority students) students. PIs participating in the MIT/WHOI
Joint Program in Oceanography will incorporate the study's findings into their
graduate courses.