* 1558159
* Collaborative Research: Physiological and Genetic Responses to Winter in a Willow Leaf Beetle
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Jonathon Stillman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2022
* USD 653,744.00

In the Sierra Nevada mountain ranges, like many high altitude environments, snow
cover is extremely variable from year to year. Many high altitude animals
survive through winter underneath snow that buffers them from extremes of
temperature. Many unique and ecologically important animals live in mountainous
environments, making it vital to understand and predict impacts of annual
differences in snow cover on their population abundances, but as yet we have
limited understanding of how snow impacts survival and reproduction of insects
and other animals. This project proposes to study physiological and genetic
responses to variation in snow cover in a high altitude beetle in the laboratory
and the natural environment to understand how snow alters reproductive success
during the winter and subsequent summer. This work will develop a partnership
between UC-Berkeley and two Primarily Undergraduate Institutions. Undergraduates
at the Primarily Undergraduate Institutions will work with researchers from
Berkeley, and Berkeley PhD students will supervise undergraduates from a wide
variety of backgrounds and experiences. Thus both groups of students will be
exposed to the culture of different educational institutions and will have
access to professional contacts outside their usual network. A curriculum module
developed from the project for K-12 students will be used to contribute towards
their understanding of challenges that organisms face in snowy climates, and
this module will be distributed to K-12 teachers through a UC Berkeley-based
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For high altitude animals, summer is a time of
energy gain, while energy conservation is key during winter because resources
are scarce and animals rely on energy stores. To resist winter cold, high
altitude insects use energy stores to synthesize metabolically expensive
cryoprotectants. This may generate a trade-off between cold hardiness and energy
conservation. Snow buffers thermal fluctuations, decreasing cold mortality and
need for cold hardiness. However, since temperatures are greater beneath snow
than in a snow-free, exposed habitat, there may be increased overall energy
demand associated with living under snow. Due to the energetic trade-off, inter-
annual fluctuations in winter snowpack and air temperature will alter selective
pressures on overwintering organisms, and may significantly affect growth and
reproduction in summer. The central hypothesis is that variation in snow cover
alters selective pressures on cold hardiness and energy conservation,
influencing physiological performance of overwintering individuals and genetic
composition of survivors. The investigators further hypothesize that cold
hardiness trades off against future reproduction by depleting winter energy
reserves due to energetic costs of cold hardiness. The research will: 1) Measure
how variation in snow alters selective gradients on winter-relevant genetic
variation in a high altitude beetle, and isolate causal drivers of winter
selective gradients. 2) Gain a predictive and quantitative understanding of how
cold and energy stressors interact to shape physiological performance during
winter and the subsequent summer. 3) Uncover mechanisms underlying interactions
between cold and energy stress by asking how single or combined stressors alter
reaction norms for energy reserves and cryoprotectants.