* 1558867
* Collaborative Research: Deep imaging of the south-central Chile margin to understand plate boundary development and its control on megathrust slip behavior
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Anne Tr√©hu, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 439,752.00

As part of the "ring of fire," the western coast of South America is subject to
frequent large earthquakes. This is because the oceanic plate is being thrust
under (subducted) beneath the continent of South America. The high level of
activity along the Chile margin makes it an excellent place to study how
geologic structure can influence earthquake behavior, knowledge that can be
transferred to other subduction zones around the world. The portion of the Chile
margin that ruptured in 1960 seems to produce similar great earthquakes every
100 to 150 years whereas to the north the historical pattern is less regular,
with several smaller earthquakes interspersed with occasional larger
earthquakes. The goal of this project is to use seismic imaging tools available
on the research vessel Langseth to look deep into this margin (up to ~15 km in
depth) to characterize the physical properties of the boundary between the
oceanic and continental plates that may control how it ruptures. The results
will have broad societal impact by informing efforts to evaluate seismic hazards
globally. This setting is a good analog to the Cascadia subduction zone off the
westcoast of the US, and a better understanding of the Chilean megathrust should
lead to more informed hazard forecasts and mitigation plans for Cascadia (and
margins around the globe). The science team for the research cruise will include
professors and students from the US and Chile (and possibly other countries) and
provide hands-on training in seismic reflection data acquisition and processing.
The research cruise will also be an opportunity to reach out both virtually
(through student-led blogs) and in person (through ship tours in port) with
school children and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The south-central
Chile subduction zone (34-47 degrees S) experienced the largest instrumentally-
recorded earthquake (Mw 9.5) in 1960 and the sixth largest (Mw 8.8) in 2010 on
an adjacent, overlapping segment to the north. The segment that ruptured during
the 1960 event has a history of regular rupture of this entire 1000-km long
segment, while the 500-km long segment that ruptured during the 2010 event
usually ruptures in smaller (100 km) patches and at irregular intervals. Good
slip models are available for both events as well as a model for interplate
coupling leading up to the 2010 event. Because of the long earthquake history
coupled with extensive modern constraints on interplate slip and interseismic
coupling, this region is an excellent place to compare the along-strike
differences in forearc geologic structure and determine their role in
controlling these major along-strike differences in megathrust earthquake
behavior. Several observations and hypotheses have been presented in recent
years to explain the different slip behaviors observed in subduction zones
globally. Foremost among these is the observation that the largest historic
earthquakes (e.g. south-central Chile, Alaska, Sumatra and Cascadia) tend to be
in thickly-sedimented subduction zones, possibly because a thick sediment cover
leads to a smooth, homogeneous plate-boundary. This project will obtain seismic
reflection data to image the detailed structure of the plate boundary at depth
and determine how sediment on the incoming plate interacts with basement
topography and whether sediment thickness controls the interaction between the
upper and lower plates that leads to great earthquakes.