* 1558093
* Determining the Functional Basis for Increasing Liana Abundance in Neotropical Forests
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2023
* Stefan Schnitzer, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2023
* USD 956,745.00

Tropical forests were once thought to be resistant to global climate change;
however, they are now changing. One of the largest structural changes occurring
in neotropical forests is the increase in liana abundance relative to trees.
This development is alarming because lianas substantially reduce tree
recruitment, growth, reproduction, survival, and diversity. In fact, recent
evidence indicates that the effects of increasing lianas may be so powerful that
they alter the global carbon cycle, which, in turn, has serious implications for
continued global climate change. Despite the profound potential ramifications of
increasing liana abundance, the causes remain poorly understood. This study will
use a series of cutting-edge approaches to address a pressing question in
ecology: what are the putative factors responsible for the shift towards liana
dominance in neotropical forests. Considering the importance of tropical forests
to global diversity and the global carbon cycle, the proposed research is
fundamental to understanding the ecology of tropical forests, how these critical
ecosystems are changing, and how these changes may ultimately influence global
climates. Broader impacts of this research include educational and international
capacity building for Latin American students and biologists, and the mentoring
of US-based undergraduate and graduate students. Findings of this research will
be communicated to the public through both scientific and popular press
articles, including articles that feature professional photographic images that
illustrate important scientific concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
evidence that lianas are increasing in neotropical forests and that lianas have
the capacity and propensity to alter tropical forest dynamics, composition, and
functioning, the proposed study is urgent and will provide critical data on the
rate of liana increases and the putative factors responsible for these
increases. Determining the increase in liana abundance in tropical forests will
also allow a better understanding of the factors that control tropical plant
abundance and distribution, one of the fundamental goals in ecology. Through a
combination of approaches (large-scale demographic, fine-scale physiology and
growth, and experimental manipulation of multiple factors), this research will
identify the liana species in central Panama that are increasing, determine the
suite of morphological and physiological functional traits that explain the
increase in those species, and experimentally test the most likely factors
responsible for liana increases (disturbance, drought, elevated CO2, and
nitrogen deposition). By understanding the causes of liana increases, the
project will address important basic and applied ecological issues. The
mentoring and training of graduate and undergraduate students and biologists
from both the US and from Latin America is an integral part of the project.