* 1558713
* Workshop:  Support for Political Networks Conference and Training Workshops
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jennifer Victor, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2019
* USD 212,471.00

General Summary

As a field of study, network methods are relatively new to the discipline of
political science; however, they are critical to questions of politics. At its
core, politics involves human interaction. For too long politics has been
studied as a process focused on individuals, where scholars have understood that
individuals' incentives and choices are shaped by the rules and institutions
around them. This tradition comes from economics, largely. However, as a social
science, it is imperative for scholars to ask and answer puzzles about politics
that recognize the relational nature of politics. Political actions cannot be
understood in the absence of a recognition that political actors' choices are
dependent on others in their network. This is true about voters, legislators,
dictators, countries, and all types of political actors. This award provides
supplemental support for PhD students and junior faculty to travel to attend the
Political Networks Conference and Training Workshops. The resources provided by
this grant are dedicated to support graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
under-funded assistant professors, expand diversity efforts, extend mentoring
and networking efforts, and encourage the development and dissemination of new
methods and theories appropriate for the specific needs of subfields brought
together by an interest in studying political networks. The training workshops
leverage participants' strengths in training and mentoring to advance the field
of political networks and foster interdisciplinary ties in this important
methodological area.

Technical Summary

This is a particularly promising period for the development of network studies
in politics. Extensive big data sets, expanded computational capabilities, and
newly-developed analytic techniques have reduced many of the past obstacles to
the serious study of political networks. Hence the study of political networks
is at an important juncture, supported by newly established interdisciplinary
organizations, an organized section, and training efforts that are currently
underway. As a consequence, network studies have gained supporters and
practitioners in virtually every area of political study; political
institutions, comparative politics, political behavior, international relations,
public policy, parties and elections, public opinion, interest groups, social
movements, and political communication. The resources provided by this grant are
dedicated to support graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and under-funded
assistant professors, expand diversity efforts, extend mentoring and networking
efforts, and encourage the development and dissemination of new methods and
theories appropriate for the specific needs of subfields brought together by an
interest in studying political networks. The training workshops leverage
participants' strengths in training and mentoring to advance the field of
political networks and foster interdisciplinary ties in this important
methodological area. The training and conference is interdisciplinary by design,
and it is exciting to see deep and extensive engagement across disciplines. The
grant is aimed specifically to achieve training and learning for participants.
In addition, the goal is that participants then take what they learn and move it
into their graduate and undergraduate teaching and contribute to quantitative
social science programs at their home institutions.