* 1558972
* Collaborative Research:  The internal Surfzone: Wave-averaged circulation driven by nonlinear internal waves shoaling over spatially-varying bathymetry
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* James Lerczak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 429,423.00

Transport by nonlinear internal waves in coastal regions has strong
interdisciplinary ties to biological oceanography through transport of plankton
and nutrients; geological and geochemical oceanography via transport of
sediments; and coastal engineering/management via transport and dispersion of
anthropogenic materials such as effluent from sewage outfalls. The overall
objectives of this study are to understand the dynamics governing the flux of
momentum from shoaling nonlinear internal waves to mean currents; the scale and
structure of mean flows driven by shoaling internal waves under idealized
conditions; and the magnitude and spatial structure of the net mass transport
associated with the shoaling internal waves. Despite the ubiquitous nature of
nonlinear internal waves in the coastal ocean, very few three dimensional
studies exist that include variability of the topography in the direction normal
to propagation. This study represents the first attempt to quantify the
transport pathways forced by internal waves and the mean flows generated by them
and it is expected to produce results and methodologies with broad applicability
in interdisciplinary oceanography and coastal management. The project will
support the professional development of a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate
student.

The approach is based on a state of the art, three-dimensional, non-hydrostatic
numerical model with adaptive mesh capabilities. In addition, data previously
collected in Massachusetts Bay during previous studies will be analyzed. This is
the first study to systematically address the mean flow and transport driven by
nonlinear internal waves shoaling over bathymetry varying in two dimensions. The
study comprises two components: a modeling component used to study the transfer
of momentum and water mass transport in a variety of situations of increasing
realism, and a data-analysis component which will consider the same problem
using the extensive dataset available from a series of experiments conducted in
Massachusetts Bay over the last 16 years. The modeling component will be used to
aid in interpreting the data. The model (Stratified Ocean Model with Adaptive
Refinement), developed in part with funding from previous National Science
Foundation proposals, is a state-of-the-art three-dimensional non-hydrostatic
stratified ocean model which employs adaptive mesh refinement to effectively use
the computational resources, increasing resolution on demand where necessary.