* 1558517
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Mobile Farming Families of Southern Appalachia and the Mexican Bajio
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* ANN KINGSOLVER, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2018
* USD 8,467.00

North American agricultural livelihoods have gone through significant
transitions since the late twentieth century. Changes include the restructuring
of food systems so that local farming economies are increasingly tied to global
networks and processes. One somewhat surprising response on the part of local
food producers has been the rise of binational family-based farming enterprises,
which, despite being small to midscale ventures, successfully coordinate across
state lines to facilitate vertically integrated operations, mitigate inequities,
and access produce markets. The research supported by this award will
investigate how this occurs: how do local family fruit and vegetable producers
utilize global networks, coordinate transregional projects, and contribute to
food system circulations? And what role do traditional modes of organizing
family farms, such as kinship networks, play in contemporary farming operations?
The research will be carried out by University of Kentucky doctoral student Mary
Elizabeth W. Schmid, with direction from anthropologist Dr. Ann E. Kingsolver,
in the western North Carolina region of southern Appalachia, with comparative
research in other southeastern U.S. states and Mexico.

Schmid will document family and enterprise histories, provisioning strategies,
forms of relatedness, cultural practices, and decision-making processes to
determine how members draw on family and non-family relations to enable
strategic production, distribution, and marketing coordination across time and
space. Her mixed methods approach will include archival research, participant
observation, interviewing, social network analysis, ethnographic mapping, and
qualitative analysis of textual data. She will map family and enterprise
networks, temporal cycles, transnational kinship circuit flows, and the social
organization of fruit and vegetable production and marketing. Findings from this
research will contribute to understanding the functioning of small to midscale
fruit and vegetable production enterprises in the contemporary economy and the
social and economic effects of agricultural policies intended to regulate this
sector.