* 1558430
* Collaborative Research:  Relative Controls of Niche vs. Neutral Microbial Community Assembly Processes Over Ecosystem Function Post-Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Diana Nemergut, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 421,954.00

Is it necessary to know what types of microbes are present in a system in order
to understand and predict ecosystem processes? This is a fundamental, yet
unanswered, question. This project will address hypotheses regarding the
relationship between community assembly processes, environmental parameters and
ecosystem functioning following a disturbance. Soil microbial community
structure and function will be tracked in soils at various times after forest
fires. Phylogenetic and genomic approaches will be employed to explore the
factors controlling how microbial communities develop, and the relative roles of
different controls in structuring microbial communities. This work will also
focus on describing the temporal and spatial dynamics of the well-documented
changes in nitrogen cycling that are observed following wildfires. This research
is expected to build a better understanding of the contributions of microbial
community structuring to these important soil processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on how soil communities recover from
burning at a time when fire frequency and severity are escalating across the
American West. The project will also facilitate the development and refinement
of new bioinformatics approaches to analyze the large data sets required to
study the dynamics of complex microbial communities. Broader impacts include the
training of graduate students and a post-doctoral scholar, and the development
of a course to integrate undergraduates directly into the planned research.
Additionally, outreach will be conducted at a local high school with a high
proportion of at-risk students&lt;br/&gt;.