* 1558729
* Asymptotic dynamics for nonlinear dispersive systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Benoit Pausader, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2017
* USD 134,172.00

At present, some simple "elementary" systems start to be reasonably well
understood. However, passing from the understanding of microscopic objects to
moderately complex configurations remains a challenging problem. This projects
aims at understanding simple but basic questions for slightly complicated
systems, focusing on situations and models related to macroscopic plasma
physics. A plasma is a collection of many charged particles that, because of
their long range interactions exhibit a collective macroscopic behavior which is
complex and remains poorly understood. This in turns limits some potential major
applications, controlled fusion being perhaps the most well-known. Thus,
furthering the understanding of this "small scale to large scale" cascade of
information can have major possible applications. The emphasis of this proposal
is on large-time questions such as "can a plasma macroscopically at rest
spontaneously develop dramatic behavior such as high concentration or
velocities, or spontaneously form a vacuum?". Another related question is to
find possible scenarios for the large-time behavior of a plasma that remains
away from the quiet neutral equilibrium. Investigating these questions involve a
fine study of the deep mechanisms of transfer of energy inside different parts
of the plasma as a result of collective elementary simple interactions.

This projects aims at developing the study of two fundamental equations from
physics. First we consider stability issues for the 2-fluid Euler-Maxwell
equation in two dimensions. This is a fundamental equation modeling the
dynamical properties of a plasma. The goal is to prove that under certain
conditions, small perturbations of an equilibrium will not develop shocks and
that actually, the plasma will get back to equilibrium, even in the absence of
dissipation. Such a result would be of great physical and mathematical
importance as it is known to be false for the compressible Euler equation in the
absence of a self-consistent electromagnetic field. In a second part, we study
the Schroedinger equation on a curved background. This equation is a universal
model appearing in many time reversible equations, notably in some plasma
models. When this equation is posed on a nonconstant background, many classical
tools from the Euclidian theory break down and one expects the appearance of
various new phenomena due to the influence of the geometry. We study in
particular the effect of the growth of the volume on the global behavior of the
solutions and on the possibility to obtain asymptotic dynamics different from
scattering. A unifying theme is to understand the asymptotic dynamics of
solutions in a context where the dispersion is limited. Another unifying theme
is to try to find simpler limit equations and understand their significance for
the full model. A last unifying theme concerns the specificity and relevance of
dispersive systems. Some tools we plan to use and develop are concentration
compactness methods, study of the space and time resonances, study of dispersive
systems and pseudo-products estimates with singular multipliers.