* 1558090
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Malleability and Resilience of Flowering Responses to Current and Future Variability in Seasonal Cues in a Geographically-widespread Species
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Daniel Runcie, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2021
* USD 150,912.00

Many environmental factors critical for plant growth and reproduction vary in
abundance from season to season. A fundamental means by which plant species cope
with this challenge is through monitoring day length, the environmental signal
that most reliably predicts calendar date. Based on that information,
individuals then either continue vegetative growth or initiate flowering. The
most favorable time of year for flowering differs by location. For instance,
winter arrives earlier at higher latitudes and elevations. Therefore,
understanding how and why photoperiodic flowering responses have been adjusted
to permit species to thrive across broad geographic ranges is important
knowledge that can inform efforts to preserve biodiversity and successfully
manage crops in the face of a changing environment. The proposed work will
address this goal by studying how populations of the common monkeyflower,
Mimulus guttatus, vary along elevation gradients in the critical day length
necessary to induce flowering. The molecular changes and ecological impacts of
this variation will be investigated with complementary studies in the lab and
field. These combined datasets will then permit development of predictive models
to test whether populations will be resilient to future climates. The
investigators - working with undergraduates at three University of California
institutions, the USA National Phenology Network, and volunteers - will also
develop a new citizen science initiative to monitor the flowering of important
wildflower species in remote alpine locations along the Pacific Crest Trail.

Although much is known about the molecular mechanisms by which photoperiod
regulates flowering in controlled conditions, far less is understood about how
these pathways function in natural seasonal conditions or what adjustments to
these pathways may prove beneficial in future climates. Preliminary work in M.
guttatus has shown that replicate altitudinal shifts in critical photoperiod
evolved through changes at distinct sets of loci. The proposed research will
characterize the genetic basis and physiological consequences of these diverse
mechanisms by utilizing the extensive genomic toolkit available in this emerging
model plant system. Specifically, the molecular basis of range-wide variation in
critical photoperiod will be established. Through transcriptional analyses under
controlled conditions and through field trials, the investigators will also test
whether the distinct sets of loci that achieve similar shifts in critical
photoperiod do so via equivalent modifications of downstream expression within
the flowering gene regulatory network or have unique effects that are adaptive
within each local environment. The former finding would suggest a broad capacity
for physiological systems to adjust to novel conditions, and the latter would
suggest genetic variation may prove a significant constraint on the pace of
adaptation. Finally, through investigating forms of diversity abundant in annual
M. guttatus but not well explored in other model plants, the proposed research
will extend ecophysiological models of flowering time and foster more accurate
forecasts of the impact of environmental variation on plant growth and
population distribution.