* 1558113
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Seed Inviability and the Evolution of Endosperm Development in Mimulus
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* John Willis, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 505,000.00

The seed of flowering plants contains two very important structures: the embryo
that will become a seedling and eventually grow into the mature plant, and the
endosperm, a tissue that provides nutrients to the embryo as it grows. If you
have eaten rice, you have eaten endosperm, the starchy portion that fills the
majority of the rice grain. Since the emergence of agriculture, humans have
selected and bred seeds with a larger and starchier endosperm portion,
ultimately creating the crop varieties we now depend upon. Endosperm, either
directly or indirectly through animal feed, now provides an estimated 67% of the
calories consumed by humans worldwide, and improving on these varieties remains
of fundamental importance. Thus, from both an agricultural and food security
perspective the development of the endosperm is critical to humankind's
survival. This research will investigate the genes that control endosperm
development and the molecular and evolutionary interactions between the
endosperm and the embryo in the monkey flower (genus Mimulus). Although not
eaten by humans, due to its ecological and evolutionary history, Mimulus
provides a unique opportunity to study evolutionary and molecular aspects of the
interactions between endosperm and embryo. As these interactions regulate the
growth of the endosperm and thus the size of the nutritious portion of the seed
in agricultural varieties, the results of this research in Mimulus are expected
to engender a molecular understanding of a developmental process critical to
human agricultural productivity. This research will inspire new high school
biology teaching modules in genetics, evolution, and plant developmental biology
that highlight the importance of the endosperm to humankind's diet, as well as
the roles of pollinators and reproductive barriers in generating the diversity
of life through the evolutionary process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence
links the evolutionary theory of parent-offspring conflict over maternal
resources to the evolution of epigenetically imprinted genes controlling normal
seed endosperm development. In interploidy hybrids, dosage-sensitivity of
paternal and maternal allelic expression in developing endosperm is critical to
normal development, and disruption leads to seed abortion. As yet it remains
unknown whether such conflict over embryo provisioning leads to evolutionary
divergence of imprinted genes or their targets, and ultimately hybrid seed
lethality, in diploid species. The investigators propose to test this
possibility by determining the genetic basis and evolutionary mechanisms
underlying species divergence in endosperm development and leading to hybrid
seed abortion, a principal isolating barrier in the Mimulus guttatus sp.
complex. This research integrates genomic, molecular genetic and developmental
biology approaches, utilizing high-throughput genome mapping, RNA sequencing
technologies, and transgenic techniques to elucidate the genetic mechanisms
contributing to seed abortion in M. guttatus x M. nudatus crosses. In so doing,
it examines questions of fundamental interest to evolutionary biologists (how
are new species formed?), and to developmental biologists (how is endosperm
growth regulated?) while addressing a question of interest to both: what
molecular changes might rapidly evolve when the mother's need to regulate growth
and development differs from that of her offspring? Answering these questions
will shed light on the developmental processes regulating endosperm growth and
the evolutionary mechanisms driving divergence in flowering plants.