* 1558268
* IRES: Nanofibers for Resource Efficiency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrei Stanishevsky, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,880.00

IRES: Nanofibers for Resource Efficiency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A thematic basis
of this program is the emerging area of nanofibers. Nanofibers have diameters
from one to four orders of magnitude smaller than the diameters of conventional
microfibers produced by mechanical drawing. As a result of their small size,
nanofibers can demonstrate superior properties that provide critical advantages
in many applications. Nanofibers (NF) are increasingly explored in high
performance filtration, batteries and fuel cells, wound healing, composite
material reinforcements, blood vessel and tissue engineering, smart textiles,
drug delivery, gas sensors, electronics, and catalysis. The global market for NF
is expected to grow at an annual growth rate of 35% between 2014 and 2020 and
reach ~$1 billion by 2017. There are huge needs in the development of sizeable
and ?green? production of NF from a larger range of materials, providing easier
ways for NF processing into functional structures, and developing a skilled
workforce. This IRES will provide at least 18 undergraduate and graduate
students from the University of Alabama at Birmingham with unique hands-on
experience and significant knowledge of cutting-edge NF fabrication methods, as
well as NF testing and application by providing an intense research program at
the Technical University of Liberec (TUL), Czech Republic, a leading academic
center in nanofiber research and commercialization, and at the Lodz University
of Technology (UT-Lodz), a regional leader in catalysis and bio-fuels in Poland.
Students will develop practical skills needed to address the knowledge gaps in
NF science and technology, bring their experiences back to their home
institutions, and help to develop a global-capable workforce for this emerging
market. By using a cohesive approach and drawing on complementary expertise,
facilities and traditions across the nations and regions, will enhance the
intellectual as well as the societal and economic returns of this IRES
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide 18 students from the
University of Alabama at Birmingham with a unique opportunity to carry out 8
week of cutting-edge research at the forefront of nanofiber science, technology,
and biomedical and energy applications at the Technical University of Liberec
(TUL), Czech Republic, a leading academic center in nanofiber research and
commercialization, and at the Lodz University of Technology (UT-Lodz), a
regional leader in heterogeneous catalysis, Poland. Nanofibers (NF) form a large
class of materials that can exhibit nano-enabled unique properties, which are
unattainable at a larger scale. However, the growth potential of the NF
materials market is still hindered by the limited ability to efficiently
generate sizeable quantities of nanofibers with predictable and controllable
complex, macroscopic architectures and desirable properties. Students will work
at TUL with a new, high-rate, alternating-current electrospinning (ac-
electrospinning) process that unveils several new physical phenomena which help
to overcome major disadvantages of commonly used dc-electrospinning, such as
?whipping? instability and residual electric charge, while increasing the
process productivity by 1 ? 2 orders of magnitude. Students will explore
selected NF-based materials for advanced catalytic systems with improved
activity, selectivity and stability in many reactions at UT-Lodz, along with
other applications tested at TUL. During the pre-trip training, foreign site
work, and post-trip activities, students will focus on advancing basic
understanding of all aspects of emerging high-rate ac-electrospinning, in order
to direct the assembly of NF into desired configurations and to stimulate the
development of commercializable processes for nanofiber-based materials for
heterogeneous catalysis, biomedical uses, and other potential applications.
Overall, this program shall facilitate a broader long-term collaboration between
the US and international research groups within the nanofiber research and
manufacturing domain by bringing new collaborators and facilitating multiple
international links between the researchers and students in related areas.