* 1558071
* Integrated Physiological, Genetic and Demographic Responses to Long-Term Habitat Change
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Anne Bronikowski, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2021
* USD 868,963.00

With this research project, the PI seeks to understand the ecological,
physiological, and genetic health measures that determine a population's fate.
This research will result in an answer to the question why some populations
thrive and grow, whereas others, in similar habitats, wither and ultimately go
extinct. Another goal of this research is to utilize collections of frozen
tissue collected over the past two decades to test for physiological health and
genetic state of the individuals that comprise both healthy and declining
populations. Ultimately, this research will result in a better predictive power
about how animals move across their landscapes, utilize resources, and persist
in the wild by taking into consideration the physiological and genetic
signatures of individuals. The PI's undertakings will involve many high school
and college students, as well as graduate students working towards their master-
of-science or doctorate degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sweeping anthropogenic
changes to environmental landscapes in the late 20th and early 21st centuries
pose urgent challenges to organisms and their populations. Potential organismal
responses to unsuitable and disintegrating habitats are to move, perish,
acclimate ecologically, or adapt evolutionarily. Predicting among these
population outcomes requires long-term studies in which species, demography,
physiology, ecology, and genetic variability have been monitored before as well
as during a period of habitat change. The PIs will couple long-term spatial and
temporal data, spanning 1976 to present, on variation in physiological processes
and life-history traits with genetic markers of population health to develop a
framework for integrating physiology, genetics, and demography in predicting
responses of populations facing habitat degradation. Furthermore they will
couple measures of individual state variables (physiological plasticity,
genotype, and fitness measures) to link individual-level states and
heterogeneity among individuals to population-level demography. They will
accomplish these goals of measuring longterm heath indices by mining or longterm
tissue and DNA collections on replicate populations of garter snakes inhabiting
the northeastern Sierra Nevada mountain range. To accomplish the synthetic
goals, mathematical models with structural equation modeling and additional
modeling approaches will be developed and utilized. This will result in a fully-
linked model of the relationships among physiological and genetic variation,
organismal life-history variation, and environmental variation.