* 1558331
* Surface Mixed Layer Salinity Budget in the Tropical Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Ren-Chieh Lien, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 185,222.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillations (MJO) is an atmospheric disturbance over the
tropical oceans with a recurrence period between 30 and 90 days, consisting of
surface westerly wind bursts, deep atmospheric convection, and heavy
precipitation. The MJO generally originates in the Equatorial Indian Ocean,
develops as it travels eastward at roughly 5 meters per second along the equator
until reaching the central Pacific and then accelerates as it circumnavigates
the globe, impacting global weather patterns. MJO prediction is unsatisfactory,
especially at its initiation stage when the oceanic feedback to the atmosphere
may be important. The DYNAMO (DYNAmics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation)
experiment conducted in 2011-2012 in the central Tropical Indian Ocean was
successful in capturing several initiations of the MJO. In that context, one of
the goals of DYNAMO was to understand the effects of salinity stratification on
the turbulent entrainment flux and Sea Surface Temperature in the Tropical
Indian Ocean where salinity stratification plays a significant role in the heat,
momentum and salinity budgets of the surface ocean mixed layer. Observations
from the DYNAMO experiment confirm that the turbulent heat flux at the base of
the surface mixed layer is a primary component in the heat budget. The turbulent
heat flux, however, varies by amounts larger than 100 Watts per square meter at
intra-seasonal (e.g., MJO) time scales under similar surface wind and buoyancy
forcing, and is presumably modulated by the barrier layer processes. This study
will evaluate the details of the surface mixed layer salinity budget and barrier
layer properties, and their temporal and spatial variations. Results from this
proposed study will quantify and increase understanding of salinity
stratification effects on turbulent entrainment fluxes in order to improve
parameterizations of turbulent fluxes in the central and eastern Tropical Indian
Ocean. This analysis project will complete the training of a Ph.D.
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the surface mixed layer
salinity budget in the central and eastern Tropical Indian Ocean and its
modulation of Sea Surface Temperature and the evolution of the Madden-Julian
oscillation. Comprehensive in-situ observations from ocean moorings deployed in
the central and eastern Tropical Indian Ocean as part of the DYNAMO experiment,
and remotely-sensed Sea Surface Salinity from the Aquarius satellite will be
used for that purpose. The moorings collected meteorological variables, as well
as temperature, salinity, and horizontal velocity measurements in the upper
ocean. All the DYNAMO moorings and some RAMA moorings were equipped with
microstructure sensors, allowing direct measurements of turbulent entrainment
fluxes. These observations provide a unique opportunity to close the surface
mixed layer salinity budget in the central and eastern TIO during different MJO
phases in the period of the DYNAMO experiment. The air-sea salinity flux will be
computed using mooring meteorological measurements. The advective salinity flux
will be computed using mooring measurements, aided by the Aquarius measurements.
The turbulent salinity flux will be computed using direct microstructure
measurements. The dominant fluxes in the surface mixed layer salinity budget
will be identified. The temporal (from days to intra-seasonal) and spatial
(central to eastern Tropical Indian Ocean) variability of salinity fluxes and
barrier layer properties, and their effects on shear instability and turbulent
entrainment flux will be quantified in different MJO phases. This study will
establish the basis for developing a physics based turbulence parameterization
scheme that includes the effects of barrier layer process that can help improve
model predictions of the initiation and evolution of the MJO.