* 1558871
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community-Based Aid Responses to Refugee Crises
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Malay Arora, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,181.00

Since the 1990s, the United Nations has increasingly acknowledged the prolonged
nature of refugee crises, and the need for humanitarian solutions that not only
offer emergency relief to refugees but also address their long-term needs.
Accordingly, it has called for a new "Community-Based Approach" to humanitarian
aid, which integrates refugees in their neighboring countries through welfare
programs and infrastructural support. The Syrian refugee crisis, however, throws
this new approach in grave doubt. The sheer scale of civilian displacement, now
reaching 4.3 million people, makes integration immeasurably difficult for
countries neighboring Syria. With the mass exodus of refugees, it is now vital
to understand how the refugee crisis is being managed in asylum countries. This
project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-
grounded scientific fieldwork, explores how humanitarian organizations negotiate
the challenges of community-based aid programs in response to refugee crises.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malay Firoz, under the supervision of Dr. Catherine Lutz
of Brown University, will examine how humanitarian organizations implement
community-based aid programs in Jordan and Lebanon. As small developing
countries, both Jordan and Lebanon are struggling to cope with the sudden influx
of refugees, and their governments are anxious to prevent refugees from
integrating. However, while the relatively stable Jordanian government has
strictly regulated its borders and contained refugees in camps, domestic turmoil
has prevented the Lebanese government from doing the same. The two countries
therefore provide ideal locations for comparing how humanitarian organizations
frame their official roles and responsibilities in different political contexts,
how aid workers on the ground adopt or transform these framings in the course of
everyday aid work, and what refugees expect from humanitarian organizations. In
order to pursue these questions, the researcher will conduct twelve months of
ethnographic fieldwork based in Amman and Beirut. He will employ a mixed-methods
approach, including textual analysis of policy statements and institutional
charters, semi-structured interviews with UN officials, aid workers and
refugees, as well as participant observation in humanitarian field offices and
refugee camps. The comparative findings from this research will provide insight
into the effectiveness of community-based aid programs amidst large-scale
displacement, and help humanitarian policy-makers design programs specifically
suited to different contexts.