* 1558990
* Investigating Sources of Excess Carbon and DELTA14C Anomalies During the Last Glacial Termination
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Lowell Stott, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 431,399.00

Recognizing that greenhouse gas variability played a primary role in Earth's
largest climate changes, the challenge now is to discover what processes are
responsible for variations in atmospheric greenhouse gases that accompany large
climate changes. The Pleistocene glacial/interglacial cycles are arguably some
Earth's largest and most dramatic climatic changes associated with variations in
atmospheric pCO2 and methane. But after three decades of research there is no
scientific consensus on the mechanisms responsible for the variations in
greenhouse gas concentrations. Recent discoveries have revealed secretes about
the Earth's carbon system that prompted the hypothesis being investigated with
this award. The hypothesis argues that the flux of CO2 into and out of rocks and
sediments that blanket marine hydrothermal systems varied with temperature
during glacial-interglacial cycles. This is because CO2 and CO2-rich fluids from
hydrothermal vents become denser than seawater as temperatures cool during
glaciations. The denser CO2 accumulates in rocks and sediments until the oceans
warm at the glacial terminations. When temperatures rise during a glacial
termination, CO2 becomes buoyant and is released into the Ocean. Carbon released
from hydrothermal systems carries distinct geochemical fingerprints that are
imprinted on marine sediments. This project will use geochemical measurements to
investigate whether these geochemical signals were imprinted on sediments at the
last glacial-to-interglacial transition. Preliminary evidence supports this
hypothesis. The results of this investigation could inform not only our
understanding of how geologic processes influenced the Earth's past climate, it
could also inform our understanding of how sensitive geologic reservoirs of
carbon are to rising ocean temperature in the future. This award will also
support ongoing participation in STEM training at the University of Southern
California through research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and high school seniors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Boron isotope and 14C
records from marine sediments indicate there was a significant increase in the
flux of 14C-depleted CO2 from the eastern equatorial Pacific to the atmosphere
during the last glacial termination as atmospheric pCO2 was rising. The source
of excess carbon and the reason for the increased flux of 14C-depleted CO2 is
not currently known. However, two different hypotheses have been put forth to
explain the deglacial history. One hypotheses calls upon ventilation of a
formally isolated abyssal water mass through the Southern Ocean and transport of
the ventilated carbon to the tropics via intermediate waters. An alternative
hypothesis calls upon release of geologic carbon into the tropical Ocean from
hydrothermal reservoirs in response to ocean warming during the deglaciation.
This research seeks to determine which of these two hypotheses is correct. Each
of the hypothesized mechanisms would have left a different geochemical
fingerprint on the intermediate waters that fed the equatorial Pacific upwelling
system. The so-called "abyssal ventilation hypothesis" predicts that the source
waters that contributed carbon to the equatorial undercurrent would have had the
lowest Delta14C signature and the lowest [CO3=]. Alternatively, if the increased
carbon flux in the equatorial Pacific resulted from release of carbon from
localized geologic sources, the most depleted Delta14C values and the lowest
[CO3=] would have occurred near the sites of carbon release. These two
mechanisms will be distinguishable with measurements of 14C ages of benthic
foraminifera, a proxy for changes in Delta14C and in B/Ca, a proxy for changes
in [CO3=]. Stable isotope data (benthic foraminiferal delta13C and delta18O)
will augment the 14C and B/Ca results for characterizing intermediate water
properties and mixing of source water signals in the equatorial undercurrent
system. Researchers at USC will make these proxy measurements and evaluate the
results using an Earth System model of intermediate complexity (cGENIE) that is
able to simulate how the isotope and [CO3=] gradients would change at
intermediate depths in the Pacific if carbon was released from the Southern
Ocean and/or from localized sources near hydrothermal vents.