* 1558754
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Investigation of Redox Reactions during Subsurface Mixing in Submarine Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Peter Saccocia, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 102,964.00

Submarine hot-springs at oceanic spreading centers form in response to heat
associated with volcanic activity responsible for the creation of new oceanic
crust. This heating of seawater to temperatures as high as 400Â°C, as it
circulates through the ocean crust, results in extensive chemical reactions that
modify the fluid's composition to something that is acidic, metal- and sulfide-
rich, and highly reducing. Venting of these fluids at the seafloor and mixing
with seawater creates a chemical environment that supports large microbial
ecosystems that do not rely on the sun (photosynthesis) as a source of energy.
Instead, they are sustained by catalyzing chemical reactions that occur when hot
and reduced hydrothermal fluids mix with cold oxidized seawater. The ability of
microbes to utilize these reactions as an energy source is highly dependent on
the abundance and composition of chemical compounds that participate in these
types of oxidation-reduction reactions. This research conducts laboratory
experiments to determine the rate of abiotic (i.e., not involving life) chemical
reactions that produce or consume chemical compounds used by deep sea microbes.
These data improve our understanding of how subsurface microbes and the higher
order marine ecosystems, that rely on these microbes as the base of the food
web, thrive on the bottom of the seafloor thousands of feet below the sea
surface. Broader impacts of the work include a substantial educational component
that provides state-of-the-art research experiences for 25 undergraduate science
majors at a primarily undergraduate institution (Bridgewater State University)
through partnership with a major oceanographic research institution (the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution). This integration of research and education
includes the development and implementation of a research course, offered at
Bridgewater State, and intensive summer research experiences at Woods Hole. The
goal is to provide undergraduates with opportunities to experience all aspects
of the scientific process, including background research, data collection,
analysis and interpretation, and presentation of results at a national
conference in order to better prepare them for employment and graduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of laboratory experiments
that investigate abiotic redox reactions in subsurface mixing zones in seafloor
hydrothermal systems. Using a novel laboratory reactor, experiments investigate
chemical disequilibria between key redox reactive species in seawater (e.g., H2,
H2S, Fe2+, CH4, O2, SO42-, CO2, NO3-), which comprise a major source of chemical
energy that supports complex subsurface ecosystems. At present, such reactions
are poorly constrained in hydrothermal environments, so this work identifies
these reactions and determines their rates at low to moderate temperatures that
characterize subsurface mixing zones within hydrothermal systems. The resulting
data will allow improvement of models of hydrothermal vent microbial metabolic
pathways. Experiments will take place using an open-system flow-through reaction
cell that is able to regulate the concentration of H2, O2, H2S, NO3-, and
intermediate oxidation state sulfur and nitrogen species as a function of
temperature and pH. Data will be used to place fundamental constraints on
thermodynamic models used to predict the amount of chemical energy delivered to
vent ecosystems, which should lead to an improved understanding of the linkages
between chemical environment and biological community composition and function.