* 1558017
* Functional Analysis of Signaling Pathways Controlling Limb Regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Malcolm Maden, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2020
* USD 680,000.00

Urodele amphibians (newts and salamanders) are unique throughout the animal
kingdom in their ability to perfectly regenerate whole organs such as limbs,
brains and the heart. For example, if the limb is amputated anywhere along its
length a perfect replacement will regenerate in about 1-2 months and this
regenerate will contain the bones, cartilage, joints, muscles, nerves, blood
vessels and skin that were originally there and all in the exactly the same
relationship to each other so that the limb will work again. The goal of this
project is to determine how growth factors and signaling molecules drive this
process. It has long been known that the nerves supply a factor that stimulates
the proliferation of the regenerating cells in the limb, and several candidates
have been identified recently. This project functionally tests each of these
candidates in a novel assay based on gene expression in the wound epidermis. The
identification of a factor that stimulates proliferation would have a huge
impact on mammalian systems where the lack of proliferation is the major
impediment to tissue regeneration. In addition to the nerve factor, two
additional signaling pathways are utilized to guide the regenerative process.
These will also be examined using the latest gene knockout techniques to
determine how these pathways interact with other known signals. This project
will impact several scientific communities, and the public at large because
regeneration has huge public appeal. Examples of this interest include that fact
that these recent axolotl regeneration studies were highlighted in TV programs
and other public media, and received public acclaim. Additionally, this project
includes specifically-designed mini-research projects that involve 4-6
undergraduates per year, and promotes active involvement of under-represented
minorities and women.

The first part of this project concentrates on the function of the apical
epidermis that forms after limb amputation as a crucial regulator of
regeneration. Transcriptomic analysis has identified the limb-specific genes
expressed in this apical epidermis, including Wnt, BMP and FGF - as well as two
novel pathways: IGF and RA. These new pathways will be examined by inhibition
using antisense morpholinos, pharmacological inhibition and Crispr/Cas9 targeted
mutagenesis to identify interactions with other pathways by qPCR and in situ
hybridization. The transcriptional network downstream of RA signaling will also
be examined by RNA-Seq to identify targets of this signaling molecule. The
second objective is to discover the molecular basis of the neurotrophic control
of limb regeneration. A novel approach will be used to screen 12 potential
neurotrophic factors for their effect on gene expression in the apical epidermis
in vitro since the apical epidermis is the primary target of the nerve. Included
in this screen are 7 novel neurotrophic factors that were identified in a
microarray for secreted factors from sensory nerves. Successful candidates will
be taken further using in vivo analyses including expression patterns during
limb regeneration and over-expression in transgenic animals.