* 1558034
* Epigenomic Analysis of Temperature-dependent Sex Determination
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Turk Rhen, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 819,835.00

Temperature-dependent gender determination was first reported nearly 50 years
ago in an African lizard. It has since been shown that temperature determines
gender in some fish and amphibians, many lizards, numerous turtles, and all
crocodilians. Yet, the mechanism that converts temperature into a biological
signal for male versus female development is not known. The Rhen lab has
identified novel temperature sensitive genes that respond quickly to temperature
change in snapping turtle embryos. These particular genes are known to turn on
or turn off gene expression during embryonic development in other species by
modifying chromosomal structure. Such factors are also known as epigenetic
regulators and may play a role in gender determination. The proposed studies
will test the hypothesis that epigenetic mechanisms regulate expression of genes
required for testis or ovary development. Ultimately, this research will advance
our understanding of temperature-dependent gender determination and provide
insight into the role epigenetic mechanisms play in testis and ovary development
in all vertebrates. Educational activities will enhance learning through
semester long projects in the classroom, improve undergraduate research
experiences through extended internships of 2-3 years, and increase the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in biology. Outreach
activities will train Rhen lab members to communicate science more effectively
to the public, disseminate findings to a wider audience through production of a
mini-documentary about temperature-dependent gender determination, and target a
demographic that is neglected in STEM outreach through an informal class for
older Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rhen lab has developed the common
snapping turtle as a model to study unique and conserved mechanisms of gender
determination in vertebrates. The overarching hypothesis is that temperature-
dependent changes in histone methylation play a key role in regulating
transcriptional programs for testis versus ovary development. Experiments test
the specific hypothesis that Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 and lysine-specific
demethylase 6B regulate methylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27) in gonads
from embryos incubated under male and female thermal regimes. Polycomb
Repressive Complex 2 methylates histone H3 at lysine 27. Trimethylated histone
H3 (H3K27me3) is a stable epigenetic mark that represses transcription.
Conversely, lysine-specific demethylase 6B allows gene expression by
demethylating H3K27me3 to H3K27me2 and H3K27me1. In Aim 1, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and quantitative PCR will be used to analyze
temperature effects on H3K27 methylation at conserved gender-determining loci.
In Aim 2, ChIP-Sequencing will be used to analyze temperature effects on genome-
wide patterns of H3K27 methylation in embryonic gonads. In Aim 3, experiments
will test whether Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 and lysine-specific demethylase
6B are causally involved in gender determination by perturbing gene expression
and/or using pharmacological inhibitors of these proteins. This research will
clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying temperature-dependent expression of
gender-determining genes. Findings will be presented in public databases, in
peer-reviewed publications, and at national/international meetings.