* 1558358
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Analyzing Tropical Alpine Glacier Dynamics During Middle-Holocene Warming
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Meredith Kelly, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,644.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will develop records of past glacier
extents in one set of mountains in a tropical setting and will assess the
sensitivity of glaciers in this and similar regions to changes in climatic
conditions, such as alternate temperature and precipitation regimes. The project
will provide new information and insights to address the degree to which alpine
tropical glaciers are especially sensitive to changing climatic and other
environmental conditions. The study region is one for which previous evidence
seemed to indicate that alpine glaciers persisted during the middle of the
Holocene Epoch, a period when evidence indicates that temperatures were as warm
as or warmer than the present time period. The project helps to assess the
sensitivity of these glaciers to warming temperatures in order to better
ascertain both the timing and magnitude of past glacier fluctuations. By
reconstructing past glacier extents in tropical regions like this, this project
will improve basic understanding about the factors and dynamics that affect
tropical glaciers as well as their sensitivity to a changing environment. The
project also will provide information that will yield more accurate predictions
of future glacier mass loss, project findings will facilitate planning and
development activities in tropical regions, where glaciers provide crucial
freshwater resources and ongoing glacier recession will impact directly the
livelihoods and wellbeing of communities. The project will provide additional
education and training benefits by engaging undergraduate students in some
facets of the project and through presentations based on the project in
elementary and secondary school classrooms in Vermont and New Hampshire. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

The ongoing retreat of tropical glaciers has been highlighted as one
manifestation of contemporary change in environmental conditions around the
Earth, but the sensitivity of these glaciers to projected future climate
conditions is uncertain. Through this dissertation research project, the
doctoral student will improve the understanding of tropical glacier response to
warmer temperatures by determining the extents of glaciers in tropical eastern
Africa over a period roughly 8,000 to 4,000 years ago, when the region was as
warm as or warmer than at present. The student will use detailed geomorphic
mapping and surface exposure dating of glacial deposits in the Rwenzori
Mountains to determine glacier extents during the current interglacial period
known as the Holocene Epoch, which extends from about 11,600 years ago to the
present. She will employ a surface-exposure dating method that relies on
measurements of the cosmogenic nuclide beryllium-10, which is produced in rock
surfaces over time due to the influx of cosmic rays. The project will be the
first study to develop a beryllium-10-based chronology of Holocene glacier
extents in tropical eastern Africa. The student will compare the Rwenzori
glacier chronology with records of temperature, precipitation, and glacier
extents from other locations in tropical East Africa in order to assess the
regional climate conditions and patterns of glacier fluctuations. These results
will be compared with Holocene glacier extents in tropical South America.
Determining whether glaciers across the global tropics fluctuated synchronously
or asynchronously during the Holocene Epoch will provides information for
evaluating the dynamics associated with changing global climatic conditions.
Project results will advance efforts to model glaciers within future warming
scenarios, thereby providing a means to test hypotheses about the possible
mechanisms that transmitted climate signals across the globe during the Holocene
Epoch.