* 1558966
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Multidecadal Changes in the Instrumental Mean Sea Level Record
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Rui Ponte, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 302,548.00

Global sea levels have risen steadily over the last century and there is concern
that sea level rise will accelerate over the next century. Early detection of
sea level acceleration, necessary for adaptation efforts, depends on an improved
understanding of multidecadal sea level changes. This study consists of a
detailed investigation of multidecadal sea level changes using sea level data,
ocean and climate models, atmospheric reanalyses, vertical land motion, and a
hierarchical Bayesian data-assimilation approach. An outcome of this study will
be an enhanced, value-added sea level dataset based on the hierarchical Bayesian
model approach, which will complement the available sea level estimates from
altimetry, tide gauges, and ocean circulation models. These sea level fields
from the Bayesian model solution will be made freely and publicly accessible and
available. With their estimates of uncertainty, these fields would be suited for
use in state estimation efforts on century time scales. This project is a
partnership between academia and industry and would also support an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this project include:
reconstructing regional maps and global time series of sea level going back two
centuries; elucidating roles of internal versus external forcing of global mean
multidecadal sea level change; diagnosing the impacts of static and dynamic
processes on multidecadal regional sea level changes; and evaluating the
veracity of climate models. The outcomes will fill basic knowledge gaps,
improving understanding of ocean circulation and climate change. To increase
basic knowledge of ocean circulation and climate change, and to cope with
difficulties related to the sparseness of sea level data in space and time, a
hierarchical Bayesian model will be brought to bear on extant datasets
(altimetry, tide gauge, vertical land motion), giving observation-based
constraints on sea level behavior over the last two centuries. Exploration of
the underlying ocean dynamics based on hierarchical Bayesian model solutions
will elucidate the physical drivers and space-time scales of multidecadal sea
level changes and provide a basis to evaluate climate models.