* 1558986
* Building Social Science Data Infrastructure: The 2016 National Asian American Survey
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Taeku Lee, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2018
* USD 507,132.00

SES-1558986&lt;br/&gt;Karthick Ramakrishnan &lt;br/&gt;University of California-
Riverside &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asian Americans are the fastest-growing racial
group in the United States, and there are important gaps in our understanding of
their social and civic integration. In addition, Asian Americans exhibit
significant socioeconomic diversity, making them ideal for answering larger
theoretical questions on immigrant incorporation in the United States, as it is
shaped by differences in national origin, residential concentration, and
educational and labor market outcomes. This project will build a data resource
for public release in June 2017 that will have widespread utility among scholars
in social science disciplines, most notably in sociology, political science, and
public policy, as well for journalists and bloggers versed in social science
data and trends. The survey of Asian Americans will provide important data for
questions related to immigrant incorporation, attitudes on economic inequality
and race-relations, and civic and political engagement. In addition to providing
comparisons within the Asian American racial category, we will include cross-
racial comparisons (to African Americans, Hispanics/Latinos, and non-Hispanic
whites) using the same instrument and mode of interview. This project advances
the mission of the National Science Foundation to promote the progress of
science, particularly the social sciences, as well as to advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare. In particular, this project has relevance in
terms of broader impacts as specified by Congress in 2010: Asian Americans have
a disproportionately large number of high-skilled workers in STEM fields.
Understanding their experiences, attitudes, opportunities, and barriers, will be
critical to ensuring the economic competitiveness of the United States and the
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
survey of Asian Americans will: 1) be contemporaneous with the 2016 General
Social Survey (GSS) and American National Election Study (ANES), 2) replicate
key questions from those surveys, and 3) build on the pioneering efforts of past
surveys of Asian Americans. The project produces a dataset for public release in
June 2017 through ICPSR (Inter-university Consortium for&lt;br/&gt;Political and
Social Research) that will have widespread utility among scholars in social
science disciplines as well for journalists and bloggers versed in social
science data and trends. The survey will provide data to address questions
related to immigrant incorporation, attitudes on economic inequality and race-
relations, and civic and political engagement. In addition to providing
comparisons within the Asian American racial category (samples of approximately
400 adults each among major national origin groups), it will include cross-
racial comparisons using the same instrument and mode of interview
(approximately 400 adults each among whites, Latinos, and African
Americans).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing number of studies focus on Asian
Americans. However, existing surveys tend to be limited to a small number of
national origin groups or to a relatively specific geographic area. More general
studies such as the GSS and ANES do not have the requisite sample size or
language support to accurately capture the experiences and attitudes of Asian
Americans. The primary innovation of the 2016 National Asian American Survey is
to replicate questions on important general surveys, specifically the GSS and
the ANES, with a large sample of Asian Americans in a well-designed study. With
this commitment to question replication, the 2016 National Asian American Survey
will allow researchers, for the first time, to compare Asian Americans to the
U.S. public on key social and political measures, and to make important
comparisons within the racial group.