* 1558654
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Changing Global Distribution of Radiocarbon: Sampling and Analysis from GO-SHIP and Ships of Opportunity Cruises
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Ann McNichol, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 618,221.00

Radiocarbon has long been recognized as an important tracer for studies of ocean
processes. The major objective of this project is to continue a systematic
global resampling of the oceanic radiocarbon distribution as part of the US
Global Ocean Carbon and Repeat Hydrography program, a part of the international
Global Ocean Ship-Based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-SHIP) network of
sustained observations. Continued sampling of select repeat hydrography lines as
well as the collection of samples from other important regions will provide the
global carbon cycle community with a robust database to test ocean general
circulation models. This is particularly important based on our reliance on such
models to predict the consequences of increased global carbon dioxide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated from this study can be used to study
mixing, ventilation rates, production rates, residence times in the deep ocean,
deep ocean biogeochemistry and oxygen use rates, air-sea gas exchange,
thermocline ventilation rates, as a proxy for anthropogenic carbon dioxide in
the ocean, and to evaluate ocean general circulation model performance. The
samples to be collected are focused on, but not limited to, the Indian and the
Southern Oceans. The researchers will collect and analyze samples from planned
repeat hydrography Atlantic cruises over the next 5 years. The total planned
sampling will help provide an updated estimate of the three dimensional
radiocarbon distribution for the Indian Ocean in addition to monitoring changes
in the bomb-14C transient. Their repeat sampling schedule is, by design, a bit
slower than for the general Repeat Hydrography program. This reduction is a
compromise based on budgetary considerations, sample analysis capacity and
cruise plans. They will also sample in the Southern Ocean as part of the
Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling (SOCCOM) effort.
These samples will document the radiocarbon distribution in this poorly
understood region of the ocean and provide important information about carbon
flux and transport through this area.