* 1558232
* I-Corps: Cloud pathology platform for computer aided digitized histopathology image processing and analysis system
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/29/2016
* Sos Agaian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Owing to the potential negative side effects of prostate cancer treatment, there
is a real need to accurately diagnose and not over treat prostate cancer. The
development of a system capable of quickly and accurately processing digitized
prostate biopsy slides to detect, classify and score prostate cancer will result
in fewer unnecessary surgeries with potentially harmful side effects and more
efficient use of healthcare dollars. This I-Corps team believes that
pathologists using such a system will be more productive and better able to
handle the increasing workload that an aging population will produce. The system
will also provide critical access to a "digital" pathologist for developing
countries where access to pathologists is severely limited. This I-Corps team
will conduct customer discovery and more fully analyze the commercial potential
for a cloud pathology platform for computer aided diagnostic and decision
support system for prostate cancer. The team will demonstrate a system where a
user will input a digitized prostate biopsy slide and the system will analyze
the slide, identify cancerous tissue regions, classify and grade the prostate
tumors and output a Gleason score. The proposed innovation leverages advances in
computer vision, image processing and neural networks. The system utilizes a
fuzzy color standardization method as a preprocessing step that allows the
system to analyze images from different sources. A novel algorithm automatically
segments prostate tissue structures based on color decomposition and extracts
morphological and architectural features from prostate needle biopsy images and
automatically classifies the prostate cancer biopsy images based on the Gleason
grading system. Finally, a new high-speed learning algorithm for the quaternion
neural network, substantially reducing network training time, while providing
equivalent performance to quaternion backpropagation.