* 1558134
* Theory of Kinetic Alfven Waves and Auroral Particle Acceleration
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Yan Song, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2019
* USD 543,865.00

This proposal is focused on developing an entirely new paradigm for auroral arc
formation that, if correct, will be groundbreaking for auroral physics. The
dynamic auroras that appear in the polar regions are visual indicators of energy
flowing into the atmosphere from disturbances raging in near-Earth space.
Electrons and ions, that power the auroral emissions, travel down magnetic field
lines from these disturbances and must be further accelerated along the way. For
several decades, the majority of the acceleration was thought to be the result
of electrons and ions traversing quasi-static potential drops while moving down
magnetic field lines. These potential drops are created when two parallel
oppositely-charged layers form in the plasma setting up an electric field and an
associated voltage drop. The auroral electrons are accelerated through the
voltage drop creating a single energy peak. Recently the significance of time
dependent acceleration of electrons by kinetic Alfven waves has become clear.
Kinetic Alfven waves are formed under certain circumstances when Alfven waves
(traveling along the magnetic field communicating the effects of changes
elsewhere in the field) develop an electric field parallel to the background
magnetic field. In contrast to the previous mechanism, the parallel wave
electric fields accelerate electrons over a broad energy range. However, neither
of these processes is well understood. To complicate things, both processes are
influenced by coupling and feedbacks with the ionosphere. The PI has developed a
compelling new theory that the two processes are related (i.e., that kinetic
Alfven waves transition to a quasi-steady state forming parallel potential
drops). The focus here is on testing this theory. Broader impacts of the work
include the training of a graduate student and communication of results through
public outreach. The research is expected to be of broad interest to other
plasma physics communities. In the longer-term, it will contribute to better
understanding of the space environment, resulting in improved forecasts, and the
development of efficient mitigation strategies to protect vulnerable
technologies of value to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach combines
theory and modeling with the goal of including a large range of temporal and
spatial scales involved in the transition from time-dependent to quasi-steady
conditions, a large parameter range, feedbacks through ionospheric reflection of
the Alfven waves and by modifications of the ionospheric conductivity due to the
precipitating electrons, as well as by the formation and effects of density
cavities along the auroral field lines. The primary tool is an already developed
linearized two-fluid model, which will be modified to include: nonlinear
electron dynamics along the magnetic field line and a realistic dipole magnetic
field geometry. This model combined with a kinetic electron model will be used
to investigate the acceleration of electrons and their self-consistent
interactions with the kinetic Alfven waves.