* 1558744
* Algorithms and Computation for Rare Events in Complex Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Qiang Du, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 05/31/2017
* USD 147,196.00

The project is concerned with mathematical and computational issues related to
the simulation and analysis of equilibria, metastable and transition states and
minimum energy paths for complex energy landscapes of practical interests, and
associated stochastic dynamics. The research to be carried out is closely
motivated by applications in a number of areas of federal strategic interests:
the development of effective algorithms and codes is a crucial part of high-
performance computing, and numerical methods and software tools to be developed
may be potentially useful for effective computational materials and drug
design.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will carry out
interdisciplinary research that encompassing subjects like computational
mathematics, physics, information, materials and biological sciences. He will
focus on new algorithmic development and analysis which have the potential to
significantly improve the usual practice on the modeling and simulation of rare
events. He will consider some specific and important applications, including
systems of interacting particles and interfaces in geometrically confined and
frustrated configurations or deformable geometry which arise in many areas of
physics, chemistry and biology (such as formation of nano-clusters, bimolecular
conformation, vesicle mediated interactions, and critical nucleation in solid
state transformations). He will attempt to draw strong connections with some of
the algorithms developed by practitioners implemented in existing software codes
such as those for first principle calculation and computational chemistry. Most
of the problems involved in the research project are associated with either
infinite dimensional spaces such as deterministic or stochastic partial
differential equations or finite dimensional spaces with high dimensions
(discretization of differential equations or particle systems involving a large
number of particles), which lead to many computational challenges. Various
mathematical and numerical issues will be studied, ranging from efficient local
saddle point search and its robust numerical implementation to rigorous analysis
and effective multiscale simulations of relevant dynamics and rare events. It is
expected that the progress made during the project will have a broad impact on
the community interested in the study of rare events. The project will also
contribute to education and training as it will provide students valuable
training ground and research experience in an interdisciplinary environment.
Much effort will be devoted to promoting active engagement of student
participation at all levels and integrating research findings into teaching and
training.