* 1558445
* Looking Further Back in Time at Flank Degradation Processes and Volcanic Edifice Evolution on the Northwestern Hawaiian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* John Smith Jr, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 219,788.00

The project will analyze and interpret multibeam bathymetry data obtained during
two highly successful research expeditions to the Papah창naumoku창kea Marine
National Monument in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. Much of the history of
the volcanoes located in this area west of the main Hawaiian Islands remains
poorly documented. This study focuses on understanding the formation of the
giant landslides that are common on the Hawaiian Islands. The primary goals are
to document how volcanoes build and then collapse over time and to document the
frequency and size of landslides to assess the hazard that they present in
Hawaii and other island nations. Large landslides have the ability to generate
tsunamis and thus pose a significant risk to society. The results will aid the
management and perpetuation of the national monument, most notably the
biological communities living on the volcanoes. A graduate student will be
trained in data analysis and interpretation.

An extensive set of geophysical data was acquired from the Hawaiian Ridge during
two cruises on the Research Vessel Falkor in 2014. The purpose of the two 36-day
expeditions, primarily sponsored by the Schmidt Ocean Institute in conjunction
with NSF and NOAA, was to carry out multibeam and potential field mapping within
the the Papah창naumoku창kea Marine National Monument in the Northwestern Hawaiian
Islands. The proposed work will use the bathymetry data to examine the nearly 50
giant submarine landslides and their deposits previously mapped in the region
using lower-resolution data collected over 20 years ago. The main objective is
to carry out detailed interpretations of the older GSLs to provide a larger
statistical base, a greater variety of source edifice morphologies and
structural settings, and a longer temporal comparison with the giant submarine
landslides in the main islands and worldwide.