* 1558887
* CAREER: Pathway to a Driverless Highway Transportation System: A Behavior Analysis and Trajectory Control Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/20/2015,08/31/2021
* Xiaopeng Li, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant investigates near-
future highway traffic with a portion of vehicles being automated and
controllable by roadside units (e.g., using driverless car and connected vehicle
technologies). This research project explores strategies of controlling the
trajectories of these automated vehicles to not only optimize their own
performance but also improve the experience of nearby human drivers. These novel
trajectory-based control concepts and models can be applied to related
industrial developments in highway infrastructure, electronic devices, and
vehicle technologies. The research outcomes expect to provide a methodological
foundation for evaluating the feasibility and the potential benefits of
transferring the current human-driven highway transportation system into one
that is fully automated. Further, the research outcomes are to be integrated
into creative education initiatives to motivate and prepare students to pursue
an engineering career. This project establishes a virtual traffic laboratory
where students can play interactive driving games during classroom learning.
This experience-based virtual learning platform supports engineering curriculum
developments, outreach to high school students and underrepresented groups, and
workshops with industrial collaborators and academic
peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to: (i) discover
fundamental patterns of interactions among neighboring drivers on a highway and
(ii) create strategies for controlling trajectories of distributed automated
vehicles to improve the overall traffic performance based on these interaction
patterns. This research establishes a virtual highway experiment platform by
integrating high-fidelity driving simulators with off-the-shelf traffic
simulators, resulting in a flexible highway driving environment that facilitates
the easy recording of driver-to-vehicle interactions. Further, this effort
creates a new data analysis method that decomposes collected trajectories into a
set of elemental segments, allowing us to apply data mining techniques to
uncover driver interaction patterns. These efforts aim to overcome two prominent
challenges in transportation research: the difficulty of collecting high-
fidelity vehicle trajectory data and the lack of quantitative methods for
analyzing such data. Based on these discoveries, a traffic control framework is
to be developed that plans trajectories for driverless vehicles in order to
improve traffic efficiency, reduces environmental impacts, increases safety, and
improves the experience of all drivers. This research advances the scope of
trajectory optimization methodologies from traditional isolated individual
trajectories to multiple interdependent and interactive trajectories in a shared
transportation channel.