* 1558755
* Social influences on the Long-term Cessation of Violence
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Peggy Giordano, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 384,404.00

Social Influences on the Long-term Cessation of Violent
Behaviors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of increased interest in how individuals
modify their behaviors in ways that promote health, little prior research has
examined the process of moving away from the use of violence within intimate
relationships. Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a leading cause of injury,
particularly in young adult populations, and is associated with declines in
emotional well-being. Despite the importance of the topic, there are few prior
studies of how to decrease IPV. Those studies have been short-term and their
explicit links to treatment programs has generally been limited to the emphases
of these programs. The current study will provide a perspective on continuity
and change in the experience of IPV over the different stages of life, and
investigate the role of social experiences as influences on what causes changes
in these types of behaviors. Most theories of change highlight the importance of
the individual's own motivation and receptivity as key components of the change
process. Unlike those studies, this study's focus on potentially malleable
social factors will provide new insights about specific social and environmental
influences that serve as catalysts for behavioral changes. Knowledge about these
linkages has the potential to inform the design of more effective prevention and
intervention efforts targeting this serious public health problem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a life-course perspective, the study will build on a
five-wave longitudinal investigation of a large, diverse sample of young men and
women interviewed first as adolescents, and later as they have navigated the
transition to adulthood (Toledo Adolescent Relationships Study). At each
interview, information was collected about IPV perpetration, as well as about
family, peer, romantic partner and neighborhood experiences and influences. The
research will follow-up for an additional assessment all those respondents who
reported using violence within the context of an intimate relationship during
the course of the study (n=403). Specific objectives are to: a) document
patterns of persistence and "desistance" of these behaviors, b) investigate the
underlying mechanisms associated with the process of making and sustaining
positive changes, and c) identify social and individual factors that distinguish
desisters and those who continue this negative pattern within their
relationships. The relatively long time gap between assessments (5 years) will
permit an examination of sustained behavior change, as distinguished from the
relatively common phenomenon of temporary lulls. In addition to the online
structured data collection effort, the researchers will complete in-depth
qualitative interviews with a subset of male and female respondents who vary in
the character of their experiences with violence (n=85). This mixed method
approach will permit a comprehensive examination of the complex interplay of
social experiences and individual-level subjective changes as factors associated
with the successful cessation of this form of interpersonal violence. This
research contributes to scholarship about desistance from crime and contributes
to the design of more effective programs to prevent and intervene in intimate
partner violence.