* 1558214
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Children's Verbal Practices and Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Miki Makihara, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 19,985.00

Languages are key to both the organization and the transformation of
communities. Particular language practices underpin some types of social
relationships while also hindering others. As social relationships change,
languages change in form and function, enabling new forms of sociality. The
research supported by this award asks: What new ways of using indigenous and
global languages are emerging today? And how are these new verbal practices
enabling or preventing social change? Supervised by Dr. Miki Makihara of City
University of New York, anthropology doctoral student Mariapaola Gritti will
investigate these questions through a 15-month linguistic-ethnographic study of
children's language practices in a village in American Samoan, a U.S. territory.
This project will advance understanding of social change, expand existing
linguistic methodologies, and clarify how language practices can underpin the
sustainability of communities. It will also inform language policy. By
documenting children's communicative practices, this project will enable mid-
and long-term monitoring of one such policy: the Samoan-language instruction
program currently piloted by the American Samoa Department of Education and
aimed both to improve educational achievement and foster local language and
culture maintenance in this U.S. territory.

American Samoa is an particularly appropriate site for this research because
residents there face changes on multiple fronts, including, their environment,
culture, forms of social organization, and possibilities for political
participation. In addition, transnational kinship and economic relations,
migration to Hawaii and the U.S. mainland, official use of English, attempts to
introduce Samoan-language instruction in schools, and campaigns promoting
Western pedagogical models all affect American Samoan ways of speaking Samoan
and English. The intensity and simultaneity of these developments make the
linguistic effects more salient for identification, documentation, and analysis,
particularly in young children's speech. Therefore, Gritti will audio and video
record and observe daily children's spontaneous social and linguistic
interactions. She will survey these children's families and conduct ethnographic
observation and interviews in the community. Her analysis of the language corpus
will focus on two aspects of children's speech: (1) English borrowings into
Samoan, which children use with variable frequency and phonology; and (2)
personal pronouns, which children may use with a mixture of English or Samoan
syntax and semantics. Employing the innovative concept of "semiotic potential,"
Gritti will monitor changes in frequency and effects of variants across
situations, among children, and over developmental stages, to highlight how
children's emerging grammar systems reflect their communicative needs, while
also contributing to change in the language they speak. Finally, children's
mimetic or play activities will be analyzed to identify children's ideas about
the different variants, about Samoan and English, and about the changing world
around them.