* 1558341
* Variability in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation During Marine Isotope Stage 3
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Delia Oppo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2018
* USD 486,519.00

Paleoclimate data show that the Earth's climate varied dramatically during the
last ice age. Abrupt transitions from cold to warm North Atlantic climate
states, spaced several millennia apart, were generally associated with increases
in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. While surface climate also varied
on shorter, millennial time scales, atmospheric carbon dioxide variability on
this time scale was negligible. Changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations on the longer times scale, and surface climate on both time
scales, are generally attributed to changes in circulation within the deep
ocean, but our knowledge of deep ocean circulation variability during the last
ice age is limited. Detailed knowledge of glacial circulation variability is
required to understand the influence of deep ocean circulation variability on
surface climate and atmospheric carbon. This project supports education and
training of an undergraduate student and a post-graduate investigator. All data
generated as part of this study will be made publicly available. The data will
also be valuable to the climate modeling community, which uses paleoclimate data
to test the same models used to predict future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom water temperature estimates, determined from
elemental ratios of benthic foraminifera, from a tropical North Atlantic
sediment core, will be used to identify times of deep ocean circulation change
during the last 65,000 years. Models predict large and rapid warming at the
location and depth (~550 m) of the sediment core in association with a weakening
of deep Atlantic water originating from the North Atlantic region. The sediment
core has high accumulation rates (&gt;30 cm/kyr), and variations in magnetic
susceptibility that can be tied directly to Greenland ice core &amp;#948;18O
variations. Proposed radiocarbon and planktonic foraminiferal &amp;#948;18O
analysis will further refine the chronology. Reconstructing deep ocean
variability during the last ice age is critical to understanding the role of
deep ocean circulation in driving glacial atmospheric carbon dioxide
variability, which generally varies significantly only on longer, multi-
millennial, time-scale. On the other hand, confirming that deep ocean
circulation did (or did not) vary on the shorter millennial time scale will help
determine whether or not observed large climate shifts in, for example, tropical
Atlantic hydrology, occurred in the absence of deep ocean circulation change.
Such a finding would imply that episodes of North Atlantic cooling have
significant and widespread climate impacts in the absence of changes in ocean
dynamics.