* 1558400
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forced Migrants Encountering the Refugee Regime
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Patricia Ehrkamp, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,955.00

This project will analyze the relationship between migration management
practices of recipient states in the West and the lived experiences of Syrian
forced migrants seeking to escape the ongoing civil war in Syria via Jordan.
Taken together, state migration policies, refugee laws, and international
agreements constitute what is here termed the "refugee regime" - a set of
institutional practices through which the migration policies of countries in the
West and the Middle East have become increasingly interconnected. This research
draws attention to (1) the transnational activities of state agencies,
humanitarian organizations, and non-state actors in managing forced migration,
and (2) forced migrants' experiences along their journeys. In doing so, this
research re-situates the politics of migration management from a top-down
disembodied conception to one informed by the everyday encounters, narratives,
and struggles of forced migrants themselves. This research will make important
contributions to the field of political geography and broader interdisciplinary
debates in refugee studies, security and border studies, and feminist
methodology. This study further seeks to interrogate popular representations of
forced migrants as passive victims or burdens on the welfare state. Findings
from this research will inform public debates about Syrian forced migrants
through a series of public information workshops and policy briefs. Research
findings will be disseminated to wider society in order to foster a better
understanding of forced migrants' lives and the challenges that migrants' face.
Findings from this research will also inform the co-PI's undergraduate teaching
on international migration, transnationalism, and geography. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement Award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.

This project responds to calls for studies on how migration management works
across national borders and how migrants experience and negotiate their journeys
between places of departure and arrival. It does so by answering two central
research questions: 1) How is the refugee regime constituted across
transnational space? 2) How do Syrian forced migrants experience the refugee
regime across their migration trajectory and once they arrive in their final
destination? In order to answer these questions this project comprises archival
research, interviews, and participatory mapping with Syrian forced migrants, as
well as interviews with staff of state and non-state institutions. Using these
methods, this research contributes new findings to scholarship on the
securitization of migration and the changing geographies of borders and
migration management.