* 1558635
* Labor Rights in the American Midwest
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Marc Dixon, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2019
* USD 65,065.00

SES-1558635 Marc Dixon Dartmouth College

The early 2010s saw an extraordinary burst of legislative activity and protest
over labor rights in the American Midwest. Thousands flooded state capitols in
protest; legislators fled to neighboring states to delay votes, and an
unsuccessful and highly controversial gubernatorial recall election was waged.
This study provides a comparative and historical lens to understand these events
and provides new insights into social movements and labor unions in particular.
The research examines legislative campaigns over labor rights in Indiana, Ohio
and Wisconsin as they were waged both in the late 1950s, at the peak of union
strength, and in the early 2010s when unions were far weaker. By analyzing
policy continuity and change across these states and over time, the study design
allows for the detection of enduring features of labor relations, including
areas where unions have long struggled, as well as how broad social processes
like globalization and deindustrialization, which have developed in the interim,
shape struggles over labor rights. Study findings will contribute to a better
understanding of American labor relations and will provide new insights on the
sources of influence among business interests and other advocacy organizations
in civil society.

This comparative historical study examines legislative campaigns over Right-to-
Work laws and public sector collective bargaining rights in Indiana, Ohio and
Wisconsin as they were waged both in the late 1950s, during the heyday of the
so-called capital-labor accord, and in the early 2010s when unions were far
weaker. This study seeks to understand patterns of continuity and policy change,
both across the three states and over time, how labor unions and their shifting
field of opponents forged coalitions, built support for policy proposals, and
influenced legislation, and how these strategies have changed over time. The
study is unique by providing a comparative historical lens to understand the
recent and high profile struggles over labor rights in the American Midwest. It
provides new insight on the 1950s as a critical decade for union development and
contributes to social movement theory by analyzing the processes and outcomes of
activist mobilization by not just unions, but corporations and business
federations as well. The project incorporates archival data from unions,
business organizations and elected officials involved in the campaigns across
the two periods and in-depth interviews with a range of participants in the
2010s. Interview and archival materials are analyzed with a formal qualitative
methodology in Event Structure Analysis (ESA), aiding the systematic comparison
of mobilization processes and policy outcomes across states and over time.