* 1558560
* Ralph Bunche Summer Institute
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Paula McClain, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2019
* USD 327,465.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ralph Bunche Summer Institute is
designed to expand opportunities for students-of-color by preparing black,
Latino, and American Indian undergraduates to enroll in doctoral programs and
become political science college and university professors and/or researchers in
the field and related fields. The RBSI immerses undergraduates in the summer of
their junior year in a five-week intensive program that includes graduate level
course work, and the design, analysis, writing, and presentation of original
research papers. The program simulates the graduate school experience and
focuses on scientific analysis by introducing the students to research methods
and statistics, and the research enterprise that is the lifeline of professional
political scientists. Results show that the RBSI is succeeding in increasing the
numbers of students-of-color in political science graduate programs, and the
numbers of blacks and Latinos with doctorates in political science, as well as
several cognate social science fields. The majority of these individuals are now
faculty at universities across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ralph Bunche Summer Institute is designed to
expand opportunities for students-of-color by preparing black, Latino, and
American Indian undergraduates to enroll in doctoral programs and become
political science college and university professors and/or researchers in the
field and related fields. The RBSI immerses undergraduates in the summer of
their junior year in a five-week intensive program that includes graduate level
course work, and the design, analysis, writing, and presentation of original
research papers. The program simulates the graduate school experience and
focuses on scientific analysis by introducing the students to research methods
and statistics, and the research enterprise that is the lifeline of professional
political scientists. Those students whose empirical papers are judged to be of
high quality are invited to present their papers in a poster session at the
annual meeting of the American Political Science Association.