* 1558543
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Network Formation among Adults with Autism
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,200.00

Neurodevelopmental disabilities such as autism inhibit the capacity for social
interaction. Scientists are aware that adults living with autism are able to
create communities and social networks, but we know little about how that
happens. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, asks how individuals with
neurodevelopmental disabilities develop sociality. This project will
significantly enhance our knowledge of how members of an underrepresented group
use various techniques and technologies to develop social networks and
communities. It will also increase our knowledge of autism in adulthood and the
ways adults with autism engage with others about the nature of the diagnostic
classification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heather Thomas, supervised by Dr. Keith M.
Murphy of the University of California at Irvine, will investigate how adults
with autism living in the United States establish and maintain social networks
using various kinds of communicative practices and technologies. Research will
be conducted among groups for adults with autism, autistic adults' networks on
online social media websites, and national and regional autism conferences to
learn about the social dynamics of online and offline social groups and networks
created and sustained by adults with autism. Preliminary data suggests that
these are ideal sites for examining the formation and maintenance of social
groups for adults with autism, autistic adults' self-advocacy practices, and
challenges to the widely held belief that autism, a neurodevelopmental
disability, necessarily restricts one's interest in and capacity for social
connection and meaningful community participation. Data will be collected
through interviews, participation in and observation of online and offline
social interactions, and collection of significant autism-related media produced
in the last decade. In various social groups distributed across Southern
California, the researcher will collect audiovisual data and produce descriptive
notes through her participation in and observation of recurring weekly events.
In exploring digital media sites frequented by autistic adults, she will
document the social practices and communication technologies that members of
this population use to form social networks.