* 1558052
* A New Hypothesis for Cardio-respiratory Mechanics in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Jon Harrison, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 877,059.00

The immense ecological success of insects makes them extremely important
agricultural pests, disease vectors, and food web components. Despite the
importance of insects, only a minimal understanding of many aspects of their
basic physiology still exists. Blood and air flow are critical for the transport
of nutrients, hormones, and gases within an insect's body, but a comprehensive
understanding of the biomechanical processes that drive fluid flow is lacking.
This project tests a new hypothesis that some insects use an abdominal pump
linked functionally to a "gut piston" to generate the principal forces driving
air and blood flow. This research is motivated by three questions: 1) How does
the abdominal pump help to create airflow and mixing in the insect gas exchange
and transport system? 2) How are pressure differences created within the main
body cavity? 3) How important is the abdominal pump for circulation? A variety
of experimental and computational methods will be used to test for linkages
between these systems. This research will clarify how insects pump fluids, and
contribute to a broader understanding of mechanically coupled systems, with
potential applications in vertebrate (including human) physiology and mechanical
engineering. Mechanically-coupled physiological systems have been relatively
well-studied in vertebrates, but rarely at the small sizes of insects. This
research will provide, therefore, new insights into the physical basis of flow
production in the most diverse group of animals on the planet. This project also
includes initiatives to involve individuals from diverse backgrounds in
research, and to share this research with the local and broader public. This
effort includes a new program that will bring Chicago Public School students to
Argonne National Laboratory to experience how synchrotron X-rays are used to
image insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes that the
tenebrionid beetle Zophobas morio, and perhaps many insect species, utilizes a
linked abdominal pump and "gut piston" to drive the majority of air and blood
flow. A new hypothesis posits that 1) the abdominal pump raises hemolymph
pressure and displaces a large amount of body volume, inducing airflows and
hemolymph flows, and 2) a synchronous "gut piston" pressurizes the thoracic and
head compartments, compressing tracheae within them, and thereby further
augments pressures that drive air and blood flow within these regions. To test
these hypotheses, a combination of newly developed and established techniques to
measure abdominal pump volume, cardiac output, hemolymph pressures, hemolymph
mixing, and tracheal airflow will be used. Specifically, this project will
determine the following: how hemolymph pressures induce compression and airflow
in the tracheal system; how differential pressures are created within the coelom
and dorsal vessel; and how these components integrate to produce blood flows in
the body. To test for linkages between abdominal pumping, hemolymph pressures,
gut piston function, hemolymph mixing, and tracheal collapse, correlational
approaches will be combined with experimental procedures to directly test the
effects of changes in heart and abdominal pump function on airflow and blood
circulation. An adaptive and parallelized immersed boundary method will also be
used to solve for the flows and mixing patterns generated by the deformations of
elastic and/or poroelastic models of the heart, tracheal tubes, and abdomen.
Experimental measurements from the beetle will be used to validate the model,
and the model will be used to address hypotheses that are difficult to probe
experimentally.