* 1558568
* Workshop: Activities supporting the international Biodiversity and Ecosystem Service Scenarios Network; March 6-10, 2016, Monte Verita, Ascona, Switzerland
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Walter Jetz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 01/31/2019
* USD 112,638.00

This award provides support for three workshops enabling participation by US
scientists in the international "Belmont Forum Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Service Scenarios Network", known as ScenNet. This network currently includes
nine countries (Australia, Brazil, China, France, Germany, India, Japan, Norway,
South Africa). The core goals of ScenNet are to strengthen ties between
researchers working nationally and internationally on future scenarios of
biodiversity science, biodiversity health and ecosystem services. A particular
focus is to make the best in international biodiversity research count in
international biodiversity assessment and policy research needs. Ecosystems and
biodiversity worldwide are currently undergoing rapid change. The projected
redistribution of species and their associated ecological functions and services
crosses national boundaries, and to reliably quantify impacts and help
prioritize actions to mitigate them will require international research
collaborations. Two important research and science-policy platforms, the
Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) and
Future Earth have recently been formed to address the magnitude and potential
effects of these ongoing transformations. The ScenNet group and activities
supported by this award are being done collaboratively with scientists
participating in the IPBES and Future Earth efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supporting workshops involves
researchers from a wide range of disciplines covering all aspects of
biodiversity scenarios including modeling of impacts of global change on
biodiversity and ecosystem services, scenarios of socio-economic development
that take into account biodiversity and ecosystem services, and feedbacks of
changes in biodiversity and ecosystem services on decision making. This effort
includes integration with US NSF Genealogy of Life (GoLife) projects. Workshops
will address key opportunities that arise through the combination of global,
species level perspectives and data (as advanced by the NSF GoLife projects) and
the usually more spatial, assemblage-focused approach of biodiversity scenario
assessment as represented by the ScenNet/Belmont community. The workshops will
bring together representatives from both communities to discuss the potential
for integrative products and visualizations on digital platforms, followed by
integrative modeling opportunities and the use of citizen science information.