* 1558145
* IOS Animal Behavior: Sibling influences on vocal babbling and vocal development
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Steven Beissinger, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 571,373.00

Vocal babbling occurs at a critical juncture in infant psychological and vocal
development and can translate into important differences in intelligence later
in life. However, it is unknown what causes some babies to babble more or
differently than others in the first place. This project uses an animal model to
examine one popular, yet un-tested, hypothesis that the quantity and quality of
playmates stimulates cognitive development as displayed by more robust vocal
babbling. Early social environment can have dramatic and lasting effects on
behavior in highly intelligent animals, but most models of language learning
have focused on adult-juvenile interactions; occur in captive or laboratory
settings; suffer from small sample sizes; or lack crucial experimental evidence.
Capitalizing on a long-term, pedigreed population of wild parrots, this project
manipulates the number of sibling nest mates to examine later effects on vocal
babbling. Research will also investigate how social play and stress hormones
impact learning. Parrots are good models to examine social influences on
language learning because they have the most sophisticated vocal imitative
abilities of non-humans, they have long-term pair bonds, and an elaborate and
elongated period of juvenile play. Results will provide a firmer foundation for
exploring potential pathways involved in early human cognitive and vocal
development. The project is based at a minority serving institution in an
economically disadvantaged region of the U.S. long underrepresented in science
and math and will provide hands-on scientific training to a large number of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Songbirds have been
the main model for research on the neurobiology and neuroendocrinology of vocal
imitation. However, song differs from human spoken language in that the former
is often restricted to males who learn during a brief sensitive phase in
development, a masculinization process in the brain strongly influenced by
gonadal steroids; later in adulthood, song is activated by the same androgenic
steroids. In humans and parrots, individuals of both sexes use complex lingual
articulation of sounds to learn new vocalizations throughout life, but little is
known about how the endocrine system mediates vocal learning in both sexes.
While a role for sex steroids cannot be ruled-out, stress steroids such as
corticosterone tend to be more sex-neutral and can have a profound influence on
neural substrates during early development. Work will: 1) quantify individual
variation in the spectrographic structure of nestling vocal babbling as a
function of brood size and hatching sequence; 2) quantify metrics of social
networks and how these relate to patterns in 1; 3) measure adrenocortical
responsiveness and any correlations with 1-2; 4) experiment through brood size
and corticosterone manipulations to establish causal explanations for patterns
found in 1-3; and 5) use path analysis to delineate developmental steps. Given
the large variation in brood size (4-11 nestlings), this presents a unique
opportunity to test if sibling social interactions foster learning processes
indirectly, or directly through provisioning of vocal templates to younger
siblings. Either scenario would represent novel learning strategies in birds and
transform our view of early psychological development. Results will be
disseminated via publications in peer-reviewed national and international
journals and presentations at national and international meetings. Both
undergraduate and graduate student research support is provided as well as
international researcher involvement.