* 1558675
* Landscape controls on hydrologic responses to long-term climate oscillations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ryan Emanuel, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 214,952.00

This project seeks to understand and quantify hydrologic responses to long-term
climate oscillations, such as the El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), for 2733
individual watersheds across the conterminous United States. These watersheds
represent a wide range of terrain, land cover, land use, and climate conditions,
and they include varying degrees of human disturbance. With such an expansive
dataset, the project will provide insight as to how and why watersheds respond
differently (or not at all) to ENSO. The study will improve scientific knowledge
and understanding about climate impacts on the terrestrial water cycle, not only
for multi-year climate oscillations but also for long-term climate change, which
are both critical for managing water supplies, planning civil infrastructure,
and preparing for natural disasters. The project will also provide geospatially-
oriented tools to improve hydrology education for K12 and university students
while providing postdoctoral training for an emerging
hydrologist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary analyses suggest that watersheds
filter ENSO signals differently, even after accounting for variations in
precipitation responses to ENSO across the country. Spatial characteristics
associated with internal watershed organization are hypothesized to explain a
significant amount of the observed variability in watershed responses to ENSO.
This hypothesis is rooted in geomorphological instantaneous unit hydrograph
(GIUH) theory, which links the spatial organization of watersheds to their
hydrologic responses. This project builds on the GIUH framework and applies it
to long-term climate phenomena such as ENSO, using statistical learning methods
along with hydrological modeling to test hypotheses. Overall, the work seeks to
improve scientific knowledge and understanding about climate impacts on the
terrestrial water cycle by bridging the gap between mechanistic, watershed-scale
studies of hydrological responses and large-scale studies of climate-streamflow
interactions that are predominantly statistical in nature. This work
acknowledges the so-called "big data" nature of many geospatial research
problems in the hydrologic sciences and brings statistical learning methods,
currently under-utilized in the field, to bear on large, publicly available
datasets.