* 1558196
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Sea Ice and Sociolegal Dynamics in a Changing Arctic Ocean Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2018
* USD 12,760.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how the changing nature
of sea ice influences marine sociolegal dynamics, with special attention given
to disputes regarding maritime boundaries and resources in the Beaufort and
Bering Seas. The doctoral student will explore how the law could potentially
recognize sea ice as a flexible entity that is incorporated into multiple legal
spaces and systems. The project will broaden theoretical understandings of
linkages among human systems, climate and environmental change, and spatial
dimensions of the ocean and law in the greater Arctic region. The project will
advance conceptualizations of sea ice in a way that recognizes that sea ice is
not a stationary object, because it moves through time and space in response to
the physical forces of wind, ocean currents, and heating. Furthermore, sea ice
is neither terrestrial nor marine, just as it is neither purely solid nor
liquid. Project findings will expand knowledge about the relationships between
this dynamic physical element and the political powers that govern a complex
ocean environment. The project will provide new insights regarding how the law
can recognize sea ice as a flexible entity that is attached to and integrated
into multiple legal spaces and systems. These insights will be of value to those
charged with overseeing activities in regions where sea ice occurs. Among those
organizations is the multinational Arctic Council, which the United States
chairs from 2015 to 2017. Project findings will help address two of the focus
areas of the U.S. chairmanship (the impacts of changing climate and
environmental conditions and Arctic Ocean safety, security, and stewardship) by
expanding knowledge about the role that changing spatial sea ice patterns have
in the many political debates of this region. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes to the spatial extent of sea ice in the
Arctic Ocean simultaneously permit and endanger maritime operations, and those
changes impact current debates over maritime boundaries, presenting an
interesting challenge for international law. In conducting this project, the
doctoral student will combine perspectives from the fields of legal geography
and ocean-space studies to assess how dynamic and changing sea ice shapes the
marine social-environment, particularly in terms of legal and political
contestations in ocean-spaces of the greater Arctic region. The student will use
three data-collection strategies: legal archival analysis to gain a base
understanding of all relevant laws and agreements; document analysis of reports
and other official documents to understand and contextualize the broader
environmental, social, political and economic issues in each of these regions;
and semi-structured interviews with policy experts, operational experts that
work in sea-ice areas, and sea-ice researchers. The interviews will focus on
participants' experiences with boundary issues in sea-ice waters, their
perceptions of sovereignty, their experience with resource extractive operations
in sea-ice waters, and their perceptions of change in an already dynamic Arctic
marine environment.