* 1558798
* Collaborative Research: Examining Upper Mantle Volatile History Through Isotopic Variations of Carbon, Nitrogen, Hydrogen and Noble Gases in Undegassed Mid-Ocean Ridge Basalts
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* David Graham, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2021
* USD 225,085.00

Measurements of volatiles such as carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen and noble
gases in submarine basalts from mid-ocean ridges have provided considerable
insight into the origin of Earth's atmosphere and oceans, and the geologic
history of cycling between the surface of the Earth and its interior. However,
almost all submarine basalts have lost much of their volatile inventory by
degassing when they are erupted, which has led to a major loss of the reliable
chemical data needed to identify pristine chemical signatures from Earth's
mantle. As a result, there is significant uncertainty and controversy in our
understanding of the origins of volatiles and their fluxes into and out of the
Earth. This research carries out analyses of the very rare occurrences of
undegassed mid-ocean ridge basalts to obtain information on the mantle isotopic
composition of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and noble gases (helium, neon and
argon). Collectively, these gases can be used synergistically to better
understand how Earth's atmosphere and oceans formed and evolved. Mid-ocean
ridges are fundamental geologic features of Earth's surface, and one of the most
intriguing challenges in geosciences is understanding the processes by which
they are created and evolve. The chemical and isotopic data resulting from this
project are fundamental in this regard, and will provide benchmarks for years to
come for models of degassing at ocean ridges and the origin and evolution of
Earth's volatiles. Broader impacts of the work include funding an institution in
Oklahoma, a state that receives comparatively little federal money (i.e., an
EPSCoR state) and the development of new international collaborations with
French scientists. It also uses NSF-funded analytical facilities at Oregon State
University and develops new methods for analyzing noble gases in rock samples,
building infrastructure for science. Findings will also be incorporated into
classes taught by the investigators and used to develop a new seminar for
graduate students centered on modeling of reservoirs, processes and fluxes in
chemical geodynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this
research are to test the extent to which regions of the upper mantle beneath
mid-ocean ridges and continental rifts are similar in their volatile abundances
and isotopic compositions on a global scale. Analyses of carbon, nitrogen,
hydrogen, and noble gases in undegassed mid-ocean ridge basalts will allow, for
the first time, testing of the inter-relationships of noble gas and major
volatile isotopes in CO2, N2, and H2O without employing degassing corrections.
This allows a direct test for regional heterogeneity in the upper mantle. The
research also specifically addresses the questions: (1) What proportions of the
volatiles C, N and H2O in the upper mantle are primordial versus recycled; (2)
do carbon stable isotopes in the ultra-depleted mid-ocean ridge basalts carry a
record of earlier depletion in low degree melts that appears to be required in
formation of the ultra-depleted source; (3) what is the behavior and
concentration of N in the depleted upper mantle; and (4) what record of early
Earth processes is preserved in the primordial isotope ratios of upper mantle
noble gases.