* 1558322
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Race, Plantation Agriculture and the Environmental Politics of Pesticide Use and Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Nik Heynen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,131.00

This project investigates how the history of plantation agriculture and
pesticide-intensive agricultural development shape contemporary practices of
pesticide use and regulation. The project places alternate framings of
pesticides - as indispensable to agricultural production or as unacceptable
environmental pollutants - within the context of the racial legacy of plantation
agriculture. By centering race as a factor agricultural and environmental
politics, this project seeks to advance understanding of the relationship
between rural inequality and environmental change. It asks how the racial
politics of the plantation impacted early development of pesticides as an
agricultural technology; how historic tensions between agricultural productivity
and racial equity contributed to current structures of agro-environmental
regulation; and how different narratives of agricultural change connected to
race relations inform contemporary debates over the use and regulation of
pesticides. Placing the dual objectives of racial equity and agricultural
productivity at the center of inquiry, the project provides a policy-relevant
analysis of the obstacles to and opportunities for greater environmental and
social sustainability through agricultural practices. Oral histories produced
through this study will be archived, and made publically available, in order to
expand public knowledge and inform future research. The findings of the study
will be shared widely through both scholarly articles and publications for
broader audiences in order to deepen understanding of the relationship between
environmental justice and contemporary agricultural
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is positioned at the intersection of
scholarship on political ecology, environmental justice, and agrarian studies.
Through a case study in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta, one of the world's most
pesticide-intensive regions during the mid-20th century and a highly productive
agricultural region in the present day, the research will ask how the politics
of pesticide usage in agricultural production and environmental regulation
reproduce, or challenge, the historical racial politics of the plantation. In
order to provide a textured history of the role of pesticides in the production
of racially unequal spaces, the project draws upon oral history methodologies
and archival research. Through semi-structured interviews and participant
observation, the study also examines how this history informs contemporary uses
and understandings of pesticides in the present day. By connecting historical
inquiry with contemporary research, this project will enrich understandings of
the historical determinants of contemporary agro-environmental practices, while
centering race as a key factor in environmental change.