* 1558558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnographic Analysis of Linkages between Rural Land Dispossession, Land Use Change, and Deforestation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Cari Tusing, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2018
* USD 13,734.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the human causes and
consequences of agricultural expansion with accompanying deforestation.
Deforestation's environmental impacts, including soil erosion, increased
flooding, desertification, and habitat loss, are well-established. Logging can
be a deforestation trigger, but agriculture is its biggest driver. Small-scale
farmers cut wood for fuel and clear modest spaces for crops; mechanized,
industrial farming and large-scale ranching clear larger tracts. Industrial
agriculture has increased food production and reduced local food shortages. But
because these large scale operations require access to expensive technologies
and farming inputs, the expansion of industrial agriculture has also pushed poor
rural farmers off their lands into cities and into the global flow of migrants.
This confluence of agriculture, deforestation, urbanization, and migration
changes local environments, destabilizes local politics, and impacts migrant
receiving countries, including the United States. These processes are well-
documented on a global scale, but the local-level micro-processes that set these
effects off in the beginning are much more poorly understood. How exactly does
mechanized agriculture expand into forested areas? How do smallholders lose
control of land? Why do so many end up leaving for urban areas? These are the
questions the research funded by this award will
address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out by University of
Arizona anthropology doctoral student, Cari Tusing, with the supervision of
senior anthropologist Dr. Linda B. Green. Because these processes have already
taken place in the United States, where industrial agriculture is now the norm,
Tusing will travel to Paraguay where industrial soy farming is just now moving
into forested areas, dramatically modifying the landscape and giving Paraguay a
deforestation rate that is among the highest in the world. The researcher will
concentrate data collection in the region surrounding the Paraguay-Brazil
border, where Brazilians are crossing into Paraguay to develop land for large-
scale agriculture and ranching in an area where Paraguayan small-scale farmers
and Guarani Amerindians practice agroforestry and subsistence agriculture. The
researcher will collect data on land titling; class, race, and national
identities; and cultural understandings of the relationship between agriculture
and deforestation. For this phase of a multi-phase project, the investigator
will focus on the Brazilian (also called Brasiguayo) farmers to document their
farming practices, strategies employed to obtain land, and social and economic
networks. Data will be collected with multiple social science methods including
participant observation, interviews, and farm transect walks. Comparable data
have already been collected on small-holder farmers and Guarani Amerindians.
Cumulatively, the three data sets will produce a fully rounded account of the
nature of recent land-use change and its effects on agricultural production,
deforestation, local livelihoods, and rural-to-urban migration.