* 1558459
* Wave effects in upper ocean turbulence models
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Eric D'Asaro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 605,021.00

Wind is the major driving force for the upper ocean. The structure and intensity
of turbulent mixing in the surface layer of the ocean vary greatly in the
presence of steep wind waves, and existing numerical models are not always very
accurate in their predictions. This study seeks to improve the representation of
surface wave effects in numerical models of upper-ocean mixing and expand the
empirical basis for validating these models against mixed layer turbulence
measurements. Existing data from freely drifting instruments that move up and
down the well mixed layer of the upper ocean will be analyzed to yield new
information about the vertical structure of turbulence under a wide range of
wave conditions. Virtual drifters simulated in very high resolution numerical
models will be used to develop new analysis methods and to enhance the limited
observational data sets. The study will aid comparisons among competing theories
on wave-turbulence interaction by expanding and refining the metrics of model-
data comparisons. Insights on wave-turbulence interaction will lead to new
mixing parameterizations, that can be validated against small-scale turbulence
measurements, and ultimately enhance the skill of ocean circulation models. The
dissemination of drifter measurements and model code will also benefit other
approaches to parameterizing wave effects. The ability of the improved closure
models to reproduce the observed anisotropy of mixed layer turbulence, and the
homogeneity of momentum and scalar profiles, will be of interest in many
physical and biogeochemical oceanographic fields, ranging from climate modeling
to coastal sediment transport and oil spill prediction. Implementing the
improvements in a widely used modeling framework, the General Ocean Turbulence
Model (GOTM) will facilitate usage of these results by a broad range of ocean
modelers. This project will promote study at a unique nexus between engineering
and geophysics and supports a graduate research associate to work on drifter
data analysis and model-data comparisons. The project will contribute new
material to the investigators' ongoing individual outreach activities through
public school classrooms and science fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second moment closure (SMC) model developments build on recent advances that
include Craik-Leibovich (CL) vortex forcing fully in a 'quasi-equilibrium' SMC,
adopting a momentum flux closure with a component down the Stokes drift gradient
and an inhomogeneous near-surface pressure-strain closure. The CL forcing
Reynolds stress terms and new turbulence closures will be applied to modify the
larger class of 'weak-equilibrium' SMCs for Langmuir turbulence. These will be
implemented and evaluated in the GOTM framework, including the modeled
interaction of Langmuir turbulence and surface wave breaking. New analysis of
existing high-quality Lagrangian float data will provide profiles of kinetic
energy components, turbulent length scales, large-eddy kinetic energy
dissipation rates and near-surface Lagrangian statistics that can discriminate
between theories for surface -wave forcing of boundary-layer turbulence. New
large eddy simulations (LES) will contain embedded virtual floats, and will
include forcing by stochastic wave breaking at float- and model-resolved scales.
Using this LES, the researchers will develop new data analysis methods and guide
SMC modifications for wave forcing. The new near-surface closure for CL forcing
will be combined with similar treatments of buoyant production in of turbulent
covariance in SMC for convection with nonlocal gradient closures. LES results
and float data will be used to verify and tune SMC models. Modified SMC model
code and float data test cases will be distributed for public availability via
the GOTM framework.