* 1558061
* Mechanisms Regulating Mesoderm Formation in a Model Spiralian
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Jonathan Henry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paulyn Cartwright
* 02/28/2021
* USD 520,000.00

This research will uncover fundamental processes controlling development using
an emerging animal model. More specifically, it aims to identify cell
interactions and genes that regulate the development of one of three main tissue
layers in embryos, the mesoderm, which forms muscles, connective tissue, and
other specialized cell types. Comparisons with other animal models will help
explain the diversity of animal life on this planet. Studies will also
investigate the genes that control a key migratory behavior exhibited by these
mesodermal cells. This behavior is exhibited by many different cell types,
including cancer cells when they undergo metastasis. Information gathered from
these studies will also be used to reconstruct three-dimensional models of
embryos for educational purposes. That information will be made available
through public websites so that anyone with access to a 3D printer can generate
physical models of various stages of development. This will allow students and
teachers access to models to better appreciate complex developmental processes,
and will foster interdisciplinary interactions between the fields of biology,
information technology and engineering. Finally, as this research will involve
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students, it will provide valuable
opportunities to train future generations of scientists and teachers.

This project examines fundamental molecular and cellular mechanisms that
regulate mesoderm formation in a model spiralian, the gastropod Crepidula. In
addition to the widely conserved endomesoderm, spiralians have a second novel
source of mesoderm (ectomesoderm) that may be tied to the origin of larval body
plans in this clade. Unlike endomesoderm, ectomesoderm undergoes epithelial-
mesenchymal transition (EMT). Cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating the
formation of ectomesoderm are poorly understood. Gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
have not been constructed for either endo- or ectomesoderm in any spiralian.
This project has two specific aims: I. Determine cellular mechanisms that
regulate ectomesoderm formation and II. Determine molecular mechanisms that
regulate development of spiralian endo- and ectomesoderm. Experiments in Aim I
will determine the role of cell-cell interactions vs. cell autonomous factors in
regulating ectomesoderm formation by combining lineage tracing, laser cell
ablation and fluorescence time-lapse imaging. In Aim II, a combination of gene
expression analyses and molecular loss-of-function assays will decipher endo-
and ectomesoderm GRNs. Comparisons of these GRNs will validate hypotheses
regarding the evolutionary origins of endo- and ectomesoderm. This research may
uncover novel interactions between genes regulating mesoderm formation and those
involved in EMT. Comparisons with previous studies in other systems will provide
a better understanding of gastrulation and body plan evolution amongst the
Metazoa. This research will involve undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral
students to provide valuable opportunities to train future scientists and
teachers, and will generate valuable reagents and resources for the scientific
community. Finally, imaging data will be disseminated through open-access
websites to permit 3D printing of physical models of various stages of
development, so anyone with access to a 3D printer can create models to
appreciate the process of morphogenesis in these embryos. This aspect of the
project will foster interdisciplinary interactions between the fields of
biology, information technology and engineering.