* 1558169
* Deciphering the Role of Bacterial Sphingolipids in Host-microbe Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Rosanna Alegado, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2020
* USD 662,019.00

We live in a microbial world, one in which chemical signals produced by bacteria
influence the biology of neighboring organisms. Bacterial sphingolipids are a
novel group of compounds that the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to
investigate as signals that can influence the development and evolution of other
organisms. These studies may lead to a greater understanding of how communities
of microbes, including our own, function and are maintained. The PI is committed
to enhancing awareness of the role of host-microbe interactions in the broader
educational and research community by integrating these concepts into
undergraduate and graduate course curricula, direct mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students, and community presentations at local venues.
Importantly, this proposal leverages the location of research to increase the
participation of underrepresented minorities. As the major Native Hawaiian-
serving institution in the nation, the University of Hawaii at Manoa provides
the opportunity to involve Native Hawaiian students in targeted undergraduate
research programs and K-12 outreach in STEM fields. Finally the PI will produce
short online videos on host-microbe interactions accessible to general audiences
in the Hawaiian language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals evolved in seas that
swarmed with bacteria, yet the influences of bacteria on animal origins are
poorly understood. Historically research on interactions between marine animals
and microbes has emphasized bacterial pathogens, but bacteria interact with
eukaryotes in other ways, and these interactions can affect animal evolution.
Choanoflagellates are the closest living relatives to animals, and their ability
to transition between single-celled and multicellular states is relevant to
discussions of metazoan origins and their reliance upon bacteria as prey is
relevant to discussions of host-microbe interactions. Algoriphagus
machipongonensis is a bacterium that is associated with the choanoflagellate
Salpingoeca rosetta, and the PI has shown that a novel sphingolipid from this
bacterial species regulates multicellular development in the choanoflagellate.
Sphingolipids are potent second messengers in eukaryotes, but the functions of
bacterial sphingolipids are poorly understood. The discovery that bacterial
sphingolipids regulate multicellular development in one of the closest living
relatives of animals suggests that these compounds act as signaling molecules in
bacteria as well. Three aims are proposed to address the hypothesis that
sphingolipids produced by Bacteroidetes bacteria also mediate microbe-microbe
signaling via membrane vesicles: (1) Identify and characterize the proteins in
A. machipongonensis that are involved in bacterial sphingolipid regulation; (2)
Determine and characterize how bacterial sphingolipids affect other prokaryotic
cells; and (3) Define the signaling interface between bacterial sphingolipid
signals and other cells. These organisms are easily maintained under laboratory
conditions, and analyses will be facilitated by the availability of the genome
sequences of two choanoflagellates and their prey bacteria, ease of maintaining
these organisms under laboratory conditions, their amenability to biochemical
and cell biological approaches, and genetic techniques developed by the PI for
the bacterial partner .