* 1558307
* Deep Water Hydrography in the Glacial Western North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 598,111.00

This project will investigate the ocean's role in climate during the last ice
age (about 20,000 years ago), a time when conditions around the North Atlantic
were very different from today. The surface ocean was colder, the atmosphere was
windier, there was far less carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and sea level was
300 feet lower. Operation of the modern North Atlantic Ocean has been likened to
a conveyor belt, where warm salty waters of Gulf Stream origin enter the
Norwegian Sea and release heat to the atmosphere that keeps northern Europe
warm. After losing their heat, surface waters sink to the bottom and flow out of
the Nordic Seas and into the deep North Atlantic basin. For over three decades
oceanographers and climatologists have known that this conveyor belt was
interrupted at times in the past, especially during the last ice age. Instead of
deep northern water in the North Atlantic, analysis of the chemical make-up of
fossil shells in marine sediment cores shows that the deep waters had a southern
(Antarctic) source. This view of the glacial North Atlantic has become a
paradigm. Recent findings from cores in the very deep basins of the North
Atlantic have challenged that conventional wisdom, suggesting that there was a
northern source of bottom water after all. This project seeks to confirm that
finding by collecting and analyzing new sediment cores from the deepest basins
of the North Atlantic (&gt;5000 meters). Results could significantly change, or
even overturn, our understanding of how the glacial North Atlantic distributed
heat, salt, nutrients, and CO2. Furthermore, because glacial age data are used
to test modern climate models under different scenarios, the proposed new
research could lead to refinement of models that predict future climate changes.
The research expedition will have about eight berths for early career
professionals who are interested in learning methods of seafloor surveying and
sampling, and the long sediment cores to be collected will be archived and
readily available for sampling by many diverse scientists. The project will also
involve international collaboration with a German research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of the research is an expedition to
the western North Atlantic between Cape Cod, MA and the Azores to survey the
very deep seafloor for new coring locations and to sample them with different
devices (multicorers, gravity corers, and piston corers). Changes in deep ocean
circulation will be traced using carbon isotope ratios in shells of fossil
planktonic and benthic foraminifera. The 13C/12C ratio is a proxy for deep water
nutrient content, and at core sites around 4.2 km this ratio shows that during
glaciation the mixture of waters from the Arctic and Antarctic was different
than today and consistent with current thinking. Most likely, either the
northern source produced less water because the surface in the Nordic seas was
more covered with sea ice than today, or the deep water traveled more slowly and
accumulated more nutrients from the surface. Existing 14C/12C data support the
pattern seen in 13C/12C, and this tracer is also used to date the sediment
deposits. However, below 4200 m, the pattern of these isotope pairs reverses and
indicates more northern source waters with increasing depth (to 5 km). This
hypothesis will be tested with coring and shore-based analytical work on sites
from between 3 km and &gt;5 km. Data from new core sites above 3 km will be
collected by a German colleague, and the collaboration will result in the first
high resolution depth reconstructions past hydrographic changes in the western
basin of the North Atlantic.