* 1558732
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Structural Constraints to Economic Mobility Among Highly Educated Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Jennifer Cole, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 5,509.00

Contemporary youth are confronted with a paradox in their aspirations for upward
mobility: higher education is increasingly becoming an economically necessary
investment, while it is becoming less subsidized and more difficult to
capitalize on in the short term. The establishment and maintenance of a stable
middle class has long been regarded as essential to the health of the economy,
and the viable pursuit of upward mobility is a key measure of confidence for
that system. This project, which trains a graduate student in conducting
rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork, asks how educated youth are
able to maintain aspirations for upward mobility in the face of significant
structural challenges. The findings will be useful to policymakers, planners,
and practitioners interested in sustainable economic development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert Miles Loomis, under the supervision of Dr. Jennifer
Cole at the University of Chicago, examines how members of a growing underclass
of educated but irregularly employed rural graduates living on the margins of
major metropolises negotiate the tension between aspirations for upward mobility
and present realities of poverty and precarious employment. The research
specifically such one such group in China (yi zu; or "ant tribe"), an ideal site
for exploring this question as it has seen a rapidly developing middle class
since initiating its policies for "reform and opening" (gaige kaifang) in the
late-1970s. Much of the population now sees education as only way out of
poverty. Rural parents, especially, often spend all of their savings to ensure
that their children attend college and land jobs in urban areas. The turn to
education as a means of social mobility was itself encouraged by the
government's decision in 1999 to radically expand the university system, making
higher education more accessible through marketization. Yet despite the greater
availability of tuition-based degrees, the Chinese economy has not generated
enough white-collar jobs to absorb this massive influx of graduates. Yet members
of this group, as educated youth, remain hopeful about their ability to enter
into China's "high quality" workforce. By providing an in depth ethnographic
look at this growing population, this project will explore how marginalized
rural youth make sense of and act upon the terms of their social participation
in contemporary urban China, and the ways they may be reproducing or challenging
the nature of value and social hierarchy as they do so. Methods include
participant observation and interviews at four different sites in and around
Beijing.