* 1558904
* Metacommunity Dynamics at Hydrothermal Vents
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Julie Kellner, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2020
* USD 764,000.00

In this project, the researchers will develop new mathematical models to study
the population dynamics of organisms that live at deep-sea hydrothermal vents,
areas of the seafloor where volcanic activity causes hot, chemical-rich fluids
to exit. The discovery of these vents in 1977 revealed unexpectedly novel and
diverse organisms, challenging the prevailing view of the deep sea as a sparsely
populated desert. Recent international efforts to mine hydrothermal vent
deposits rich in copper, gold, silver and zinc are intensely debated, as deep-
sea mineral mining can destroy diverse vent communities and alter the
surrounding seafloor habitat. The investigators will extend their models to
analyze the potential effects of mining activities. Results from new models will
be synthesized to meet the needs of potential stakeholders, including
organizations that advise, manage, and conduct activities related to seafloor
mining and Marine Protected Areas. Research products will be disseminated as
reports and in stakeholder meetings such as those organized by the International
Seabed Authority and the Deep Ocean Stewardship Initiative. The research team
will work with graphic artists, video producers, and educators to develop new
educational presentations for the NOAA Science on a SphereÂ® (SOS) system. This
new content will be distributed via open access to the entire SOS Users Network
and incorporated into SOS programs at over 100 science centers across the U.S.
and in 20 other countries. Undergraduate students will participate in the
project through the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's Summer Student
Fellowship Program and the Woods Hole Partnership Education Program. These two
programs provide students with authentic research experiences; the PEP program
attracts underrepresented minority students, and offers them a short course in
marine science and a research internship along with a 6-wk research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metacommunity theory offers important advantages
over alternative approaches in modeling vent ecosystems, and the proposed work
will advance both our understanding of these communities and strategies for
developing models of metacommunities more generally. The proposed work
substantially expands earlier metacommunity models for vent systems developed by
the researchers in innovative ways. The analyses will remove many initial
constraints and add important considerations including site-dependent transition
probabilities and clustering of nearby sites with shared characteristics. The
options for modeling dispersal properties with two alternative dispersal kernels
will also advance understanding. The researchers will examine recognized
successional patterns not considered in the previous work using patch occupancy
models, and they will carry out sensitivity analyses to evaluate the role of
parameters for which uncertainty is high, such as larval duration and dispersal
distance, patch disturbance rates and recovery times. This element of the work
plan will serve to prioritize future field research, emphasizing the role that
models can play in guiding research programs.