* 1558605
* Collaborative Research: Coring in the Southeast Indian and Southern Oceans to examine climate driven changes in watermass paleoventilation, sources, and structure
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Ellen Martin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 01/31/2023
* USD 321,013.00

Fifty times more CO2 resides in the ocean than the atmosphere. Exchange of CO2
with the atmosphere and the storage of CO2 in the ocean is an important control
on atmospheric concentrations. During recent ice ages, atmospheric CO2
concentrations were naturally 30% lower than pre industrial levels. Extensive
evidence indicates this reduction was caused by greater storage of CO2 in the
ocean. Today, wind-driven air-sea exchange in the Southern Ocean is one of the
primary mechanisms for CO2 exchange between these two reservoirs. During the
last glacial interval, reduced exchange in the Southern Ocean driven by changes
in ocean circulation and the resulting changes in ocean chemistry is believed to
have played an important role in sequestering more CO2 in the ocean; however,
there is ongoing debate about the specific state of glacial oceanic and
atmospheric circulation in the Southern Ocean. Current studies are hampered by a
lack of suitable sediment cores from key locations; existing cores are
concentrated in the South Atlantic and Southwestern Pacific. There are clearly
changes in the chemistry and circulation of water masses between these two
regions, but there is little information available from the critical region of
the Southern Indian Ocean where much of the CO2 exchange occurs today. The few
cores from this area that do exist have been exhausted over the past 30 years of
research. In this study, researchers will collect cores on a cruise to Southeast
Indian Ocean waters and conduct the initial shore-based stratigraphic and
environmental analyses. Collaborations with Australian scientists will be an
integral part of this work and these cores will be an important resource for
scientists around the world. The project supports the training of both a
graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
circulation and ventilation of water masses at intermediate depths (~500-1400 m)
in the Southern Indian Ocean are central to atmosphere-ocean CO2 partitioning.
During glaciations changes in both thermohaline circulation and wind-driven
Southern Ocean ventilation are believed to have played an important role in
sequestering atmospheric CO2. A detailed understanding of the interaction
between the physical mechanisms of thermohaline overturning circulation and
wind-driven ventilation requires precise definition of changes in water mass
boundaries and properties across the deglaciation. The use of vertical and
horizontal transects of sediment core material has been fundamental in
identifying past variations in the structure of the ocean. Published transects
of paleo-proxies in the glacial South Atlantic differ substantially from the
Southwest Pacific, leading to the idea that processes in the Southeast Indian
Ocean had a significant influence on glacial CO2 exchange. Consequently, this
work will constrain surface frontal locations that shift in response to changes
in atmospheric circulation, as well as deep water mass boundaries and properties
that vary with ocean circulation patterns. The cruise objective is to obtain
30-50 cores to create depth and latitudinal transects underlying both
subantarctic and subtropical waters in the Southeast Indian Ocean from a region
west and south of Australia. The scientific objective is to determine the
temporal evolution of the horizontal and vertical distribution of proxies
(e.g.13C, 18O, Nd isotopes) that will reconstruct the water source and
ventilation history of this critical region of the Southern Ocean. The
scientific outcomes will be to produce: 1) the first depth transect of water
mass proxies in the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern Ocean over the last
glacial cycle, and 2) a latitudinal transect of surface and deep water
properties.