* 1558650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Social and Biogeophysical Factors Contributing to Soil Fertility Sustainability in Local and Regional Food Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Karl Zimmerer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2017
* USD 8,187.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will employ a geographic approach
focused on human-environment interactions to analyze soil fertility management
and the combined social and biogeophysical factors that contribute to soil
fertility sustainability in local and regional food systems. The project will
focus on the complex interplay among farming philosophies, access to resources,
and participation in local and regional food systems. It also will examine how
these factors influence farmer decision making and soil fertility on
participating farms. This project will provide new information regarding the
human-environment aspects of agricultural sustainability and insight into the
potential for local and regional food system activities like farmers markets to
address the challenges of reducing adverse environmental impacts of food
production and improving agricultural sustainability. The special attention
given to phosphorus will yield new findings regarding the ability of local and
regional food systems to break from dependence on non-renewable sources of
fertilizer and prevent excessive application of nutrients that can damage
connected ecosystems. Findings will be delivered directly to farmers and other
engaged in local and regional food systems to help improve their practices as
well as to sustainable farming associations and non-profits that work to connect
farmers with resources needed to strengthen local and regional food systems. The
results of this research therefore will advance basic scientific understanding
about soil sustainability and will assist farmers, policy makers, and food
system advocates as they work to ensure the long-term viability of the food
system. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.

Soils are one of the most important resources for food production and
agricultural sustainability, but many aspects of soil sustainability still are
poorly understood. One of these issues is the ability of local and regional food
systems to produce more sustainable soil fertility. In conducting this project,
the doctoral student whose dissertation research will be supported will use
semi-structured interviews, soil analysis, and geospatial techniques to answer
three core questions: (1) How do farmers participating in a local and regional
food systems manage their soil fertility? (2) How does participation in a local
and regional food systems influence soil fertility management decisions? (3) How
resilient is the soil fertility of local and regional food systems? The student
will integrate information from interviews with the results of soil testing for
statistical analysis to better understand how social and ecological factors
interact and contribute to sustainable soil fertility. Interview analysis will
identify key challenges and successes in sustainable soil management and provide
greater context for statistical analysis. Geospatial techniques will be used to
map and analyze degrees of farmer dependence on non-renewable fertilizers. This
student will analyze regional farmers market networks based in New York City,
but the research framework and findings will have applications in local and
regional food systems in many other regions of North America and elsewhere.