* 1558874
* The Role of Advective Heat Fluxes in Buffering Annual to Interannual Temperature Variability over U.S. Inner Shelves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 803,087.00

Water temperatures over the inner-half of continental shelves are typically cold
in winter and warm in summer, consistent with the annual cycle of surface heat
fluxes from the atmosphere. However, preliminary analysis of historical data and
synthesis of previous regional studies indicate there are large regional
differences in the amplitude of the annual cycle. For example,
the&lt;br/&gt;average temperature difference between August and February is less
than 5 C along much of the U.S. West Coast, but is between 15 and 20 C along the
East Coast. While there are also large regional differences in the annual cycle
of surface heat, the surface heat fluxes do not generally account for the
observed amplitude of the annual cycle or the regional differences. Both these
results and previous&lt;br/&gt;studies indicate that advective heat fluxes are
important over the inner shelf and that they tend to buffer the response to
surface heat fluxes and lead to important biological and societal implications.
Thermal stresses play a key role in both organism function and community
ecology, and small increases in inner shelf temperatures or alterations in the
processes that control them can lead to dramatic shifts in community structure
and/or mass mortality events. Thus, a clear understanding of how buffering by
advection functions would allow some predictive capacity for the potential
changes in both ecologically and commercially important coastal marine species
in future climate scenarios. This research project aims to understand the
processes controlling water temperature variations over the inner shelf on
annual and interannual timescales. The project involves training of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the first comprehensive
look at the heat budget of the inner continental shelf, including its seasonal
cycle and inter-annual variability. Available temperature and velocity data sets
will be used to examine how the heat balance can be maintained by a number of
possible sources of cooling including: across-shelf exchange due to depth-
dependent upwelling, the along-shelf advection of an along-shelf temperature
gradient, and the across-shelf exchange due to eddies. The results will be
synthesized to determine the relative contributions of heat flux components and
their associated processes for the different shelf regions of the continental
US. The analysis will enable an assessment of the role of shelf environment
(e.g. width) versus external forcing (e.g. surface heat flux, wind stress) in
driving the regional temperature patterns observed. The results will yield new
information about inner-shelf circulation, the role of advection in controlling
or moderating inner-shelf heating, as well as give broader context to previous
studies of across-shelf exchange in the coastal ocean.