* 1558645
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Assessing the Impacts of Community Based Conservation in National Park Buffer Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Roderick Neumann, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 13,535.00

This project will examine the political and socio-economic effects of community-
based conservation (CBC) projects in buffer zones surrounding national parks.
The project will investigate the complex interplay between biodiversity
conservation, cultural identity, and rural development in order to understand
how buffer zones and CBC projects shape rural property regimes, reproduce or
alleviate socioeconomic inequalities, and inform new political subjectivities
and indigenous territorial claims. The project focuses on national park buffer
zones in South Asia, a strategically important, politically volatile region and
a vital contributor to global biodiversity, and the specific case of Nepal,
which has experienced both a Maoist-inspired insurgency and an expansion in CBC
projects. Community-based conservation projects are intended to promote rural
socio-economic development and political participation, reduce political
tensions over land distribution, and create the conditions of biodiversity
conservation in the countryside. Actual experiences of such projects are mixed.
This project is expected to expand understanding of the effects of such projects
in order to aid international policy-making efforts to improve conservation and
development planning. Findings will be disseminated through presentations in
workshops and conferences in the U.S., Nepal, and elsewhere. The project may
also promote STEM education through the dissemination of results relevant to
conservation biology and support U.S. security interests through the
dissemination of knowledge about Nepal's rural political conditions. The
research will also contribute to academic programs at Florida International
University, a minority-serving public institution that prepare graduates for
success in a globally competitive workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions of
how and to what effect CBC projects intersect with identity politics surrounding
territorial claims and land rights are central, but unsettled in the scientific
literature. At one extreme, studies have identified the displacement of
indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities as a chief outcome. At the other
extreme, some studies have credited the introduction of CBCs with strengthening
local community land rights and indigenous peoples' territorial claims. Findings
from this study will be used to improve the theorization of disparate outcomes.
The primary questions pursued are: 1) what effects do CBC initiatives have on
socioeconomic inequalities and vice versa; 2) how are CBC initiatives implicated
in state making and social identity formation; and 3) what effects do CBC
initiatives have on rural property relations and indigenous territorial claims?
The project employs a mix of ethnographic and quantitative methods in an
extended field study of two buffer zone communities in Nepal. Methods include
participant observation, in-depth semi-structured interviews, and document
analysis.