* 1558695
* The coupled surfzone and inner-shelf heat budget: The effect of albedo, surface gravity, and internal waves
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Falk Feddersen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 291,617.00

Nearshore waters are of critical economic and ecological importance. A wide
variety of species including invertebrates (clams, crabs, mollusks), fish, and
birds make their home and forage in this region. Coasts are also centers of
tourism and recreation, fueling economic activity. Water temperature is known to
be highly variable here in space and over time, playing a critical role in many
components of nearshore ecosystems. In the deeper water of the continental-shelf
(depths 12-100 m) heat budget has been extensively studied and the cross-shelf
export of heat has been quantified. However, in shallower water, the coupled
heat budget of the surfzone (where the shallow depth causes wave breaking) and
the inner-shelf just offshore has not been studied. Thus, the processes that
drive nearshore temperature variability are poorly understood and unique
physical processes that affect this region?s heat budget have not been
considered. This project will use data from a new 9-month field experiment that
resolved the thermal structure from the shoreline to 6m water depth to
characterize key processes that drive temperature variability in the nearshore
such as heat transfer by rip currents, mixing by breaking internal waves, local
heat generation upon the dissipation of gravity wave energy, and the reflection
of solar energy by foam and bubbles due to breaking waves. Analysis of these
unique data will improve understanding of the physical processes governing
temperature (heat) evolution that can be applied to the broad range of
economically and ecologically important nearshore regions. This work will have
application to nonlinear internal wave transformation and related mixing.
Nearshore temperature evolution and cross-shore fluxes are tightly linked to the
ecology of bacterial pathogens, diatoms, larvae, and invertebrates in this
region. Elevated surfzone albedo may explain surfzone persistence of harmful
pathogens, with human health implications. This work will also have implications
for internal wave driven larval transport into and across the nearshore.
Research and education will be integrated at all academic levels. This project
will train a PhD student who was involved in all aspects of the field work. An
outreach collaboration will be developed with an AP Environmental Science class
at the underserved Kearny Science High School, developing curriculum materials,
teaching lectures, and hosting a field trip. Undergraduate students will be
engaged through the SIO REU program.

Although nonlinear internal-wave driven nearshore temperature variability has
previously been observed at a single location, the full cross-shore, vertical,
and temporal variability of the coupled surfzone and inner-shelf has yet to be
characterized. A pilot surfzone heat budget showed that a full coupled surfzone
inner-shelf heat budget was feasible and that surface gravity wave energy flux
heated the surfzone at a rate on average a quarter of the solar radiation,
indicating its importance to the heat budget. A new 9-month long field
experiment on the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) pier, designed to
close the coupled surfzone/inner-shelf heat budget, has just been completed. The
experiment, executed by 3rd year graduate student Greg Sinnett, highly resolved
the spatio-temporal structure of temperature from the shoreline to 6-m water
depth over almost a full seasonal cycle. In addition, 3 ADCP current meters were
deployed to measure advective heat fluxes and a pier-deployed 4-way radiometer
was deployed to measure surfzone and inner-shelf albedo. These extensive new
field observations will be analyzed to close a coupled surfzone and inner-shelf
heat budget and quantify the magnitude and variability of the heat budget terms.
In particular, this region has unique processes influencing the heat budget that
have yet to be considered or properly quantified. The surfzone albedo (due to
foam or whitewater) may be significantly elevated over open ocean albedo,
thereby reducing surfzone solar heating. However, surfzone albedo has not been
quantified and the factors influencing it are not understood. This study will
quantify surfzone albedo, determine its importance in reducing surfzone incident
solar radiation, and develop albedo parameterizations. The pilot surfzone heat
budget found that surface gravity wave heating was important relative to solar
radiation during summer when waves are small and days long. This analysis will
quantify the relative importance of wave heating from late summer to early
spring. In the pilot study, advective heat flux was inferred (not measured) to
drive significant temperature variability and on average cool the surfzone. Two
physical mechanisms driving heat fluxes are nonlinear internal waves and rip
currents. The observations will be used to quantify the advective heat flux
across the nearshore, its magnitude and time-scales, and examine the mechanisms
driving it, and potential feedbacks with incident waves or barotropic tides.
Thus, the project will provide a detailed understanding of the processes
governing nearshore temperature variation and will allow for the
parameterization of some of these processes.