* 1558446
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Roles of Tributaries, Floodplains, and the Anabranching Channels on Suspended Sediment Transport Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Edward Park, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 09/30/2017
* USD 14,687.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large rivers play an
important role in the transport of eroded materials, biogeochemical cycles,
sustenance of complex ecosystems, biodiversity of their environments, and
providing a variety of socio-economic services for humans. Despite their natural
and economic importance, developing a fuller understanding of large river
processes has been difficult because of the physical and mechanistic
complexities of such processes. This doctoral dissertation research project will
use innovative methods that include the integration of remotely sensed data with
hydrogeomorphologic data to advance basic understanding of sediment distribution
patterns in the complex fluvial environments associated with large rivers. The
project will provide new insights into the morphodynamics of large rivers by
characterizing the spatiotemporal patterns of sediment transport and identifying
the hydrosedimentary interactions in channel floodplain systems. Project results
will be useful for addressing a broad range of water resources management
issues, wetlands preservation ecology problems, and local policy-making
questions. The project also will strengthen institutional ties between U.S. and
Brazilian universities and scientific centers, and it will incorporate
educational outreach to local U.S. schools for support of underrepresented K-12
students in the science. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because sediment
plays a major role in the hydrophysical, ecological, and biogeochemical
functions of any channel-floodplain system, the assessment of sediment transport
and mapping of sedimentary environments over multi-temporal scales have been
areas of focus for river scientists across multiple disciplines. The doctoral
student whose dissertation research will be supported by this award will focus
on two core questions: (1) What are the spatiotemporal patterns of sediment
transport at major confluences along an anabranching main river channel? (2)
What are the sediment transport, deposition patterns, and sediment budgets in
the floodplains? The student will answer these questions by conducting field
surveys, geomorphic mapping, and in-situ sample collection at several sites
along the Amazon River. He will integrate these field data with remote sensing-
derived products to model and characterize the macroscale sediment transport
mechanisms in the channel-floodplain systems of the river. Outcomes from this
research project would be useful to a global understanding of riverine
anabranching patterns as well as shedding new light on the morphodynamics and
environmental mechanisms of large river systems around the world.