* 1558821
* Collaborative Research: The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation and Internal Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Edwin Schneider, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2020
* USD 451,075.00

The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is a global ocean
circulation in which colder and denser surface water sinks in the subpolar North
Atlantic and flows southward at depth, reaching Antarctica and circulating
through the world oceans until it eventually resurfaces and returns north from
the high southern latitudes. The AMOC transports a substantial amount of heat
from the Southern Hemisphere and the tropics into the North Atlantic, and
variations of the AMOC are thought to be implicated in long-term variations in
North Atlantic sea surface temperature (SST). The SST variations have impacts on
the frequency and intensity of Atlantic hurricanes, prolonged drought in the
Sahel, north-south shifts of the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), and
rainfall changes over much of the globe including the US.

This project seeks to understand the basic dynamics which drive AMOC variability
as well as its effects on SST and surface climate, focusing in particular on the
extent to which the slow variations of the AMOC are driven by "weather noise",
the short-term and somewhat impulsive forcing of the ocean by the passage of
surface weather systems. Despite its impulsive nature forcing by weather systems
can induce a low-frequency ocean response due to the reddening effect of upper
ocean thermal inertia. The PIs have developed a method to quantify the effect of
weather noise in climate model simulations in which an ensemble of atmospheric
models are coupled to a single ocean model. The surface fluxes through which the
atmosphere affects the ocean are averaged over all the ensemble models before
applying them to the ocean, so the ocean only feels the effects of the ensemble
mean fluxes. Each atmospheric model produces its own weather systems which are
unrelated to the weather generated in the other models, thus the weather noise
averages out in the ensemble mean and does not affect the ocean. Here the PIs
employ this strategy, which they refer to as an Interactive Ensemble (IE), using
the Community Earth System Model (CESM). The IE-CESM is an updated version of
the IE system they developed under previous funding (AGS-1137902/1137911), and
the ensemble includes the land surface and sea ice component models as well as
the atmosphere model.

The PIs assess the role of weather noise in generating AMOC variability through
comparisons between IE-CESM simulations and control runs using the standard CESM
(in which weather noise is not removed). Additional ocean-only simulations are
used to assess the role of internal ocean variability in AMOC variability.
Additional simulations use a hybrid IE (HyIE) configuration, in which
atmospheric forcing from the IE is used in some regions but forcing from a
single atmospheric model is used in others. Weather noise is thus applied only
over specified regions, and the local and remote responses of the regionally
confined noise forcing can be evaluated.

One hypothesis to be tested is that the AMOC responds primarily to weather noise
forcing over the Labrador sea where most of the deep water formation occurs.
Alternatively, remote noise forcing could affect the AMOC, which is trapped
along the western boundary, through the generation of westward-propagating
oceanic Rossby waves. The response of the surface climate to AMOC variability is
also considered, with particular attention to the north-south shifts of the
intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) that are the expected consequence of
changes in cross-equatorial transport accompanying AMOC fluctuations.

As noted above AMOC variability is a matter of practical as well as scientific
interest, given its association with surface climate effects such as drought and
hurricane activity. In addition, the PIs are working with the CESM developers to
make the IE framework available to the broader research community. The project
also supports two graduate students, thereby providing for the future work force
in this research area.