* 1558049
* Modulation of the Adrenocortical Response to Perturbations of the Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2023
* John Wingfield, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 665,932.00

Extreme weather events such as storms, are increasing in frequency, duration and
intensity. Couple this with other global changes resulting from human
disturbance and it is clear that mechanisms underlying organism-environment
interactions in response to stressful environmental factors are key. These
responses, often called the "stress response" help the animal cope through the
modification of physiology and behaviour that promote survival. The focus here
will be on the stress hormone responses, particularly from the adrenal gland,
that are a highly adaptive suite of physiological and behavioral traits that are
conserved across vertebrates including humans. A basic understanding of how
seasonal modulations of the stress response works will allow us to predict how
vertebrate organisms adjust their physiology and behaviour in response to an
increasingly capricious environment as well as across a species' range with an
emphasis on those populations that are on the limits of, or have pushed beyond,
their geographic range. The PIs aim to educate K-12 students and teachers, while
also reaching out to under-represented minorities (particularly Latinos in
California) to enhance awareness, and conservation, of habitat for all organisms
as well as birds. In these ways the work can be broadly disseminated to the
public at large. In an era of dramatic environmental change, public awareness is
critical and the broader impact activities will have far reaching influence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms underlying organism-environment interactions in
response to perturbations of the environment are key for survival. The focus
here will be on the hormonal response, particularly corticosteroids from the
adrenal gland. The PIs have a good understanding of the responses to
environmental stress in biomedical contexts, often under the chronic stress
paradigm. However, these approaches do not mimic nature in which organisms
experience seasonal cycles in environmental conditions and the stress response
is modulated accordingly. Understanding how individuals push the boundaries of
their coping strategies as well as geographic range is critical both from a
basic science standpoint and for conservation. The proposed work will assess how
the adrenocortical stress response is regulated using both laboratory and field
studies to inform us of what brain centers are responsible for controlling
seasonal fluctuation in the stress response. In addition, the focus will be on
how the activity of these brain regions fluctuates across the annual cycle of
environmental severity, and also across a species' range with an emphasis on
those populations that are on the limits of, or have pushed beyond, their
geographic range. A basic understanding of how the HPA axis works in species
that undergo seasonal modulations in the stress response will also allow the PIs
to predict how vertebrate organisms adjust their physiology and behavior in
response to an increasingly capricious environment.