* 1558072
* Transcription Regulatory Circuits of Grass Cell Wall Biosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Samuel Hazen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 713,448.00

The costs of degrading cellulosic biomass currently impede its widespread use as
a competitive domestic renewable alternative to fossil fuels. A promising route
to renewable liquid fuels is the conversion of various biomass sources by
microbial organisms. The goal for this project is to develop a basic
understanding of the genes that control biomass accumulation. This will enable
our long-term goal of producing ecologically and economically sustainable
sources of feedstocks for biofuels. The research specifically addresses the
genes that regulate a key aspect of plant growth, which is the creation of cell
walls. In specific cells the walls are very thick and it is these that account
for the bulk of all plant biomass. Grasses include many of our most important
food and forage crops including maize, wheat, rice, ryegrass, and tall fescue.
Despite the importance of the plant cell wall for plant growth, our knowledge of
the precise regulatory mechanisms that give rise to the coordinated synthesis of
the wall polymers is limited. This is especially true of grasses. This project
will provide interdisciplinary training in development, genetics, genomics, and
biochemistry for at least two University of Massachusetts graduate students and
facilitate an internship program with the National Technical Institute for the
Deaf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at understanding the transcription
networks that regulate secondary cell wall biosynthesis in grasses. The cell
wall is a complex composite of polysaccharides, proteins, and lignin. Much of
what is currently understood about the transcriptional regulation of cell wall
biosynthesis is from the study of Arabidopsis thaliana xylem vessels and fibers,
yet this understanding may not be generalizable across land plants. The cell
walls of grasses, including domesticated cereals that provide the majority of
human calories and the perennials under development as biofuel energy crops,
differ significantly in morphology and composition from the eudicot A. thaliana.
The research will explore the function of three Brachypodium distachyon
transcription factors: GRASS NAC REPRESSOR OF FLOWERING (GNRF), WALL REGULATOR
INTERACTING bHLH (WRIB), KNOTTED-LIKE HOMEOBOX OF BRACHYPODIUM DISTACHYON7
(KNOB7). The researchers hypothesize that these proteins regulate wall
biosynthesis through protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions that make-up a
system of feed forward and negative feedback loops that are influenced by
external cues. Transcription factors will be characterized by using methods such
as chromatin immunoprecipitation to determine the gene promoter targets of the
proteins and the effect of binding on cell wall biosynthesis. Protein-protein
interactions will be evaluated using co-immunoprecipitation. A possible role for
photo and thermocycles in the function of cell wall regulation will be tested by
measuring function under varying time course conditions in plants of different
mutant backgrounds.