* 1558829
* Validation of a New Geochemical Approach to Constrain Deep Sea Porewater Residence Times and Advection Rates: Applications to Biogeochemical Cycling at Guaymas Basin
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Richard Peterson, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2019
* USD 82,579.00

This project proposes to validate a new approach to measure porewater flow
dynamics from deep sea sediments using a biologically conservative, naturally-
occurring tracer, Radium 224, which is constantly produced by porewaters. The
technique will be validated using independent measures of porewater fluxes (i.e.
heat gradients and magnesium profiles) during a cruise to the Guaymas Basin in
the Gulf of California that is already funded by NSF. Once validated the
technique will be broadly applicable to all sedimentary environments including
oceans, rivers/streams, wetlands and lakes. Understanding porewater flow
dynamics is important to understanding ocean and other aquatic system chemical
budgets, microbial ecology and global heat flow.

This proposal hypothesizes that the short-lived radium isotope Ra 224 may serve
as an effective tracer of porewater flows in deep ocean systems, regardless of
the type or composition of seepages, because its sources and sinks can be
uniquely constrained. The method will be tested in the Guaymas Basin which is
comprised of areas undergoing a range of seepage rates and offers porewater
thermal gradients resulting from the hydrothermal system. As a result heat
fluxes and gradients in magnesium and other cations affected by high-temperature
water/rock interactions can be used to independently validate the porewater
flows measured by Ra 224.