* 1558011
* Modulators of the Abscisic Acid Core Signaling Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2023
* Ruth Finkelstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,711.00

Increases in the human population of the Earth, coupled with increased carbon
emissions, are leading to changes in our global climate that threaten
agriculture just as our collective demands grow. Climate change is manifest as
severe weather events ranging from warming and drought to major storms and
flooding in different regions. The combination of severe drought during growing
seasons and excessive moisture during cereal grain maturation can lead to many
billions of dollars in annual yield losses worldwide. A better understanding of
the genetic mechanisms controlling plant stress tolerance and productivity could
help us to create or breed plants that could better withstand unfavorable
climate events. The hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is a key regulator of stress
signaling. Within the last seven years a "core ABA signaling pathway" has
emerged that mechanistically links many ABA signaling components that were
previously identified genetically. This proposal addresses the function of a
group of proteins that interact directly with multiple central components of
this core pathway, possibly functioning as signaling hubs. Understanding the
interactions controlling ABA responses could be instrumental for ensuring the
world's future food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central components of
the ABA core signaling pathway include four families of proteins: the
PYL/PYR/RCAR family of ABA receptors, the clade A family of protein phosphatase
(PP)2Cs, the Snf-Related Kinase (SnRK)2 family,and the ABI5/ABF/AREB clade of
ABA response element binding basic leucine zipper (bZIP) class transcription
factors. An additional family, the ABI Five binding Protein (AFP)s, interact
directly with the bZIPs, PP2Cs and SnRK2s, and also show interactions with
chromatin modifiers. This project will address the mechanisms and implications
of these interactions by determining 1) whether AFPs act as transcriptional
repressors of ABA response element (ABRE)-containing genes by sequestering bZIPs
at low ABA concentrations; (2) whether AFPs interact with TPL-like co-
repressor(s) or other chromatin modifying protein(s) to alter histone
acetylation and activity of genes regulated by bZIPs; and 3) whether AFP
function and localization is regulated by changes in phosphorylation mediated by
PP2Cs and SnRK2s or other kinases. The proposed experiments will test how the
AFPs contribute to a feedback system that permits plants to resume growth when
developmentally or stress-induced ABA levels decline. In addition, they will
address the biochemical function(s) of a family still annotated only as proteins
of unknown function.