* 1558699
* Experimental study of CO2 hydration in seawater: Mechanism and kinetic isotope effects
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 297,415.00

The chemical reaction of carbon dioxide (CO2) with water in the marine
environment is a fundamental process that creates carbonic acid (H2CO3) and all
of the associated chemical ions (carbonate (CO3); hydrogen ions (H+), and
bicarbonate (HCO3-)) that serve as the dominant buffer for pH in the ocean.
Dehydration refers to the opposite reaction that releases CO2 gas. By entering
into important reactions and serving to control pH, these species govern a wide
variety of chemical and biological processes in the ocean. Surprisingly, while
the important reactions that involve CO2 hydration and its resulting products
have been extensively studied in the ocean, some of the fundamental mechanisms
remain poorly understood and datasets are sparse. In particular, almost nothing
is known about how the natural isotopes of the carbon and oxygen atoms are
involved and this is critically needed to explain observed changes in chemical
species and solid calcium carbonate such as that created by coral reefs. This
research aims to carefully produce novel experimental data that includes
critical measurements of carbon and oxygen isotopes before and after the
hydration of CO2 in the ocean. Because these resulting carbonate species are
used widely in many studies in the ocean sciences, particularly those examining
past climates, this research will have far-reaching influences. Additionally,
the results will provide new fundamental insight on exactly how the ocean will
take up and respond to changing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 in a changing
climate. The research will fund an early-career scientist who is dedicated to
graduate and undergraduate education as well as scientific outreach to the
community.

While hydration/dehydration of CO2 in the ocean critically influences a variety
of marine chemical and biological processes, there are certain aspects of the
reaction that are poorly understood. The molecular mechanism is not yet clear,
as there are two possible pathways that have been proposed. Additionally,
kinetic isotope effects during CO2 have not been well studied, and the data
regarding this topic is inconsistent. This research aims to study the carbon and
oxygen isotope fractionation, which will not only clarify the molecular
mechanism of the reaction but also will add a consistent dataset on kinetic
isotope effects. The main challenge in this study is separating the product,
HCO3-, from CO2 before re-equilibration, but the researcher will resolve this by
rapidly precipitating dissolved carbon as carbonate. Since carbonates formed
from the process of hydration are considered critical indicators of water
chemistry, biological processes, and the inorganic carbon cycle as a whole and
are used in a wide variety of oceanographic research, particularly as paleo-
proxies, this research will provide fundamental mechanistic data that will
greatly advance studies reaching beyond the physical chemical measurements that
will be made here.