* 1558369
* Collaborative Research: Autonomous sampling of upper ocean mixing in the Southern Ocean due to wind forcing and double-diffusion
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Luca Centurioni, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 583,087.00

The Southern Ocean is responsible for about half the uptake of anthropogenic
carbon and an even larger fraction of the atmosphere's flux of heat into the
sea. The Southern Ocean is the only sector of the global ocean that connects all
three major ocean basins through the Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC).
Despite its importance, the region is under sampled largely due to its remote
location and severe conditions. The dearth of observations in the Southern Ocean
is not limited to ocean measurements. Meteorological measurements such as wind
speed and heat fluxes are scarce and often from sensors mounted on sparse ship
traffic. With the maturing of autonomous platforms, there is now an opportunity
to collect high-resolution spatial and temporal measurements in the full range
of conditions characteristic of the Southern Ocean. While climate models have
advanced substantially, the inadequate representation of unresolved mixing
processes is still a significant source of error. This is perhaps the most
severe in the near-surface boundary layer of the ocean where Langmuir physics,
frontal processes, and double-diffusion are active in the Southern Ocean, yet
the lack of observations have slowed progress in developing parameterizations.
This novel observational study will allow sampling of the upper-ocean physics of
this region on spatial and timescales much shorter than those sampled during
previous experiments, allowing the resolution of inertial and diurnal processes
forced by winds and radiation, and on spatial scales that give insight into the
turbulent cascade influencing the upper ocean. The results from this project
will lead to more realistic parameterizations of subgrid-scale processes in
numerical models of ocean circulation, of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system
and of climate models. The proposed project will recruit two undergraduate
summer fellow through the Women in Science At Yale (WISAY) to provide them
hands-on experience in using autonomous platforms to sample the ocean.

This project is motivated by the need to understand the overturning circulation
of the global ocean in a region that is both rich in small-scale physical
processes and severely under-sampled. This circulation governs the transport and
storage of heat and carbon dioxide within the huge oceanic reservoir, and thus
plays a major role in regulating the Earth's climate. The specific goals of this
project are to 1) obtain measurements of turbulent dissipation rates,
temperature, salinity and fluorescence in the upper 1000 m collocated with
surface wave spectral data and meteorological measurements. The use of
autonomous platforms will provide a dataset with unprecedented spatial and
temporal resolution of mixing in the Southern Ocean and 2) investigate the
turbulent response of the upper ocean to the extreme surface forcing (wind
stress, radiative fluxes) in the Southern Ocean. The dataset will eliminate the
fair-weather bias of shipboard measurements and will provide motivation for
theoretical and model studies of submesoscale and boundary layer dynamics in the
region. The study will be conducted in the region of the ACC fronts between
Drake Passage and the Argentine Basin. A Wave Glider and drifter constellation
will measure wind, waves, air temperature and radiation quantities, and sea
surface temperature and salinity. Gliders with microstructure sensors will
measure temperature and salinity fine structure and turbulence in the upper 1000
m of the water column where the eddy field is active and water masses interact,
and in the near-surface boundary layer where the ocean interacts with the
atmosphere. At the end of the deployment the glider array will sample around the
Ocean Observatory Initiative site in the Argentine basin to validate the
meteorological measurements from the wave glider. This dataset will provide an
opportunity to study the physics underpinning mixing rates in this region, while
simultaneously contributing valuable insights to the modeling community.