* 1558476
* Collaborative Research: Bubble Processes during Air-Sea Gas Transfer
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2022
* USD 379,025.00

Remote gas measurements by floats, gliders, and moorings are used to indirectly
determine the Annual Net Community Production (ANCP) in the ocean by examining
the gases produced by the biological community during photosynthesis and
respiration (i.e. oxygen and carbon dioxide). In principal this method works
well, but currently there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the role of
bubbles in the air-sea exchange of gases, and thus in altering the
concentrations of gases important for ANCP calculations. This research aims to
constrain the effects of bubbles on remote gas measurements used for these
production estimates. In particular, oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide will
be studied. By making measurements of these gases under storm conditions, the
study will attempt to determine how much impact turbulence has on bubble
processes and air-sea gas transfer. Data from the field observations will then
be used to create a bubble process model which will help researchers more
accurately use gas measurements to estimate how the biological signal (i.e.
ANCP) is modified by physical processes (i.e. bubbles). One graduate student at
Louisiana State University will be funded through this project, and the Program
for Climate Change at the University of Washington will be supported through
training of high school teachers on the role of the oceans in the earth's
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upper ocean turbulence has a significant effect on
the air-sea transfer of gases. This effect is known, but currently not very well
understood or constrained. In particular, the role of bubble processes in this
exchange are largely a mystery and introduces a great deal of uncertainty into
the use of oxygen measurements as proxies for Annual Net Community Production.
This research plans to merge fieldwork and modeling methods to create
mechanistic models that will allow researchers to more accurately quantify
bubble processes as a mechanism for air-sea exchange of biogenic gases, thereby
resulting in a more precise method to calculate Annual Net Community Production
from remote sensors on floats, gliders, and moorings. By making precise
measurements of O2, N2, and CO2 at the air-sea boundary before and after the
rapid pressure changes during storm conditions, a better understanding of the
these effects on the exchange of these gases between the surface ocean and lower
atmosphere will be achieved.