* 1558742
* Ventilation of Denmark Strait Overflow Water in the Iceland and Greenland Seas
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 3,844,001.00

The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) is a key component of the
global climate system. Its upper limb consists of warm Atlantic-origin water
that flows poleward across the Greenland-Scotland Ridge where it is transformed
in the Nordic Seas and high Arctic Ocean. The dense water mass product then
returns southward and enters the sub-polar North Atlantic through gaps in the
Greenland-Scotland Ridge. The largest of these dense overflows is the Denmark
Strait Overflow Water which feeds the bottom-most component of the Deep Western
Boundary Current. Previous thinking has maintained that the dominant source of
the Denmark Strait Overflow Water is the Atlantic-origin water transported
equatorward in the East Greenland Current. In this scheme the warm-to-cold
transformation of water takes place in the rim current system of the Nordic
Seas. Recent observations, however, indicate that up to half of the Denmark
Strait Overflow Water (in particular, the densest component) emanates from the
North Icelandic Jet, which advects Arctic Intermediate Water along the north
slope of Iceland. The question then arises, what is the source of the North
Icelandic Jet and where does the warm-to-cold transformation occur that produces
this water? To understand the workings of the AMOC and how it might respond to
changes in climate, it is essential to determine all of the dense water sources
to its lower limb and understand the atmospheric and oceanic processes that form
the water. Herein a wintertime field program will be conducted in the Iceland
and Greenland Seas together with a coordinated modeling study to fundamentally
advance our knowledge of this newly identified source of dense water and its
link to the AMOC. This project will, for the first time, document convection in
the northwest Iceland Sea and southeast Greenland Sea in relation to the
atmospheric forcing, determine the lateral extent of the transformation and the
volume and water mass characteristics of the newly-ventilated water, and
characterize the circulation in which the convection occurs. By doing so, the
link between the water mass transformation process, the exit pathway of the
North Icelandic Jet, and the deep limb of the AMOC will be quantified. An
outreach program will engage secondary school children and the general public,
and a graduate student will be trained by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
fundamentally advance our knowledge of this newly identified source of dense
water north of Iceland and its link to the AMOC. The field campaign consists of
a six-week wintertime hydrographic cruise to the region that will coincide with
the atmospheric field campaign from the United Kingdom. The modeling component
will help interpret and tie together the extensive set of international
observations that will be obtained. The winter cruise has four components: (1) a
broad-scale survey of the northwest Iceland Sea and southeast Greenland Sea
where the dense North Icelandic Jet water is believed to emanate from (a region
essentially devoid of wintertime observations. This includes an excursion into
the center of each gyre; (2) adaptive sampling in conjunction with the aircraft
campaign to measure the ocean's response to cold-air outbreaks in targeted areas
downstream of the ice-edge, where the mixed-layers should be deepest and
densest; (3) focused sampling near the Jan Mayen Fracture Zone to assess the
degree to which newly ventilated dense water is fluxed southward from the
Greenland Sea to the Iceland Sea; and (4) a detailed survey of the region where
the North Icelandic Jet is formed. This project is the U.S. contribution to a
broader international program, known as the Iceland-Greenland Seas Project
(IGP), to study the air-sea interaction in the northwest Iceland Sea and
southeast Greenland Sea and the associated ocean circulation and water mass
transformation. The IGP has contributors from the United Kingdom, Iceland,
Canada, Norway, and the Netherlands and includes an aircraft campaign that is
closely coupled to the oceanographic fieldwork, as well as atmospheric and
oceanic modeling.