* 1558890
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The impact of shifts in social network structure on cooperative behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Monique Borgerhoff Mulder, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,497.00

Social scientists have long been interested in how a person's social
relationships impact their behavior, but they have typically only analyzed
single social networks, like a friendship network. This project proposes,
however, that looking at a single social network instead of the entirety of
someone's social interactions limits our understanding of cooperative behavior,
and may even give us the wrong answer. This project, which trains a graduate
student in conducting rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork,
explores social network data from multiple domains. The project would enhance
scientific understanding by broadly disseminating findings to organizations,
officials, and scientists engaged in identifying effective models for
international development. Through outreach activities that develop modules
focused on the drivers of human change, the project would also integrate the
research findings into the teaching of science at the K-12 and university level.

Curtis Atkisson, under the supervision of Dr. Monique Borgerhoff Mulder will
investigate how an individual's cooperative behavior is impacted by all of their
social interactions as well as the community they are in. The project proposes
that the amount of overlap between an individual's different social networks
will predict their cooperative behavior - both towards people they know and
strangers. The project further proposes that the integration of social networks
across a community will also account for cooperative behavior. This will help
explain the often reported result that an individual's community is a primary
determinant of their cooperative behavior. These results have great potential to
help us understand changes in cooperative behaviors as societies change, and
better foster cooperation in our own communities. The researcher will
investigate these ideas in a set of communities that are expected to differ in
the overlap of their social networks in an indigenous area of Guyana.
Anthropological studies of cooperation and decision-making are typically
situated in such small-scale societies, which because of their relatively
homogeneity and historic insularity, tend to more effectively control for the
variables being queried. U surveys, economic games, and detailed interviews, the
scientists will bring the methodological holism of anthropology to bear on the
analysis of multiple social networks, their overlap, and cooperation. One of the
compelling aspects of this project is that it brings together multiple distinct
areas of anthropology, serving as an example for the deep integration of the
rigor of scientific inquiry and social theory.