* 1558127
* Group Size, Scaling of Work, and Metabolism in Ant Colonies
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The pattern of lower energy use per gram with increasing size (known as
metabolic scaling) occurs across all animal groups, yet the mechanisms behind it
are still not understood. Intriguingly, social insect colonies show the same
level of reduced metabolism with increasing colony size. This project will
combine experiments and mathematical models to determine the relationships
between energy use and the organization of work in ant colonies. Ant colonies
serve as an exemplar for this question, because their highly coordinated
societies are organized around the work needed to sustain colony growth and
maintenance, analogous to metabolic processes in organisms. Understanding the
mechanisms underlying metabolic scaling has potential applications in
physiology, medicine, and agriculture. The energy-based models and experiments
in this project will be relevant well beyond social insect colonies, including
informing human population scaling issues. The project will connect this
research with a Mathematics and Social Biology Co-mentoring Program, to train
research teams of undergraduates together in biology and mathematics. Students
will participate in a formal training program on social biological principles
and simulation modeling, and then participate as cross-disciplinary teams in
collaborative research. Existing connections with research and minority programs
at ASU will be used to recruit under-represented students into the program.
Teaching modules on group size, social behavior, and metabolism for online K-12
use will also be developed in collaboration with ASU's Ask-a-Biologist outreach
program. This project is co-funded by the Animal Behavior program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the Mathematical Biology program in
the Division of Mathematical Sciences, and the BIOMAPS program for proposals at
the interface of Biology, Math and the Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group size is one of the most fundamental
attributes of sociality, with important effects on social organization and
fitness. Previous work has found that larger harvester ant colonies
(Pogonomyrmex californicus) exhibit allometric changes in task performance and
activity patterns, including increased worker specialization. They additionally
shift the allocation of effort, possibly away from more expensive tasks.
Potentially coupled with this, colonies also show a consistent pattern of
hypometric metabolic scaling, which matches that of organismal scaling patterns.
Because task performance is directly linked to colony growth and metabolism,
these results lead to the hypothesis that larger colonies achieve economies of
scale in energy use from scaling changes in the organization of work. To examine
how colony size influences work organization, the distribution of workers across
tasks, individual task specialization, and worker activity levels will be
measured in laboratory colonies of varying size. Colony metabolism, brood
production and growth rates will be measured simultaneously to link behavioral
organization to colony metabolic consequences. Additionally, colony
demographics, including worker size and age distributions, will be assessed for
their contributions to variation in metabolism. These parameters will be
measured for: (a) colonies that vary in size but not age; (b) colonies changing
in size ontogenetically over time; (c) size-manipulated colonies. The empirical
research will be combined with simulation, differential equation and
optimization models to ask how components of task organization and activity
might interact to generate scaling changes in colony metabolism and
productivity.