* 1558661
* Collaborative Research: An Expanded Framework for Inferring Public Policy Diffusion Networks
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Bruce Desmarais, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2020
* USD 178,953.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State governments are commonly referred to
as "laboratories of democracy?"because for many&lt;br/&gt;decades they have
experimented with new policy solutions to society's most important
problems.&lt;br/&gt;Public policy scholars and practitioners of politics often
look to the states for innovative policies&lt;br/&gt;that can be emulated by
other governments across the country; a process referred to as
policy&lt;br/&gt;diffusion. However, the complex relationships between the
states (that is, the patterns,&lt;br/&gt;pathways, and mechanisms underlying how
policies actually diffuse from one state to another)&lt;br/&gt;are not well
understood. In this research, the PIs develop innovative tools
and&lt;br/&gt;data to facilitate the large-scale computational and data-
intensive study of policy diffusion. They&lt;br/&gt;seek to develop and utilize
the largest database on states' decisions to adopt policies to
better&lt;br/&gt;understand which states are policy leaders, which are policy
followers, and why. This will&lt;br/&gt;provide a novel, expansive, and
systematic view of the policy diffusion process that covers
the&lt;br/&gt;American states. As a result, policymakers and other interested
stakeholders will have access to a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive look at the spread of
innovation among state governments regarding financial,&lt;br/&gt;environmental,
health, security, and other social problem
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Aspects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to make three central contributions to the study of public policy
diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;First, it will produce a database on the adoption of
hundreds of policies in the American states, at&lt;br/&gt;least tripling the
size of the largest database currently available and yielding a sample of
policies&lt;br/&gt;that is more representative of the universe of policies for
which states make laws. It will also&lt;br/&gt;leverage these new data to map
and analyze the network pathways according to which policies&lt;br/&gt;diffuse
(i.e., establish states that are leaders and followers in the diffusion of
policies). As&lt;br/&gt;recently published research by the principal
investigators shows, cutting-edge computational&lt;br/&gt;methods can be applied
to large databases containing information on when policies were
adopted&lt;br/&gt;by which governments in order to identify underlying networks
along which policies persistently&lt;br/&gt;diffuse. Another key contribution
from this research is to improve upon the existing method
for&lt;br/&gt;inferring network ties in ways that are most suitable for policy
diffusion research (as well as&lt;br/&gt;social science more generally) and
implement it in a user-friendly package in the R
statistical&lt;br/&gt;environment. A final contribution, which is intended to
maximize the potential user-base of these&lt;br/&gt;data and methods, will be to
build an interactive online portal to the data, complete
with&lt;br/&gt;visualizations and automated analytics.