* 1558900
* Elucidating Gene Network Modules Regulating Inter-specific Diversity in Plant Leaf Shape
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Neelima Sinha, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 02/29/2020
* USD 805,000.00

Conversion of solar energy to chemical energy in land plants is the source of
agricultural productivity. This process occurs in leaves but how different types
of leaves differ in their ability to produce carbon compounds is not well
understood. Nor do we understand how genes act and interact to produce leaves of
different shapes and sizes. This project will utilize analysis of how genes are
regulated to generate gene products that interact to create cascades of effects
eventually leading to the formation of different forms of leaves. This
understanding will allow us to manipulate gene expression to generate more
efficient leaf forms. This project will also disseminate knowledge of gene
regulation and leaf function, and provide hands on research experience to high
school students from a predominantly Hispanic school district.

How morphological diversity has arisen is a key question in biology. Angiosperms
exhibit a great diversity in leaf shape and leaf development has been
characterized in several species, making leaves ideal targets to understand the
mechanism behind morphological natural variation. Leaves are also functionally
significant for generating biomass and leading to agricultural yield. This
research is based upon a deduced gene co-expression network underlying leaf
development in tomato and its relatives. Molecular experiments and hypothesis
testing validated the bioinformatically predicted gene regulatory network (GRN)
and identified key components, such as BLADE-ON-PETIOLE (BOP), within the gene
network module regulating leaf shape. Alteration in BOP expression by transgenic
experiments in tomato, S. pennellii and S. habrochaites, can recreate naturally
occurring leaf phenotypes in the tomato species complex. The investigators will
identify BOP targets, look at BOP co-expressed genes to integrate network
information across three species (Aim 1), detect differential interactions
(DiffCorr) between genes in the GRN across species (Aim 2), and generate
transcriptomes and build GRNs to identify GRN rewiring across selected eudicots
(Aim 3).