* 1558289
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Understanding the Climate Mechanisms Associated with Past Drought and Vegetation Change.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jacqueline Shinker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 08/31/2018
* USD 6,537.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research project will use the modern climate analog technique to
investigate the synoptic and dynamic climate processes associated with drought
in the western U.S. and the possible responses of ecosystems to past
megadroughts. The doctoral student will provide new insights into how vegetative
responses to past hydroclimate variability and disturbances can help protect and
mitigate ecological communities against future environmental change. An
understanding of the climate processes associated with modern drought will
provide deeper insights into past drought variability and the mechanisms that
caused megadroughts evident in paleoecological records. The student will work
closely with local communities and government agencies by providing useful
knowledge to resource managers regarding past hydroclimate variability and
impacts to valuable natural resources. In addition, the new insights into
biodiversity dynamics associated with past megadroughts will inform policy-
related discussions regarding ecological sustainability and land-management
issues. Results from this research would be useful for a broad range of uses,
including species range modeling, predicting future ecosystem migration patterns
in response to future climate change, and fire management in certain ecosystems.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the range of natural
variability related to past drought and wet periods is important for providing
context to water resource managers for future water planning. The doctoral
student whose dissertation research will be supported by this award will use
modern climate data during past dry and wet events as analogs for the events
seen in the sedimentary record. The project will focus on two core questions:
(1) What were the prevailing seasonal atmospheric circulation patterns and
surface conditions over western North America during the megadrought centered
around 4,200 years BP? (2) What were the prevailing seasonal atmospheric
circulation patterns over western North America during the wet event that
followed the megadrought? In order to identify possible synoptic and dynamic
patterns that may have caused these two events in the western U.S., the student
will apply a modern climate analog technique, which is a conceptual model that
uses modern extremes as analogs of past events. To accomplish this, a composite
of anomaly values for selected modern climate analog case years will be mapped
and analyzed for their spatiotemporal variability of surface and atmospheric
conditions.