* 1558068
* The Vibrissotactile Natural Scene
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Sara Solla, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2022
* USD 525,983.00

In humans, the sense of touch is closely linked with hand movements. An open
question in neuroscience is how the brain combines touch signals (sensory) with
hand movements (motor) to create a unified tactile perception of an object.
Because of difficulties in studying how the human brain combines these cues,
researchers study rats, which use ~60 whiskers to tactually explore the
environment. The whisker system is an excellent model to investigate how neurons
represent and unify touch and movement, but neuroscientists currently struggle
to stimulate the whiskers in a way that imitates the signals obtained during
natural exploratory behavior. In this proposal, the investigators will
characterize naturalistic patterns of tactile input that the rat's brain evolved
to process, and will develop new mathematical tools to describe the
environmental features that the rat experiences. The proposed work is
scientifically important for two reasons. First, because rodents are the most
commonly used animals in neuroscience, these experiments will aid researchers
studying many parts of the brain involved with touch and movement. Second, these
new mathematical tools will help quantify the sense of touch across species,
including humans. The proposed work will have significant broader impacts on
science and mathematics education and public outreach. Undergraduate students
will contribute to the work, and the investigators will lead Northwestern's
Robotics Club to explore engineering applications of whisker-based tactile
sensing. The investigators will also continue outreach efforts through the
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers, the Society of Women Engineers, and
Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the fields of
vision and audition, the receptive fields of central neurons are tuned to the
statistics of the "natural scenes,- to those properties of the stimuli that the
animal is likely to encounter in its natural environment. In the field of
somatosensation it is challenging to quantify the natural tactile scene, in part
because somatosensory signals are tightly linked to the animal's movements. The
proposed work aims to begin to quantify the natural tactile scene for the rat
vibrissal system by combining careful behavioral monitoring and simulations of
rat head and whisker movements. The project has two major goals. The first is to
characterize the statistics of the environments that the rat naturally inhabits.
In Bayesian terms, this statistical distribution is called the "prior," because
it describes the environment's geometrical features, unbiased by the tactile
sampling choices of the animal. The second is to quantify the statistics of the
environment sampled by the rat, given its choices of head motions and whisk
cycle. In Bayesian terms, this statistical distribution is called the
"posterior," because it incorporates the bias of the rat when preferentially
sampling the tactile scene. This work is one of the first attempts to quantify
the statistics of active touch, and it aims to make specific predictions for the
receptive field properties that enable spatiotemporal integration. Equally
important, this work will develop an appropriate mathematical framework for
characterizing the geometry of natural scenes, an essential step towards
describing active somatosensation using information theoretic measures.