* 1558853
* International Workshop on Implications of Occupant Behavior for Building Design and Operation: Now and the Future
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Bing Dong, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2016
* USD 34,911.00

1558853 &lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Dong, Bing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is in
partial support of the International Workshop on Implications of Occupant
Behavior for Building Design and Operation: Now and the Future. This workshop
will be held on April 2, 2016 at the University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.
Occupancy behavior in buildings is becoming an important topic of research as
building systems become more sophisticated and people spend more time in
buildings, making occupancy behavior one of the leading influencers of energy
consumption in buildings. Occupancy behavior refers to occupancy presence and
numbers in spaces or a building, and human-building interactions, such as
opening/closing windows, blinds, and turning on/off lighting, as well as
occupant preferences, such as thermal and lighting comfort. The challenges to
study occupancy behavior in buildings are: (a) occupancy behavior is stochastic
and complex in nature; (b) privacy issues make data collection difficult; and
(c) monitoring occupancy behavior relies on various sensors with relatively high
costs. The changes of built environment caused by occupancy behavior also affect
occupants physiologically and psychologically. To this date, potential energy
savings from occupancy behavior based applications have been evaluated both by
simulations and in field studies. However, most current studies are individual
and case by case, without a systematic and scalable approach. In addition,
existing building infrastructure impedes the development of occupancy behavior-
based industry products and applications, which will be among the topics of
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of occupancy behavior
research is to improve building design and operation in a homogeneous way for
next generation energy efficient buildings. The objective of this workshop is to
identify the research gaps in existing occupancy behavior research including
what the obstacles are and what is needed from both academic research and
industry, and the identification of future research directions. The list of
topics to be discussed includes: (1) Modeling and simulation of occupancy
presence in buildings; (2) Human-building interactions (3) Occupancy behavior
based applications in industry. This workshop is targeted to: (a) advance the
general knowledge of building science, engineering and cyber-physical systems
through round-table discussions; (b) advance the knowledge of methodological
development in occupancy behavior research for built environment through panel
presentations and intensive technical discussions; (c) provide a collaborative
platform for mechanical, civil and computer engineering faculties and graduate
students to exchange ideas; (d) provide future research directions and encourage
more involvement of faculties and students to participate in those research; (e)
provide insights on better building design and operation for future energy
efficient buildings.