* 1558561
* Collaborative Research: An Expanded Framework for Inferring Public Policy Diffusion Networks
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Jeffrey Harden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2018
* USD 63,226.00

General Summary

State governments are commonly referred to as "laboratories of democracy"because
for many decades they have experimented with new policy solutions to society's
most important problems. Public policy scholars and practitioners of politics
often look to the states for innovative policies that can be emulated by other
governments across the country; a process referred to as policy diffusion.
However, the complex relationships between the states (that is, the patterns,
pathways, and mechanisms underlying how policies actually diffuse from one state
to another) are not well understood. In this research, the PIs develop
innovative tools and data to facilitate the large-scale computational and data-
intensive study of policy diffusion. They seek to develop and utilize the
largest database on states' decisions to adopt policies to better understand
which states are policy leaders, which are policy followers, and why. This will
provide a novel, expansive, and systematic view of the policy diffusion process
that covers the American states. As a result, policymakers and other interested
stakeholders will have access to a comprehensive look at the spread of
innovation among state governments regarding financial, environmental, health,
security, and other social problem domains.

Technical Aspects

This research seeks to make three central contributions to the study of public
policy diffusion. First, it will produce a database on the adoption of hundreds
of policies in the American states, at least tripling the size of the largest
database currently available and yielding a sample of policies that is more
representative of the universe of policies for which states make laws. It will
also leverage these new data to map and analyze the network pathways according
to which policies diffuse (i.e., establish states that are leaders and followers
in the diffusion of policies). As recently published research by the principal
investigators shows, cutting-edge computational methods can be applied to large
databases containing information on when policies were adopted by which
governments in order to identify underlying networks along which policies
persistently diffuse. Another key contribution from this research is to improve
upon the existing method for inferring network ties in ways that are most
suitable for policy diffusion research (as well as social science more
generally) and implement it in a user-friendly package in the R statistical
environment. A final contribution, which is intended to maximize the potential
user-base of these data and methods, will be to build an interactive online
portal to the data, complete with visualizations and automated analytics.