* 1558623
* Topics in Analysis of Big Data and Complex Models
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Serena Ng, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 238,080.00

The proposed research seeks to provide researchers with new methods to study
economic issues of current interest, making effective use of big datasets that
are only recently available. The projects deal with issues in data
preprocessing, estimation, and hypothesis testing. The emphasis is on methods
with broad applicability and that can be put to practical use. The proposed
research is also multidisciplinary, combining methodologies from statistics with
those from computer science, while providing methods for empirical researchers
from any field that uses statistical methods on massive data sets.

The proposed research consists of three projects. The first project develops
methods for efficient and effective analysis of big data for the purpose of
understanding micro and macroeconomic phenomenon. While datasets that are
terabytes in size are increasingly available, resource constraints often make it
necessary to study a smaller set of observations, which raises the question
about how to form subsamples. The investigator will develop methods that can
efficiently use large datasets, while preserving data features valuable to
economic analysis. The second project provides frequentist tools to assess
sensitivity of the estimation results to model assumptions and features of the
data, which will be particularly useful to assess the results from complex
structural models. The third project will assess whether uncertainty is a cause
or a consequence of economic fluctuations. Given that there is no ideal
instrument to distinguish uncertainty shocks from real activity shocks, the
investigator will develop an iterative method that would purge the unwarranted
variations from a potentially invalid instrument in order to arrive at a valid
instrument. This generated external IV procedure can generally be used in
applications when no valid instrument is available.