* 1558219
* Collaborative Research: S2I2: Cncp: Conceptualization of an S2I2 Institute for High Energy Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2021
* USD 409,991.00

Facilities such as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN represent a huge step
forward in the quest to understand the fundamental building blocks of nature,
and their interactions. The discovery of the Higgs boson and the observation of
very rare B meson decays, as predicted by the Standard Model (SM) of particle
physics, demonstrate the strong scientific reach of LHC experiments. Despite
these achievements, fundamental questions remain, including: Why does nature
express the symmetries embodied in the SM, and not other symmetries? Why are
there exactly three generations of basic building blocks (quarks and leptons)?
Why are the masses of these building blocks so different from each other, both
within a generation and between generations? What is the dark matter which
pervades the universe? Does space-time have additional symmetries or extend
beyond the three spatial dimensions we know? Planning for upgrades for a High
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) in the 2020s is well underway. These upgrades will lead
to a 100-fold increase in data volume. Exploiting the increased data volume and
the large investments in upgraded detectors requires a commensurate investment
in software to assure that the scientific goals are
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HL-LHC is expected to take data starting 10
years from now, and continue for many years. This conceptualization project will
develop a Strategic Plan for an eventual S2I2 Institute which can address the
software development and sustainability challenges of software for the HL-LHC
era. This conceptualization project will support a series of workshops to
prepare both the S2I2 Strategic Plan and, together with the international
community, a Community White Paper providing an overall roadmap for both U.S.
and international software efforts to realize the full science potential of the
HL-LHC. This project advances the objectives of the National Strategic Computing
Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at sustaining and enhancing the U.S.
scientific, technological, and economic leadership position in High-Performance
Computing (HPC) research, development, and deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the
Physics Division in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.