* 1558994
* Age constraints on subtropical iceberg scour events
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Jenna Hill, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2020
* USD 79,404.00

As the ice sheets across North America melted following the last ice age, huge
icebergs calved off into the sea, drifting in ocean currents across the North
Atlantic. Many of these icebergs travelled east, remaining in polar regions, but
new evidence from high-resolution maps of the seafloor, combined with modeling
of past ocean currents, suggests hundreds of massive (~300m thick) icebergs
likely drifted south along the Atlantic coast of the U.S., with some traveling
all the way to the Florida Keys before completely melting. These icebergs would
have been carried south by huge outburst floods of melting ice water that were
able overcome the northward flow of the Gulf Stream current. The discovery of
this pathway implies the circulation patterns of fresh meltwater from ice sheets
and the subsequent impact on global climate may be more complex than previously
thought; yet the timing of these events remains uncertain. The goal of this
research is to provide initial age constraints on the timing of the iceberg
scour events by examining seafloor sediment from this region and assess the
potential to obtain high resolution records of cold, meltwater pulses flowing
south along the margin. These data will present an important step forward in
understanding how glacial meltwater pulses interact with and impact global
circulation and climate patterns. Looking to ice sheet melting events in the
past can provide critical insight to future changes, which is of particular
interest as modern ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica continue to melt and
the impacts of shifts in global climate are felt around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many abrupt shifts in Northern Hemisphere climate
during the last 20,000 to 6,000 years are thought to have been triggered by the
discharge of large volumes of meltwater and icebergs to the subpolar North
Atlantic. The recent discovery of iceberg scours at subtropical latitudes
(35-24Â°N), along with high-resolution numerical model reconstructions of
associated meltwater floods, suggests that freshwater rapidly would have reached
the subtropics without initially freshening the subpolar deepwater formation
regions that moderate the strength of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC). Freshwater associated with these events would have been
significantly diluted by mixing with the saltier current before being advected
northward to the subpolar gyre by the Gulf Stream. This pattern of subtropical
freshening contrasts with the current paradigm that increased meltwater and
iceberg discharge freshened the subpolar gyre, as shown by the presence of ice-
rafted detritus (IRD) in marine sediments in the northern Atlantic. The analysis
of marine sediment cores from the subtropical iceberg scours will help initiate
the compilation of a paleoclimate database recording the frequency, duration and
magnitude of meltwater and iceberg events routed to the subtropical North
Atlantic. These data will provide critical model parameters describing the
timing and conditions for grounded iceberg transport across the margin that can
be used to examine whether the presence iceberg scours and IRD represent changes
in large-scale ocean circulation, or more localized changes in the trajectory
and location of melting icebergs. Understanding when meltwater and icebergs were
transported to the subtropics is vital for unraveling how changes in high-
latitude freshwater forcing may have influenced past climate.