* 1558592
* Collaborative Research: The Transition from Rifting to Seafloor Spreading at the Western Tip of the Cocos-Nazca Rift
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Emily Klein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 267,840.00

OCE 1558592&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: The Transition from
Rifting to Seafloor Spreading at the Western Tip of the Cocos-Nazca
Rift&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for posting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
long-standing question in the study of mid-ocean ridges focuses on how they
initiate and evolve. Our research cruise to the Galapagos Triple Junction in the
eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean will characterize the transition from initial
rifting to seafloor spreading, and the associated development of ridge axis
segmentation. In this region, the western tip of the Cocos-Nazca Rift is
breaking into ~0.5 Ma crust accreted on the east flank of the East Pacific Rise,
and each stage in the transition from rifting to magmatic seafloor spreading can
be studied. In order to examine along-axis changes as a function of distance
from the rift tip, we will collect geophysical data on morphology, gravity and
magnetic variations, rock samples for chemical analyses, and water column data
for identifying hydrothermal activity. Our findings on oceanic rifting will
complement on-going studies of these processes in continental rift settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our study area extends eastward from the site of initial
rifting of the Cocos-Nazca spreading center to nucleantion of magmatic spreading
at the Hess Deep rift, to full magmatic spreading, thus exhibiting progressive
stages in the initiation and development of rifting and segmentation. Multibeam
bathymetry, gravity, and magnetic data will be collected to reconstruct the
tectonic evolution from initial rifting through seafloor spreading, and in
particular, changes in segment and offset characteristics as they develop.
Chemical analysis of rock samples collected along the spreading axes and along
flow lines will shed light on the evolution of mantle melting and melt delivery
systems and their relationship to the tectonic segmentation. Graduate and
undergraduate students (Duke and MIT/WHOI), will participate in the cruise and
on-shore research, gaining valuable seagoing experience and learning to conduct
collaborative research. In addition, we will develop activities based upon this
work for use in a yearly science-immersion program for minority, middle school
girls.