* 1558235
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: A Cross Cultural Comparison Of Risk And Adaptation Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Howard Foster, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 11,164.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Ms Alicia Odewale will
conduct archaeological research to examine the natural and social challenges
associated with New World slaves in multiple regions within the New World. In
addition to archaeologically investigating the risks plaguing these communities,
the researchers will also compare the strategies each enslaved community
employed to mitigate both social and natural hazards in their environment. This
comparative study uses a mixed methods approach, combining the use of slave
narratives and primary accounts with archaeological evidence recovered from the
former residential spaces of enslaved peoples living in environmentally distinct
regions. This research goes beyond current African Diaspora scholarship to
highlight the experiences of enslaved peoples serving the most elite factions of
society, as well as uncovering those specific environmental challenges of
primary concern to enslaved peoples living within urban insular and rural
landlocked regions across the Diaspora, and compares the range of cultural
adaptations different enslaved communities used to overcome the challenges they
faced. The current project remains relevant for risk prone communities across
the globe, as certain marginalized or indigenous cultures continue to be
threatened by external forces beyond their control. Investigating the use of
different strategies to diminish the effects of external forces in the past will
present new directives in how to better protect marginalized peoples in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alicia Odewale and her team will conduct new
archaeological investigations around the Danish West India and Guinea Company
Warehouse inside the Christiansted National Historic Site in St. Croix, and
compare these newly recovered artifacts to the extensive material already being
processed by the Archaeology Department at the Montpelier Plantation Estate in
Virginia. The investigators will identify and rank the primary risks of most
concern to the enslaved community in each region from first-hand accounts of
enslaved peoples in the West Indies and Virginia. Four types of risk sensitive
artifact classes including: faunal remains, metal wares, ceramics and trade
goods found at each site will then be used to identify the possible cultural
responses to those challenges that presented the greatest threats to the
enslaved community in each region. The central question of this study asks which
of these sites presents a riskier environment for enslaved peoples during the
late plantation era. The investigators hypothesize that the social and natural
hazards present in the urban Caribbean environment for the royal enslaved
laborers in St. Croix will pose a greater threat to the enslaved community than
the rural antebellum plantation environment belonging to the presidential
enslaved laborers in Virginia. Combining the written words of enslaved peoples
with archaeological evidence will create a more informed study of the diversity
of experiences that existed across the African Diaspora and provide a more
inclusive environment for archaeologists, students and descendant communities to
work together.