* 1558782
* Collaborative Research: Rio Grande Rise: New Questions on Plume  Dynamics, Atlantic Tectonic Evolution and an Important Window to the African LLSVP
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* William Sager, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2022
* USD 124,981.00

The Rio Grande Rise in the South Atlantic off of the coast of Brazil is a
volcanic oceanic plateau that formed on, or close to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
spreading center. The Walvis Ridge, which is now located off of Africa, also
formed near the Mid-Atlantic Ridge close to the same time. The Rio Grande Rise
is about twice the volume of Walvis Ridge and together they record ~130 Myr of
intra-plate volcanism and are hypothesized to represent the products of a deep
mantle plume. Despite its extremely large size and prolonged volcanic history,
Rio Grande Rise truly is terra incognita. Based on the few rock samples
available, it appears that Rio Grande Rise formed between 70 and 90 million
years ago at the same time as the older part of Walvis Ridge. To understand the
history of these large volcanic features, this project will carry out a seagoing
cruise to the Rio Grande Rise to survey and collect rock samples from 40
seamounts, rift zone valleys and steep escarpments. These new data will allow a
thorough investigation of the formation of the Rio Grande Rise and its
relationship to the Walvis Ridge where rock samples have already been collected.
The new data will also provide a unique opportunity to address a wide range of
questions relating to plate tectonics, including how the Rio Grande Rise is
related to the deep dense mantle zone of the African large low shear wave
velocity province (LLSVP) which is thought to be a place where mantle plumes are
generated. This project is in collaboration with Brazilian scientists and
students. The project supports the training of U.S. graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly collected
geochronological, geochemical and geophysical data will contribute significantly
to the following two major science questions: (1) Is Rio Grande Rise shaped by
plume dynamics, shallow tectonics or both and what are the consequences for
understanding hotspot evolution? (2) What are the mantle sources related to the
deep dense mantle zone of the African large low shear wave velocity province
(LLSVP)? Determining when Rio Grande Rise and Walvis Ridge volcanism became
associated with intra-plate hotspot volcanism alone is fundamental as these
volcanic traces are essential for calculating African absolute plate motion and
global plate circuit models back to 130 million years. Moreover, if the large
volume of the Rio Grande Rise-Walvis Ridge system and its source link back to
the edge of the LLSVP, this will provide a unique possibility to investigate
whether their extreme enriched composition represents a major component in the
lower mantle.