* 1558209
* I-Corps:  AdsProphet: Full-screen Delay-aware Mobile Ads Display
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Yan Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Mobile advertising is a large and quickly growing market, driven by the movement
of viewing traffic and advertising dollars from other media to mobile. In 2014,
mobile worldwide ad spending is about $40 billion and it's expected to top
nearly $200 billion in 2019. Among all the hundreds of thousands of app
developers operating today, 90% of which offer free apps that create revenues
through "in-app" advertising: they get paid when a user clicks on an ad embedded
in their apps. Nowadays, these app developers have to play banner ad in their
apps, which is a small-sized ad form that usually runs at the bottom of the
screen, attracting littler user attention&lt;br/&gt;and thus reducing
developers' revenues. The proposed technology "AdsProphet" is a novel mobile ads
library that is based on the observation that when user using apps, a lot of
time has been wasted on waiting for the app to load remote data and such
'freezing time' has not been fully taken advantage of. AdsProphet can find these
valuable windows and displays full-screen ads, which attracts user attention 25
times higher than what banner ads can achieve. This I-Corps team assumes app
developers can use AdsProphet to display full-screen ads at a rate of 10% of
banner ads, then AdsProphet is expected to double developers' revenue without
affecting user experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technique behind
AdsProphet is a novel real-time user-perceived delay prediction system on mobile
device. It's challenging to propose such a system: first, during each networking
delay,only a portion of it is user-perceived delay when user can do nothing but
to wait. There is no built-in event for it in any systems. This I-Corps team
proposes a novel approach that is able to intelligently&lt;br/&gt;detect user-
perceived delay by combing techniques of network behavior manipulation, image
similarity comparison algorithms and user behavior model. Second, the networking
condition varies dramatically and frequently on a mobile device: users move
their phones from place to place and connect to different networks such as WIFI
or cellular network all the time. Moreover, the prediction process must decide
whether or not to play ads in real-time; otherwise, it wastes the time to play
full-screen ads and affect developers? revenues. The team first proposes an
approach to predict user-perceived delay by designing a novel algorithm to
efficiently estimate bandwidth as&lt;br/&gt;well as round trip time to target
servers, both of which serve as the most essential indicators of current
networking condition. Then, to further accelerate the proposed prediction
system, the team proposes a networking history model based on user's history.