* 1558942
* I-Corps:  Light responsive nanoparticle depot for controlled delivery of drugs to the eye
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Rosibel Ochoa, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The only viable option for the treatment for many eye-related diseases involves
the injection of drugs directly into the eye (intravitreal injections). These
are difficult procedures for the doctor to perform and extremely uncomfortable
for the patients receiving these treatments. As a result, there are issues with
patient compliance and the risk of complications is high, both resulting in
millions of dollars inefficiently spent on secondary medical costs. Furthermore,
due to the fact that dosing is difficult to control, doctors will often use the
maximum "safe" dose when treating these diseases to ensure efficacy, which
unfortunately leads to strong and undesirable side effects from these potent
drugs. Therefore, there is a need for a technology which can reduce the number
of injections needed in the treatment regimen, as well as the ability to
accurately control the amount of therapeutic drug introduced, while maintaining
the same level of efficacy. These combined capabilities would relieve patients
from unnecessary pain and suffering, reduce the chance for complications, and as
a result, lead to increased patient compliance and improved clinical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most severe of these eye diseases
which require periodic intravitreal injections is the wet form of Age-related
Macular Degeneration (wet AMD). Irreversible vision loss may occur if patients
miss even one of their monthly prophylactic treatments. The proposed technology
"AMDepot" is a drug delivery platform based on a proprietary, light-responsive
polymer.Therapeutic drugs are loaded into the polymer in nanoparticle form, and
released in a highly controlled manner upon exposure to light. This system
allows the therapy to be administered repeatedly through the shining of a
specific form of light into the eye, significantly reducing the number of
intravitreal injections needed. The purpose of this study would be to
investigate and validate the real-world need of a technology which can mitigate
adverse effects from intravitreal injections by reducing the number of
injections needed and replacing it with light-controlled dosing. While this
technology could be useful in many disease settings, this I-Corps team will
focus its initial efforts in the realm of wet AMD. To accomplish this, a
detailed plan has been devised to interview some of the world-leading
ophthalmologists at top U.S. eye centers, as well as AMD patients in several
local support groups in Southern California to gain further insights into the
problem and to validate the proposed hypotheses.