* 1558587
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Small-Scale Shrimp Production in the Age of Industrial Aquaculture
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Bradford Dubik, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,925.00

This research project investigates how the emergence of shrimp diseases impacts
shrimp producers and global shrimp production networks. It examines how
environmental conditions interact with socio-political factors and development
policy to influence the production of the world's most valuable seafood
commodity. Shrimp diseases result in dramatic economic losses in regions reliant
on aquaculture and create high market volatility in regions that primarily fish
for wild shrimp, such as the United States. A better understanding of the socio-
political and environmental conditions that drive the problem of disease will
strengthen the food production economies of both types of regions, particularly
for small-scale producers who are disproportionately affected by disease
outbreaks. The project incorporates environmental and contextual factors into
commodities research, which has traditionally focused on the role of firms in
explaining how commodities like shrimp are produced. The focus on shrimp disease
is expected to help improve disease remediation management for shrimp farmers as
well as assist the identification and dissemination of effective responses to
market volatility for U.S. producers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shrimp are produced
in two distinct ways: (a) aquaculture (farming) in land-based ponds and (b)
traditional wild-capture methods. Most consumers in the global marketplace do
not differentiate shrimp produced by these two methods. As a result, the growth
of aquaculture has dramatically increased supply and caused a fall in global
prices for producers using both methods. This growth has been accompanied by the
emergence of diseases in shrimp farms, which have caused significant economic
loss and dramatic price volatility in the global market. Despite decades of
research, treatment of most major diseases remains difficult or impossible. The
problem is especially severe for many small-scale producers in both the U.S. and
Asia, who are impacted by the general fall in prices and lack the knowledge or
resources to effectively respond to disease losses or market volatility. This
project addresses these issues by asking what structural and socioeconomic
drivers lead to the emergence of disease in certain areas, how disease impacts
producers at local levels, and how small-scale producers adapt and respond to
disease. The research methods combine analysis of contextual historical and
economic data with interviews with shrimp producers and local traders in field
sites in North Carolina and Aceh, Indonesia. This approach addresses the "black
box" problem of commodities research, in which the consumer side of commodity
exchanges are well understood, but the social and environmental conditions of
production at the local level are not. Interviews draw on the investigator's
connections with producer groups in both regions to better understand production
relationships, livelihood strategies, and policy impacts, with an emphasis on
how they shape and are shaped by the emergence of disease.