* 1558205
* Choice, Learning, and Equilibrium
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Drew Fudenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 302,406.00

This award funds research in game theory that develops new ways to analyze how
people interact with each other in strategic settings, especially when people
learn over time from the results of their actions. The PI plans six different
research projects using a variety of methods; formal theory, numerical
simulation, and lab experiments. The first and last projects characterize
conditions under which evolutionary learning processes mean that behavior
adjusts relatively quickly to a long run outcome. The second will produce and
analyze a model of individual choice that is probabilistic and includes the time
it takes to make a choice. The third project will examine how people decide
whether to cooperate in a repeated interaction setting where they only observe
their partner's intention with noise, and so can not be certain whether a
failure to cooperate was intentional, and in addition people can make (possibly
false) claims about whether they intended to cooperate. The fourth project will
develop a new definition of equilibrium behavior in strategic situations to see
what sorts of incorrect beliefs about other people's play are robust to rational
learning when different people in the same role (e.g. "auditors" or "consumers")
do not directly observe what other people in their own role do. The fifth
project considers how people learn from experience when their beginning
understanding of the world is not quite correct (eg, when people work to learn
from misspecified models). The research will benefit society by developing new
theories and methods that can help us better predict how people will respond to
changes in government policies and business practices.

The research will help develop a better understanding of human behavior in
individual decisions and in interactive contexts. The research questions include
the following. How can the widely-used drift-diffusion model of stochastic
choice be improved to better match the observed data on the relationship between
choice probability and decision time, while maintain its link to Bayesian
optimization? What happens when the model is generalized to allow time-varying
costs or other signal structures? What happens when people are trying to learn
their optimal actions, and are prepared to tradeoff a lower current expected
payoff for a more informative signal, but misperceive the information value of
their actions because their model is mis-specified? What are the implications of
learning with recency bias- the tendency to rely mostly on recent observations-
for which Nash equilibria will be observed? When do evolutionary or learning
models converge quickly enough that that their asymptotic behavior in large
populations is relevant, and how does this relate to the amount of randomness in
choice? When will players truthfully report their intended play when their
actions are observed with error, and when will others learn to trust these
cheap-talk and possibly false reports? What are the long-run implications of
rational learning when players know their opponents' payoff functions and also
know the sorts of observations (e.g. bids, values, etc.) that other players see
but not their actual data? The project will be strengthen ties between
economists and psychologists interested in either recency bias or the drift-
diffusion model, and between economists and computer scientists interested in
learning in games. Taking a longer term view, the proposed research may enhance
our understanding of how and when reciprocal altruism leads to cooperation; this
is of fundamental importance in many branches of social science and is also a
key issue in evolutionary biology. Likewise, better understanding the
foundations of stochastic choice is a fundamental issue in cognitive psychology
and computational neuroscience.