* 1558929
* Collaborative Research: Understanding lay theories of environmental change and adaptation in southern Appalachia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Meredith Welch-Devine, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 94,297.00

Collaborative Research: Understanding Lay Theories of Environmental Change,
Climate Change, and Adaptation in Southern Appalachia

The research funded by this award will investigate lay observations of
environmental change: how people who live in a particular place use their own
experiences to understand change in the natural world. The research will be
conducted by Dr. Meredith Welch-Devine (University of Georgia) and Dr. Brian J.
Burke (Appalachian State University), anthropologists affiliated with the NSF-
supported Coweeta Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program in southern
Appalachia. Drawing on more than 80 years of data, Coweeta scientists have
developed projections of future environmental change in the region and have
outlined anticipated effects on local biodiversity and ecosystems. Their
scientific findings provide a rich resource for local environmental governance
and adaptation planning. In parallel, local non-scientist residents of the same
region have gathered their own experiential data on biodiversity and change,
transmitting it across generations and developing their own theories of its
causes and consequences. Unfortunately, such local theories are rarely studied
systematically even though they can be contribute significantly to science and
to improved policy making. Place-based theories enhance science findings by
connecting broad-scale changes to specific locations and micro-level change
processes, as well as to the livelihoods, landscapes, and issues that move
people to act. Because lay theories can significantly shape how we as a society
respond and adapt to the changes around us, it is important to understand where
local knowledge comes from and how it is affected by local history, economy, and
culture.

The Coweeta region provides an ideal venue for such an investigation because of
the availability of comparative scientific data. Also, the region is home to a
mix of long-term and newcomer populations with different ways of engaging the
natural world. For some residents, nature provides their livelihood, while
others have been drawn to the area by its scenic beauty and recreation
opportunities. Recognizing that plants and animals are central to people's
experiences of their environment, the researchers have chosen to focus on
perceptions of biodiversity. They will construct a sample of 90 local residents
stratified by how long they and their families have lived in the area (multi-
generational residents, one or two generation residents, and newcomers). The
researchers will conduct life history and environmental interaction interviews
with all members of the sample. An additional 45 residents will be asked to
complete comprehensive freelisting exercises to elicit their cognitive models of
the natural world, which will be complemented with follow-up interviews focused
on changes in the freelisted items. The researchers will also conduct semi-
structured interviews with resource managers and environmental policy makers;
analyze official documents for differential inclusion of local and scientific
knowledge and concerns in policy making; and conduct participant observation at
relevant community events. Findings will document how local non-scientists
experience and understand the same environmental changes that Coweeta scientists
are measuring and recording. Parallel research, funded elsewhere, is being
conducted in France, Zimbabwe, and Cameroon; data will be analyzed at the
country level and then across the four countries through synthesis workshops.
The overall goal is to understand how perceptions of environmental change vary,
why they vary, and what the implications are for planning and policy.