* 1558356
* Collaborative Research: Hydrothermal and Microbiological Investigations of the Active Brothers Volcano in the Kermadec Arc
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Susan Humphris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 514,056.00

Nearly one third, or 22,000 km of Earth's submarine volcanic activity, occurs
along intraoceanic volcanic arcs. The volcanos and seafloor spreading centers in
these areas host significant numbers of hydrothermal systems that vent hot,
mineral-charged waters into the oceans and support unique micro- and
macrobiological communities that are found nowhere else on Earth. The chemistry
of hydrothermal systems found along interoceanic arcs differ substantially from
those located at mid-ocean ridges, with arc systems exhibiting strong magmatic
signatures. This unique chemistry, coupled with the shallow depths at which the
calderas of many of these arc volcanoes occur, result in highly acidic and
volatile-enriched fluids that are the precursors to economically metal-rich
mineral deposits. Because these systems are difficult to detect unless they are
come upon by accident, these systems are relatively unstudied and have
unexplored microbiological communities. This research will undertake a 20-day
oceanographic research expedition and shore-based laboratory studies of the
samples that are collected to characterize one of these unique volcanoes:
Brothers Volcano in the Kermadec Arc in the Western Pacific Ocean. This volcano
has also been selected as a potential ocean drilling site with science focused
on the development of a better understanding of active seafloor hydrothermal
systems and their circulation pathways. Goals of the present research program
include using remotely operated vehicles to survey and sample the rocks, vent
fluids, and microbes in the Brothers Volcano caldera. It also includes an
extensive heat flow survey to identify areas of fluid recharge and discharge.
Broader impacts of the research include establishing collaborations with New
Zealand scientists, graduate student training, support of two investigators
whose genders are under-represented in the sciences, and public outreach through
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's award-winning Dive and Discover
website. Presentations will also be made to the public as opportunities present
themselves. There is also the potential for the discovery of new microbiological
species with unusual metabolic pathways or enzymes which may have natural
products and/or pharmacological utility. The work also has the ability to help
us understand the formation of hydrothermal vent related sulfide deposits which
commonly are rich in copper, gold, and molybdenum. This research also
complements the science agenda of the NSF-funded International Ocean Discovery
Program and provides a critical site survey upon which seafloor drilling legs
can be based. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on documenting and
understanding the geology, heat flow, hydrothermal, and microbial
characteristics of the Brothers Volcano edifice in the Kermadec Arc in the
Western Pacific Ocean. A 20-day sample collection cruise will take place in the
caldera of the Brothers Volcano and will be followed up by onshore laboratory
geochemical and microbiological work. The research project will test five
hypotheses related to hydrothermal circulation at Brothers volcano. Work will
include documenting the heat and chemical fluxes coming from the caldera; the
role of low pH in these systems; and the influence of magmatic volatile-rich
hydrothermal fluids on rock alteration. Research will also involve determining
mechanisms and the extent of fluid-rock interaction and mass transfer of carbon,
sulfur, metals and metalloids into the ocean; the subseafloor distribution of
metals and associated mineral deposits; and the diversity and extent of
microbial life in an arc volcano hydrothermal environment. Brothers volcano is
ideally suited for such studies because it harbors two different styles of
hydrothermal vents within its caldera: (1) high-temperature black smoker-type
fluids discharging from Cu-Au-rich sulfide chimneys; and (2) moderate
temperature, gassy, acid-sulfate waters where native sulfur chimneys and
extensive Fe-oxyhydroxide crusts occur. During the cruise a mapping, sampling,
and observational program will take place, consisting of a series of dives by a
remotely operated vehicle to four distinct hydrothermal fields within Brothers
caldera. Thermal blankets will be deployed in the caldera around the
hydrothermal vents to measure heat flow and fluid recharge and discharge zones.
Coexisting minerals and fluids associated with the vents and the surrounding
caldera will be collected and geochemically analyzed. This research and the
resulting caldera survey complements other observational and analytical work
carried out over the past decade by NOAA, the National Ocean and Atmospheric
Administration, and its corresponding agency associated with the government of
New Zealand. One important goal of the survey work is to identify potential
sites for ocean drilling for further understanding of seafloor arc volcanic
systems.