* 1558044
* Building the Microbiome into the Hibernator Metabolic Phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2020
* Hannah Carey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 11/30/2020
* USD 635,307.00

The guts of all animals, including humans, contain vast numbers of bacteria that
appear to live in harmony with their hosts. To advance knowledge of how animals
and humans benefit from their resident bacteria, the ways that bacteria
communicate with their hosts must be understood. This project identifies the
molecules, called metabolites that are produced when bacteria digest food in the
host's gut. Bacterial metabolites can be absorbed into the host body where they
are used for nourishment, and they also provide a crucial communication link
between bacteria and the host's own cells. Besides using the host's diet, some
bacteria produce metabolites by breaking down molecules that are part of the
host's gut, which is normally a healthy process but not well understood. To
determine which metabolites in the host's body come from bacteria breaking down
food vs. the gut molecules, researchers will use ground squirrels that eat
during summer and then stop eating during their winter hibernation season.
Researchers will sequence the DNA of gut bacteria to reveal how their genetic
makeup relates to production of different metabolites that appear in the body of
summer and winter squirrels, including those produced from food or from host
molecules. Project findings will increase knowledge of how animals and their
bacteria communicate and influence each other during altered dietary conditions.
The project will develop educational modules for middle and high school students
to teach concepts about the role of gut microbes in nutrition and health, using
hibernation as an engaging and unifying theme.

A challenge in understanding host-gut microbe relationships is identifying
metabolites produced by the gut microbiota that are incorporated into the host
metabolome, thus potentially influencing host physiology. Bacterial-derived
metabolites originate from degradation of dietary substrates or from endogenous
compounds produced by the host. This project uses hibernation, in which the host
animal ceases feeding for long periods each year, coupled with experimental
microbiota depletion to identify bacterial metabolites in host tissues produced
from dietary vs. host-derived substrates. The bacterial metagenome, its
metabolic output (metabolome) and the host's metabolome will be assessed in
squirrels feeding in summer, fasted in hibernation and refed in spring, some
treated with antibiotics to deplete the microbiota. Microbiota capacity to
degrade a complex plant glycan and a simple sugar will be assessed through
breath responses to orally-administered 13C-labeled substrates and targeted and
untargeted metabolomics analyses of microbiota and host tissue. Bacterial
contribution to protein sparing during hibernation is measured using targeted
metabolomic analysis of 15N-labeled proteins incorporated after injection of
13C,15N-labeled urea. Bioinformatic tools will be used to construct a system-
based analysis that integrates the bacterial metagenome and metabolome features
of the hibernator host and its seasonally changing microbiota. Results of the
project will for the first time integrate the gut microbiome into hibernation
biology and produce new knowledge that can be applied to other animal-microbial
symbioses in which food resources vary over time.