* 1558366
* UNH/IAM Workshop on Advancing Wall-Turbulence Model Development and Implementation, University of New Hampshire
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Joseph Klewicki, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2016
* USD 9,950.00

Proposal ID: 1558366 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Klewicki, Joseph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks funds to partially cover expenses related to the organization of
the workshop entitled ?UNH/IAM Workshop on Advancing Wall-Turbulence Model
Development and Implementation?, to be held at the campus of the University of
New Hampshire, in November 19-20, 2015.&lt;br/&gt;While turbulence is an old
problem in engineering, it is one of the most important practical problems in
both the industry and the environment, since the majority of flows around us are
turbulent (e.g., atmospheric boundary layer, flows in oceans, in chemical
processes, etc). During the past decade, however, there have been
transformational advances in experimentation and simulation, and these have led
to the capacity to characterize the temporal and spatial structure of turbulent
boundary layers at unprecedented levels of detail. These advances can further
lead to our ability to control turbulence with profound impact in energy
consumption, pollutant generation and dispersion, transportation and climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;The focus of the workshop will be on areas that are very
research active, including i) Exact Coherent Structures; ii) Data Informed
Sparse Representations; iii) Quasi-linearized Models, and iv) Asymptotically
Reduced PDE Models. A goal of the workshop is to advance a deeper understanding
of the details of how the various modeling strategies developed recently in
these areas are pragmatically implemented. It would provide ample opportunities
for lengthy and open discussions that will usefully facilitate the understanding
by the non-experts on how their experiment and/or computation based research
might usefully connect to model development and implementation.