* 1558448
* Sustained measurements of Southern Ocean air-sea coupling from a mobile autonomous platform
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* James Girton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 919,417.00

The coupled air-sea dynamics of the Southern Ocean play a critical role in the
ocean?s transport and storage of heat and carbon dioxide and the response of
these processes to climate change. This project advances our capability to
observe air-sea dynamics under winds through a 6-month deployment of a wave
glider. The wave glider has been adequately demonstrated as a robust high-
endurance platform for open-ocean work and has begun to demonstrate its
capability for research-quality measurements. This project will advance that
capability by increasing our understanding of vehicle and sensor performance and
suitability for measuring air?sea fluxes of momentum, moisture, and heat.
Simultaneously, the vehicle will be used to study critical scientific questions
on air-sea interactions. The project will include graduate and undergraduate
student training and outreach activities through local schools, the Seattle
Aquarium, and the Pacific Science Center.

The main research topics addressed in this project are the spatial structure of
winds and surface properties in the Southern Ocean, the influence of surface
wave Stokes drift on Ekman transport in the upper ocean, wave modulation of wind
stress, near-inertial wind energy input into the ocean, and the coupling between
winds and sea surface temperature. The observations will be taken by a Liquid
Robotics Wave Glider SV3 autonomous surface vehicle instrumented for
measurements of surface waves, temperature and salinity, upper-ocean currents,
barometric pressure, and winds. Deployment and recovery will exploit planned
cruises maintaining the Ocean Observatories Initiative Southern Ocean array and
re-supplying the US Antarctic Program's Palmer Station. The sampling plan
consists of (1) three months near the Ocean Observatories Initiative air-sea
interactions buoy to study spatial structure and allow cross-calibration of the
various sensors and their responses to vehicle heading and wind and wave
conditions; (2) two months conducting a downstream grid survey across the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current towards Drake Passage; and (3) a month-long
timeseries in southern Drake Passage in the weak-current region between the
Polar Front and the Southern ACC Front before recovery from the R/V Laurence M.
Gould.