* 1559281
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Demographic Impacts of State-Sponsored Medical Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Sarah Phillips, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 6,830.00

Even though knowledge about the bio-cultural conditions of infertility has
changed dramatically since the invention of in vitro fertilization (IVF), the
most effective infertility treatment today, experiences with reproductive
technologies can vary significantly. Assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs)
such as IVF can be heavily leveraged and regulated by governments with
protonalist policy objectives; and depending on who avails themselves of these
reproductive technologies, those policies can have significant demographic
impacts. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, explores what social,
cultural, and demographic changes result from the use of state-sponsored medical
technologies by ethnic minorities faced with social pressure reproduce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safak Kilictepe, under the supervision of Dr. Sarah
Phillips of Indiana University will conduct research on the relationship between
IVF and ethnic-minority status. The research is situated in a context that
allows the researcher to investigate how infertile ethnic minority women living
in socio-politically changing environments experience their infertility. The
researcher will explore how ethnic minority women, who live in societies in
which women's socioeconomic status significantly depends on their fertility,
respond to and make use of government regulated IVF technology to achieve their
own reproductive interests and validate their own gendered identities as women
and mothers. The research will take place in Turkey, one of the world's fastest
growing and tightly regulated IVF markets. The researcher will conduct twelve
months of ethnographic research in the capital city (four months) and a
southeastern city (eight months) dominated by a Kurdish minority population in
Turkey. The methods include participant observation, interviews (with 108
individuals), and textual and statistical data analysis. Findings will be
disseminated to guide policy makers, practitioners, and scholars developing
education materials for, and/or making policies about reproduction and
reproductive technologies.