* 1559098
* Tectonics in the Western Anatolian Extensional Province from sequence stratigraphic modeling of multichannel seismic data in the Gulf of Kusadasi
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Celine Grall, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/28/2022
* USD 295,196.00

This project will accomplish two goals. The first part of the project will
create software for modeling stratigraphy, the layers of rock that accumulate in
sedimentary basins around the world. The patterns of the sedimentary layers, or
strata, depend on the complex interplay of changes in sea level, tectonics and
the supply of sediments. The model will be appropriate for modeling stratigraphy
over time scales of from 10,000 to millions of years, will be applicable to many
settings, and made broadly available for use by other scientists. There is very
limited publically available software for this type of stratigraphic modeling.
The second part of the project will apply the new software package to an area
off of western Turkey. This is an area where stretching of the crust is causing
the land to sink and accumulate layers of sediment. Mapping of the layers by
Turkish colleagues show a complex pattern of both subsidence and uplift of the
bay over the last 1 million years due to faulting. Changes in sea level that
shifted the coastline back and forth over the 100,000-year glacial cycles
provide a framework for interpreting ages of the strata. We will model the
stratigraphy to determine the tectonics and contribute to assessing the seismic
hazard of this region. It has been subject to recent earthquakes up to M6 and
historic earthquakes up to M7. The project will provide training for a young
Turkish scientist, and a U.S. undergraduate student, adding to their abilities
to quantitatively model stratigraphy and estimate
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gulf of Kusadasi is one of the most
seismically active regions of the Western Anatolian Extensional Province with
active fault systems expressing N-S extension, E-W compression, and NE-SW and
NW-SE strike slip. High-resolution Turkish multichannel seismic data image an
extensional basin, the offshore extension of a rift cutting the area, and two
uplifted zones at high angle to it. The preserved sediments contain thirteen
stratigraphic sequences composed of prograding deltas with shingled clinoforms
that have been correlated to glacioeustatic cycles going back to &gt;1 Ma. The
sequences are cut by faults with varied orientations, and they reveal associated
patterns of subsidence and uplift. These deposits can thus be used to quantify
the vertical motions and fault offsets, and thereby constrain the tectonics of
the region. The sequences, interpreted as due to the 100,000 year glacio-
eustatic cycles, provide a clear temporal framework for deciphering the tectonic
and sedimentary history of the region. We propose to use a numerical sequence
stratigraphic model to reproduce the stratal geometries and quantify the
vertical motions over the last 1 Ma. In order to do the modeling, we will
rewrite Sequence, a code for modeling stratigraphy at a sequence stratigraphic
timescale. The calculated subsidence will be used to estimate the extension,
after accounting for isostatic unloading by the extension and loading by the
sediments. The results will determine whether the area is undergoing pure
extension, pure shear, or a mixture of the two. The rates of faulting through
time will be estimated and will indicate if the deformation is steady-state,
waxing or waning. Quantitative estimates of deformation at this scale are
necessary to understand the complex tectonics of the Aegean-Anatolian region,
and to better evaluate the earthquake hazard.