* 1559045
* Conference:   An International Conference Focusing on Loess and Related Topics
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2017
* USD 38,000.00

This award will provide support for an international conference sponsored by the
Loess Focus Group of the International Quaternary Union (INQUA) to be held at
the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire in September 2016. The conference will
foster networking and collaboration among an international assemblage of
geologists, geographers, and soil scientists whose research interests focus on
loess, which is an eolian sediment largely consisting of wind-blown silt.
Because of its distinctive character and origin, loess has been the topic of
considerable research in geography, geomorphology, and soil science. The
conference will bring together scholars from around the world to share results
from recent research, discuss topics and issues of mutual interest, and provide
opportunities for scholars to explore possibilities for new collaborative
relationships. Although a series of conferences focusing on loess have been
convened periodically since 1999, this will be the first such gathering in North
America. The conference will provide an opportunity to highlight much of the
loess research in the mid-continental U.S. being done by U.S. researchers to an
international audience, and it will provide a venue within which many Americans,
who often do not interact directly with loess scholars in Europe and China, to
meet, network, and collaborate. In addition to facilitating interactions among
scholars from different nations, the conference will catalyze advances in loess
science that will enable better mapping and use of the distinctive soils
associated with loess, and it will promote research in loess areas that have
received little research attention in the past.

Many of the soils in the richest agricultural parts of the world are formed in
loess, which means that research about the geology and spatial properties of
loess provides important information about past geologic and climatic conditions
wherever it is found. The conference is expected to attract between 125 and 150
scholars, and it will be one of a number of gatherings preceding the annual
meeting of the Geological Society of America in Denver. The conference will be
conducted over four days, with two days in meeting rooms and two days at field
sites where scholars will be able to examine representative loess-based features
firsthand. Topics of special emphasis during indoor and field-based discussions
will be on fluvial and glacial systems as loess sources; on the role of loess in
regions with only thin veneers of wind-blown sediments; and on loess landscapes,
eolian transportational systems, and the concept of loess transport surfaces.