* 1559223
* Assessing the Effects of Human Activity Related to Sustainability and Biodiversity Conservation on Tropical Forests and Primates
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Peter Beck, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Assessing the effects of human activity related to sustainability and
biodiversity conservation on tropical forests and
primates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael D. Wasserman &amp; Peter A. Beck,
Environmental Science &amp; Policy, St. Edward's
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity loss, climate change, and
pollution are major threats to ecosystem functioning and quality of human life,
especially for societies that directly depend upon the local environment for
resources. Addressing human-environment interactions is particularly important
for tropical forest ecosystems. These ecosystems contain approximately half of
all living species, play an important role in climate change mitigation through
carbon storage, and filter pollutants from water and air. However, traditional
conservation strategies that exclude local populations have often been
ineffective leading to significant forest loss over the past several decades.
This NSF IRES research program will evaluate the effectiveness of alternative
conservation strategies to maintain tropical forest ecosystems and primate
populations, while also maintaining the livelihoods of local communities
surrounding the forests. Through this research program, underrepresented
students in the environmental sciences will gain international field research
experience. The investigators will integrate ecological and social research
methods to address questions critical to fields of ecology, anthropology, and
environmental policy, address current environmental issues such as habitat
fragmentation and biodiversity loss, and provide STEM training for
underrepresented students at two biological field stations in Costa Rica (La
Selva and Las Cruces) in collaboration with the Organization for Tropical
Studies. Students will work closely with Costa Rican field assistants and local
communities during their research, thus providing multiple opportunities for
cultural exchange. Interested Costa Rican university students will be included
in the projects and encouraged to apply for the master's program in
environmental management and sustainability at St. Edward's University. At the
end of the 10-week program, students will present their initial results to local
communities and Costa Rican scholars at a public forum and will be encouraged to
communicate their final results through peer-reviewed publication and
presentations at professional conferences. An additional end product associated
with this program and utilized by the IRES students will be a fully functioning
laboratory capable of running immunoassays for quantifying primate hormone
levels in the field, thus transferring scientific knowledge and infrastructure
to a developing country. Results from this research program will provide
important insight useful to the design of policies for sustaining both
biodiversity and human livelihoods, particularly in tropical forest regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical forests are one of the world's most
important ecosystems, containing at least half of all species, regulating
climate, purifying air and water, and providing resources for local communities.
Nonetheless, over the past few decades widespread deforestation has
significantly reduced the extent of tropical forests, leading to declines in
wildlife populations that depend on them through habitat loss and fragmentation.
Primate populations have been especially affected with more than 60% of all
species considered vulnerable or endangered by the IUCN. Efforts to preserve the
remaining forests and threatened species dependent on them have largely focused
on creating protected areas, such as national parks. However, citizens often
rely heavily on natural resources for subsistence and environmental laws are
regularly breached in developing countries, thus weakening the effectiveness of
protected areas. As a result, conservation policies have evolved from
exclusionary protected areas to strategies that focus on local communities by
providing economic and other incentives. Despite the increasing promotion of
community-based alternatives by both scholars and practitioners, little evidence
exists that they are any more effective than protected areas at maintaining
forest quality or sustaining primate populations. Therefore, this NSF IRES
research program has two main objectives: 1. To quantify how policies
integrating conservation and development objectives, such as ecotourism,
academic research activities, and multiple-use protected areas, influence
tropical forests and their primates, as well as how effective these
environmental policies are at maintaining human livelihoods. 2. To provide
international field research experience to underrepresented students in the
environmental sciences. To meet these objectives, student projects will examine
differences in forest condition (e.g., fragment size, % canopy cover, carbon
storage, diversity) and primate biology (i.e., physiology, behavior, population
size) across a number of forests at and surrounding Las Cruces and La Selva
Biological Stations in Costa Rica that are protected for various objectives
(i.e., ecotourism, research, national conservation). Students will also examine
the effects of these strategies on local community livelihoods and how this
influences local perception of environmental policy. Specifically, 15 ten-week
independent master's student research projects will occur across a three-year
period to survey primate populations, quantify behavior, measure primate fecal
hormone levels with immunoassays in country (an environmental endocrinology
laboratory will be established in Costa Rica), conduct interviews and surveys of
local landowners, other stakeholders, and tourists, and quantify forest
characteristics. By examining interactions between people, parks, and primates
through independent, yet interrelated, student projects, we will be able to
provide a thorough analysis of the effectiveness of private ecotourism, public
protected areas, and academic research stations to maintain livelihoods for
human populations and promote conservation of biodiversity. Results from this
project will add significantly to the knowledge of how economic, participatory,
and research incentives can affect conservation decisions and outcomes. As a
breakdown in either natural ecosystems or human society will negatively affect
the other, quantifying the effectiveness of various environmental management
strategies to maintain both biodiversity and local community livelihoods is
necessary to ensure that these policies are actually promoting sustainability
and conservation.