* 1559134
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Innovations in Geriatric Medicine and the Ethics of Eldercare Delivery
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Elizabeth DeLuca, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 17,636.00

Health care experts and policymakers are increasingly concerned with an apparent
paradox when it comes to geriatric medicine: while biomedical care is
increasingly successful in sustaining human life, the social and familial care
of older adults is in short supply. Global and national health initiatives have
expanded access to geriatric care for older adults, making medical monitoring
and treatment an important part of growing old. This project, which trains a
graduate student in how to conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific
fieldwork, explores how health care interventions for older populations shape
relations among the family, state and local government, and markets for paid
care labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine doctoral
candidate Elizabeth DeLuca, supervised by Dr. Michael Montoya, will examine how
shifting regimes of health and social care are shaping relations among older
adults and those who claim to care for them. The researcher asks how families,
caregivers, and municipal officials respond to social pressures and
technological changes in the delivery of eldercare; what kinds of moral and
ethical claims emerge in the negotiation of eldercare, and how those claims
shape the relationship between older adults, families, caregivers, and municipal
officials; and to what extent these eldercare arrangements rework relations of
kinship, politics, and paid labor. The doctoral student will undertake twelve
months of ethnographic fieldwork in two urban districts in Turkey. Turkey
represents an appropriate field site for the exploration of geriatric care
planning as the number of older adults is expected to double in the next fifteen
years. The specific urban field sites were chosen because the municipalities in
these districts have developed public health programs targeting the medical
monitoring of older adults who live alone. These districts also have relatively
large populations of adults over the age of 65. The researcher will conduct
extended participant observation in municipal services as well as in-depth
interviews with caregivers and healthcare workers, recording their
understandings and approaches to care and the aging body. She will follow
discourses and practices of elder care through homes, public health services,
and political and medical rhetoric, collecting information about how the
practices of care contribute to relations of family, state, and labor. This
study will provide a timely contribution to the global issue of social and
medical care for aging populations by illuminating the complex social,
political, and technical arrangements undergirding global demographic
transitions and the shifting regimes of care that accompany them. This study
also ethnographically investigates the recent development of "healthy city"
initiatives that focus on older citizens and will contribute to
interdisciplinary social science research on aging and public health. Findings
will also suggest how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of growing
infrastructures for long-term care and geriatric medicine, accounting for
diverse ethical and moral understandings of care, the body and the family. The
project also supports the training of a graduate student.