* 1559487
* IRES Collaborative Research: Student-Assisted Global Exoplanet Search (SAGES)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Phillip Reed, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2020
* USD 113,450.00

IRES-SAGES will train US undergraduate students to help discover and
characterize exoplanets, planets outside our solar system. Students will travel
abroad to receive mentorship from international experts in the most important
observational techniques for exoplanet studies. The students will then bring
their acquired skills and research products back to the US where they will
continue their investigations, train fellow students, disseminate their
findings, and develop outreach activities for their local communities and K-12
schools. The students? research will target gas giant exoplanets in close orbits
? so-called ?hot Jupiters? ? around especially bright stars. Although thousands
of exoplanets have been discovered, nearly all of our direct in-depth knowledge
of exoplanet properties comes from a handful of hot Jupiters orbiting bright
stars. Both the students? home institutions and the foreign institutions they
will visit are members of the Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope (KELT)
project, a global collaboration with a proven record of discovering these
important planets. IRES-SAGES will produce US citizens who are both globally
engaged and more rigorously prepared for employment in physics- and space-
related industries, advance the field of astrophysics research, promote national
and international interests in space exploration, and improve scientific
literacy in the US through outreach activities. The recruitment of IRES-SAGES
students will target demographic groups traditionally underrepresented in the
physical science fields.

Surveys for exoplanet transits ? dimmings of a star when one of its planets
partially eclipses it ? have been largely limited to stars fainter than tenth
magnitude. KELT was created to search for planets transiting brighter stars
through the use of telescopes specially designed to prevent image saturation.
Only about two dozen hot Jupiters transiting stars brighter than tenth magnitude
are known, but they are responsible for nearly all of the published literature
on exoplanetary atmospheres, direct thermal emission, and spin-orbit alignment.
Until more transiting super-Earths and Neptunes are discovered around bright
stars and technology advances to the point where we can investigate them more
thoroughly, hot Jupiters transiting bright stars remain the best sites for
individual exoplanet exploration. KELT has discovered several of these planets
through its global network of observatories and astronomers with different key
specialties. IRES-SAGES will leverage this network to train US students in the
discovery and characterization of these planets, as well as the wider range of
planet types targeted by the microlensing, radial velocity, and transit programs
of KELT?s foreign partners.