* 1559398
* Communication, Perception, and Strategic Obfuscation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Geoffroy de Clippel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2019
* USD 241,698.00

Project abstract

Communication is a key component of many aspects of economic activities, and
more generally of social interactions. Lawyers need to convey information about
the parties they represent; central banks provide information about the state of
the economy; researchers disseminate results from their work; job candidates
report their qualifications to potential employers; firms report their progress
to investors. Complex information requires effort both to communicate and
understand. Without resorting to dishonesty, an informed entity may be able to
mitigate the effect of detrimental information by making it more difficult to
decipher, for instance through information over-load or unclear language. While
the development of information economics over the past fifty years has greatly
improved our understanding of how information affects strategic behavior, many
models still overlook the complexities of communicating, acquiring and
processing information. The purpose of this study is to understand the extent of
communication between individuals when information may be difficult to transmit
and/or process. This project will clarify how attention and incentives shape
behavior in such widely relevant settings, and why policies preventing lying or
omission may be insufficient to address issues of transparency.

The project looks at the important interplay between communication, perception
and strategic obfuscation from both theoretical and experimental angles. First,
the PIs will examine the testable implications of a model of costly
communication and perception; that is, they will characterize the set of
observed behaviors which are consistent with their model for some underlying
cost functions. Second, they will show how one can build on recent developments
in experimental tests of rational inattention to test strategic obfuscation;
that is, they move from an individual decision problem to the complexities of an
interactive setting. Finally, they will test their theory experimentally using a
novel experimental design that highlights the impact of limited perception on
strategic obfuscation in communication games.