* 1559943
* REU Site: Natural Resource Science on Native American Lands
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Matthew Johnson, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 346,320.00

This REU Site award to Humboldt State University, located in Arcata, CA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of 2016-
2018. Students will design research projects on natural resource management in
close collaboration with faculty mentors from the Departments of Wildlife,
Fisheries, and Forestry as well as with collaborators from the Yurok, Hoopa, and
Karuk Tribes. Students will also participate in workshops on Traditional Ecology
Knowledge (TEK), responsible conduct of research, and how to get into graduate
school. Access to unparalleled nearby ecosystems along with excellent facilities
on campus and critical collaborations offer students opportunities to pursue
research questions unique to the region, but with broad application, such as
interactions between climate change and fire, forest alteration and wildlife
habitat use, using environmental DNA in water samples to monitor elusive
species, and the development of hydrological models to optimize water releases
from dams for important fish species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. The program is especially geared
toward American Indian and Native Alaskan students. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. In collaboration with local tribal offices and tribal
natural resource managers, this program puts scientific research in the context
of tribal natural resource management. Students will not only learn vital
lessons about the practical value of science, but will also learn that results
from collaborative student research projects can provide essential data for
natural resource managers that can influence land use
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available at (http://www2.humboldt.edu/REU/) or by contacting the PI (Dr. Matt
Johnson at matt.johnson@humboldt.edu).