* 1559410
* IRES: Philadelphia-Singapore Optics Research Experience for Undergraduates
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Michael Lim, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 220,956.00

Applied optics plays a critical role in experimental science and engineering
research in fields as diverse as atomic physics and fluid dynamics. Training the
next generation of scientists and engineers in cutting-edge optical techniques
is a national challenge that must be met with hands-on student participation in
contemporary research. Dr. Michael Lim of Rowan University will take 15
undergraduate students, between 2017-2019, to perform 10-week-long summer
projects hosted by physics groups at Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
Singapore. NTU is a top-tier international university known for its outstanding
science and engineering research. Students will have unparalleled access to
state-of-the-art laser/optical instrumentation and mentorship by Dr. Rainer
Dumke and Dr. Claus-Dieter Ohl, well known international experts in their
respective fields of atom optics and fluid flows. The program is designed to
immerse students in activities that include designing and constructing optical
apparatus, and collecting and analyzing data. Simultaneously, students will
build the communication skills needed for future international collaboration.
Through mini-projects at Edmund Optics, Inc., they will also connect their
academic work to industry, allowing them a first-hand look at the
interconnectedness of academic research and international business. A diverse
student cohort will be recruited annually from Philadelphia-area institutions
that include Rowan University, Rutgers University-Camden, Delaware State
University, University of Delaware, Bryn Mawr College, and Temple University.

Leveraging the strong optics education students at this consortium of schools,
the selected cohort will be assigned summer projects in the Quantum Technology
(Dumke) and Fluid Dynamics (Ohl) research groups, focusing on laboratory
measurements in either ultra-cold atomic physics or modern fluid dynamics. They
will run projects that use optical manipulation or measurement to study laser-
frequency stabilization, laser-cooled atoms near superconductors, pattern
formation in microfluidic channels, and laser-produced shockwaves in liquids.
This research may result in the co-authorship of refereed journal articles, and
all students will be expected to give presentations at scientific professional
meetings in the U.S. The scientific knowledge, technical skills, and experience
in global collaboration that participants acquire will provide a competitive
edge as students embark on their future career paths.