* 1559368
* IRES:International Research Experience in Nanotechnology in Japan 2015
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Lynn Rathbun, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2019
* USD 249,771.00

Nanotechnology is a world-wide research enterprise. It is essential for young
researchers to learn to excel in this environment. While science is universal,
the process by which peers do science by communicating with each other is not.
In this context, communication is about much more than language. Language is the
easy part as almost all scientists speak English. But issues of gender roles,
seniority, directness, and formality all differ, to mention just a few. This
International Research Experience for Students award supports five outstanding
U.S. undergraduate students per year for three years to conduct nanotechnology
research at the National Institute of Materials Science in Japan. The students
selected for this program are promising young scientists with an interest in
nanotechnology who have already successfully completed one significant domestic
nanotechnology training experience through the National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network/National Nanotechnology Coordination Infrastructure
(NNIN/NNCI) Research Experience for Undergraduates program. The IRES program
enhances participating students? scientific skills with a more advanced research
project while simultaneously building their awareness of international research
culture. This program uses anew qualitative assessment instrument for measuring
and increasing the impact of the research experience on global research
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;The National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS) is a
leading inter&lt;br/&gt;national research facility with a broad program in
nanotechnology. The research component part of the program concentrates on two
subfields of nanotechnology where considerable student interest is evident:
energy and nanobiotechnology. The five selected students will participate in an
individual focused research project under the supervision of a senior NIMS
researcher. In the energy arena, projects may include real time monitoring of
energy conversion processes, novel nano-photocatalytic materials for solar fuel
production, and development of viable thermoelectric materials.
Nanobiotechnology projects may include smart materials for biomedical
applications, nanobiointerfaces for analyzing cellular function, nanostructured
scaffolds for cell function manipulation, and immune system regulation through a
nanoparticle mediated DNA drug delivery mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is jointly funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering,
Directorate for Engineering Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems and Nanoscale Science and Engineering Program.