* 1559687
* RAPID: Scalability and Sustainability in Uncertain Environments: Recovery from the Nepal Earthquakes of April 25 and May 12, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 09/30/2016
* USD 46,327.00

Understanding recovery processes after disaster is critical to building disaster
resilient communities. As the frequency, cost, and scope of disaster events
increase, the need escalates for incorporating planning for recovery from such
events into updated plans for mitigation and response. This integrated effort is
essential at all levels of governmental jurisdiction: municipal,
county/district/regional, state/provincial, national, and international. Such
planning will identify the conditions that accelerate a community's cumulative
exposure to risk, the points at which this exposure can be interrupted or
slowed, and the sequence of steps that can most effectively and quickly restore
a damaged community to functional operation. Developing a viable model for
community recovery after disaster represents a global need, one that is
especially relevant to US cities like New Orleans that is still struggling with
recovery ten years after the devastating hurricane and flood of 2005. Other US
cities, like Seattle and Los Angeles, face recurring seismic risk, while Miami
and Houston anticipate destructive storms accompanied by sea level rise in the
coming decades. Charleston copes with both hurricanes and seismic risk.
Anticipating thresholds of risk as they accrue over time at different scales of
operation, and planning appropriate mechanisms for risk reduction and recovery
are basic strategies for designing sustainable communities that are resilient to
hazards, a national imperative. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) study,
carefully executed, will show the threshold points of decision that lead to
sustainable recovery and resilience in environments exposed to continuing risk,
and, conversely, the points at which a community's cumulative exposure to risk
threatens to slide back into vulnerable conditions that trigger other hazards,
leading to accelerated risk and potential disaster. Pre-emptive recovery
planning will benefit not only the community at risk, but the entire
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the criteria that enable communities to
recover from destructive events quickly in sustainable ways represents a major
intellectual challenge. This study of disaster recovery will be based on the
actual context of seismic risk in Nepal, and the issues that are involved in
incorporating mitigation of multihazard risk into disaster recovery processes as
investment for a sustainable community. The study will examine recovery from
disaster as a process that occurs at multiple scales of organizational and
jurisdictional decision making over a one-year period, from July 1, 2015 to June
30, 2016. It will analyze especially the uses of information technology as a
primary tool for engaging communities in their own recovery. The model draws on
three major concepts that have informed the study of organizational decision
making: collective action, or how people learn to work together; information
systems, or how information flows effectively within and among people and
organizations to guide informed action; and fields of action, or how values and
personal examples of leadership shape actions in uncertain environments. The
study will use different methods of analysis, including Bayesian influence
diagrams and system dynamics, to track the flow of information, influence,
technical change, types of knowledge, level of skills, and gaps in performance
that characterize a society recovering from disaster. The model, carefully
developed, will have a global impact for communities at risk.