* 1559984
* REU Site:  Re-Inventing America's Urban Water Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Richard Luthy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 354,450.00

America's urban infrastructure was largely developed in the mid 20th century, a
time of inexpensive energy, smaller urban populations, and less awareness of
environmental impacts such as damage to aquatic habitat and greenhouse gas
emissions. Many regions of the country are experiencing periodic water shortages
and historic droughts that have created unprecedented stress on water resources
and pushed re-thinking of water supply options. Such shortages, coupled with the
high cost of operating and maintaining existing water infrastructure, threaten
economic growth, social welfare and national security and underscore the urgent
need to transform America's water infrastructure. This Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site program at Stanford University, hosted by the
Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Re-Inventing the Nation's Urban Water
Infrastructure (ReNUWIt), aims to create a new paradigm for safe, sustainable
management of urban water. A unique interdisciplinary research experience for
undergraduates will immerse diverse and talented cohorts of students from a
variety of institutions, particularly those with limited or no research
opportunities, in ReNUWIt research groups, working on projects related to
managed natural systems and efficient engineered systems. This program will
increase undergraduate students' interests in pursuing advanced degrees in water
science engineering, with a particular emphasis on women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers undergraduates, in
collaboration with ReNUWIt faculty, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students,
opportunities to conduct hands-on research during a 9-week summer program, using
cross-disciplinary, systems level approaches that directly address the design of
urban water infrastructure and key knowledge gaps in water science/engineering.
The program will take place at the four ReNUWIt partner institution campuses
located at: Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, Colorado
School of Mines, and New Mexico State University. In addition, to conducting
research the students will participate in a range of activities outside the lab
to learn more about the wider research community and to hone the skills needed
to become successful contributors to the community. These include: 1) All REU
Meeting on the Stanford campus. 2) Weekly videoconferences with REU students at
partner institutions 3)Professional development workshops on technical writing,
oral presentations, career options. and ethics. 4) Interaction with members of
ReNUWIt's Industrial Affiliates Board and Innovation Partners. Products created
by the REU students at the end of the summary-abstracts and summary graphics-
will be displayed in the online ReNUWIt REU gallery for wide dissemination. Some
of the REU students will also present their work at national and international
conferences.