* 1559923
* REU Site: Aquatic Chemical Ecology at Georgia Tech
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Frank Stewart, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2021
* USD 326,377.00

The Division of Ocean Sciences provides renewed funding for a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program in Aquatic Chemical Ecology at
Georgia Institute of Technology, located in Atlanta, GA. The program will host
10 undergraduates during a 10-week internship each summer for three years.
Program activities consist of faculty mentorship, research training, educational
components (seminars, workshops), career advising, and networking activities
designed to immerse REU students in a rich and diverse research culture. The
central focus will be a research project that is designed, implemented,
documented, and presented by the student. The PIs intend to attract a high
proportion of students from non-PhD granting institutions, focusing especially
on recruitment of students from under represented groups and
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical cues mediate a variety of critical
ecological processes, including inter- and intraspecific competition, predator-
prey, host-parasite, and mutualistic interactions. These cues are used by
organisms to locate food, evade predators, select mates, launch cooperative
behaviors, construct social hierarchies, and choose suitable environments.
Altogether, chemically-mediated interactions have ecological and evolutionary
consequences at the individual, population, community, and ecosystem levels.
Georgia Tech will offer an integrated research experience in aquatic chemical
ecology. Faculty mentors will be selected from the Departments of Civil &amp;
Environmental Engineering, Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Earth &amp;
Atmospheric Sciences, Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, and Biology. A total of 30
students will conduct independent research projects related to aquatic chemical
ecology and will receive training in scientific communication and STEM career
options.