* 1559988
* REU Site:   Summer Undergraduate Research in Physics and Astrophysics at the University of Michigan
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* James Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2020
* USD 279,062.00

The University of Michigan Physics REU program provides a transformative summer
research experience for undergraduate students from around the country who
otherwise may not have access to a major research program. The first goal of the
program is to prepare the students for a career in the physical sciences. The
second goal is for the students to perform cutting edge research in modern
physics laboratories with active research groups and dedicated faculty. The
research areas include astrophysics and cosmology, atomic, molecular and optical
physics, condensed matter physics, high energy physics, nonlinear dynamics,
complex systems and nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU students work
closely with a faculty mentor on a carefully crafted ten-week research project.
The selected students are interviewed to determine their interest and are then
matched to faculty who are active in research in that area. The project is
defined based on the interest of the student and the research needs of the
faculty. In addition to the research project the students are exposed to a
variety of research topics and methodologies through a series of faculty
research seminars. Professional development is a critical part of the REU
program and students participate in tutorials on ethics, applying to graduate
school, applying for grants, scientific writing and giving scientific
presentations. Students engage in additional educational and social activities,
including safety training, machine shop and electronic shop classes, lab tours
and a variety of lunches with other students and faculty. These activities allow
students to put their research experience in a wider perspective, to build a
network of professional contacts, and to develop professional skills in a
scientific environment.