* 1559306
* Acquisition of a quadrupole ICPMS system for (U-Th)/He thermochronology and trace element analysis at the University of Colorado, Boulder
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* James Metcalf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 183,646.00

(U-Th)/He thermochronology is a powerful tool for constraining the thermal
history of rocks and regions. The technique can provide detailed insight into a
myriad of geologic processes, including the formation of both ancient and modern
landscapes, the thermal evolution of fossil-fuel source rocks, and the history
of asteroid impacts. Almost any geologic process that results in or from a
change in temperature can be studied with (U-Th)/He thermochronology. This
proposal will fund the acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICP-MS), a key piece of instrumentation needed to make (U-Th)/He
measurements, at the University of Colorado Thermochronology Research and
Instrumentation Lab (CU-TRaIL). The CU-TRaIL serves an expanding user base in
the broader Earth science community, and acquiring a dedicated ICP-MS will help
meet the growing demand for (U-Th)/He data. The new machine will be located in
the same laboratory space as the sample preparation facility and the He
extraction and measurement line, thereby allowing for much more efficient
analyses and greatly reducing current inefficiencies in laboratory staff time.
In addition, students and other lab scientists will be able to quickly
experiment with new and innovative techniques to increase the range of processes
that can be addressed with (U-Th)/He thermochronology and to improve the
efficiency and quality of the measurements. The speed, and versatility of the
new ICP-MS machine will also open up the possibility for new collaborations
within the Geological Sciences department, and provide University of Colorado
graduate students with invaluable experience and training opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CU TRaIL is currently equipped with mineral separation
and microscopy facilities, a quadrupole He system for degassing and measuring He
from minerals, and clean lab space for mineral U-Th spiking and dissolution.
This award will provide funding to acquire a new quadrupole inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) primarily utilized for U-Th solution analysis
for (U-Th)/He geochronology. The new ICP-MS will also be made accessible for
other types of analyses, especially trace element work on digested accessory
mineral, carbonate, and whole rock solutions, in which there is particular
interest in the Department of Geological Sciences at CU. CU TRaIL has generated
&gt;3800 sample analyses; developed external collaborations that include 24
senior PIs and 20 graduate and undergraduate students; billed &gt;$230,000 worth
of analyses; generated data used in at least 42 abstracts and 4 submitted
manuscripts on which a CU TRaIL member is a coauthor; and hosted a short course
that filled rapidly to maximum capacity. This successful launch of the facility
promises a healthy future ahead. However, the lab is now experiencing
intensifying demand for data from both internal and external users. The current
bottleneck to meeting this growing need is access to an ICP-MS to efficiently
generate U-Th analyses for dissolved mineral solutions. This access issue also
poses an obstacle to training students and visitors in this key part of the
method, and limits flexibility in running experimental solutions associated with
several avenues of the lab?s method development work. Acquisition of an ICP-MS
will address these research, development and training demands, and will lead to
&gt;50% increase in efficiency in this part of the analytical process. It will
also aid in achieving the lab?s twin goals of conducting innovative,
interdisciplinary, and high-caliber research while simultaneously serving the
greater Earth science community.