* 1559450
* IRES: Quantifying Disaster Risk Reduction Geographic Information Capacity with United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security and University of Bonn Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Parody, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Non technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This International Research Experience for
Students (IRES) is focused on quantifying disaster risk reduction geographic
information capacities. Each year, a cohort of five U.S. graduate students from
the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will participate in a ten-week
summer research experience with collaborators at the United Nations University
Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS) and the University of
Bonn (UBonn) - both located in Bonn, Germany. Highlights of collaborative
activities include student access to and learning from UNU-EHS, UBonn, and other
international disaster risk reduction experts, student research training
activities, spatial data set acquisition, and access to international scientific
networks only available in Bonn. The primary student research project is to
create and rigorously evaluate a Disaster Risk Reduction - Information Capacity
Index (DRR-ICI). A DRR-ICI currently does not exist. The scientific purpose of
the DRR-ICI is to quantify and evaluate how disaster risk reduction geographic
information capacities such as information availability, scale and relevancy
vary within Germany and from country to country. The project will advance
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning by
creating unique linkages to international organizations that will train, educate
and professionally develop the next generation of interdisciplinary STEM
research scientists focused on disaster risk reduction and GIS. Intellectual
products created by IRES students, such as the DRR-ICI, will provide important
benefits to society that can bring global attention to disaster risk reduction
research and GIS potentially saving lives when disasters occur. The project is
particularly strong in enhancing infrastructure for research and education as
IRES students will become part of both the UN and German disaster stakeholder
networks that are only available by being on-site in
Bonn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
create transformative knowledge on understanding the relationship between
geographic information capacity and disaster risk reduction ? an area that has
received little research attention despite the overall importance of geographic
information for disaster risk reduction. Student research efforts to create and
evaluate a DRR-ICI will make valuable intellectual contributions to
understanding (a) how disaster risk reduction geographic information capacity is
itself a disaster risk factor, (b) how geographic information capacity can be
tied to geographic information best practices, and (c) comparing geographic
information capacities between countries and sub-national levels within
countries to inform disaster management decision making. The DRR-ICI developed
by students will provide practical, intellectual products for disaster risk
reduction teaching and learning that can transition into real use in the event
of a disaster.