* 1559356
* Eating themselves sick?   Ecological interactions among a mixotrophic flagellate, its prokaryotic prey, and an ingestible giant virus.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Grieg Steward, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2020
* USD 774,532.00

Phytoplankton support the biological bounty of our seas, so understanding what
controls their growth and death is one of the central issues in oceanography. In
much of the nutrient-depleted surface waters of the open ocean, the most
successful phytoplankton are tiny photosynthetic bacteria known as
Prochlorococcus. These bacteria are highly successful competitors for the
ocean's limited nutrients and commonly outcompete larger phytoplankton. Yet,
many larger types of phytoplankton persist in the ocean. One reason why this
coexistence may occur is that some of the weaker competitors called mixotrophs
have evolved a clever alternative strategy best summed up as "If you can't beat
them, eat them". In addition to directly competing for nutrients dissolved in
the water, these larger phytoplankton can acquire nutrients by consuming and
digesting their smaller rivals. The dual ability to photosynthesize and eat
competitors has clear advantages, but there can be hidden costs of this
intraguild predation strategy. While feeding on Procholorococcus, mixotrophs may
also inadvertently ingest giant viruses that are so large they are mistaken for
food. Infection is often fatal. Mixotrophy and viral infection are ubiquitous in
the ocean; however these processes are often understudied and missing from
traditional models of marine food webs that generally consider photosynthesis
and predation independently. In this project, the interactions among a common
mixotroph (Florenciella), its prey (Prochlorococcus), and a virus that infects
the mixotroph (FloV1) will be studied in the lab and field. This research will
also help guide the development of a cohesive mixotroph-virus-prey trophic
model. Improving these trophic models to account for more complex processes
could fundamentally change our understanding of marine trophic dynamics. The
project will directly support the training of a post-doc, graduate and
undergraduate student in inter-disciplinary science that includes field, lab,
and modeling activities. The project will support a major component of the
graduate student's dissertation and the progressive training of an undergraduate
student, culminating in an independent project. The concepts of mixotrophy and
viral ecology investigated here will be translated into a public display seen by
hundreds of children and members of the public. The PIs will engage a K-12
teacher in the fieldwork at sea through a "Science Teachers Aboard Research
Ships (STARS)" program and will recruit an undergraduate researcher through the
CMORE Scholars program at the University of Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advantages and drawbacks of a mixotrophic strategy will depend on the
availability of resources and competitors and the likelihood of viral infection.
The timing of grazing will be tested to determine whether Florenciella grazes
continuously or separates it grazing and photosynthetic activities by only
feeding at night. Prey preferences of Florenciella will be tested in competitive
grazing experiments offering Prochlorococcus as prey in the presence of varying
amounts of other bacteria and cyanobacteria. Electron microscopy will be used to
determine whether prey and virus enter Florenciella by the same pathway and
whether the presence of prey competitively interferes with viral infection. The
kinetics of grazing by Florenciella and infection of Florenciella by FloV1 will
be quantified. The results from these lab experiments will be used to
parameterize a numerical model. The model will be used to answer questions and
make predictions about the dynamics of the mixotroph-virus-prey system and those
predictions will be compared to field data. Collectivity, these observational,
experimental and quantitative analyses will provide a detailed exploration of
the ecological complexity hidden at the base of the marine food web.