* 1559816
* REU Site: CSHL NSF-REU Bioinformatics and Computational Neuroscience Summer Undergraduate Program
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Michael Schatz, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 458,317.00

This REU Site award to Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL), located in Cold
Spring Harbor, NY, will support the training of ten students for ten weeks
during the summers of 2016-2018. This award is supported by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and
the Division for Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for Mathematics and
Physical Sciences (MPS).CSHL's REU in Bioinformatics and Computational
Neuroscience (BCN) provides participants with an exceptional research
experience, integrating genomics and neuroscience through shared analysis tools.
Spanning genomes, cells, organisms and the brain, the program trains students to
approach complex biological systems quantitatively. Students conduct full-time,
independent research under the mentorship of one of CSHL's approximately 50
faculty members working in genomics, quantitative biology, and neuroscience.
Participants have access to state-of-the-art technologies, such as high-
throughput sequencing and two-photon imaging, and attend lab meetings and
research seminars. The REU curriculum includes workshops on quantitative
techniques, responsible conduct of research, scientific communication, and
scientific careers. The REU culminates with a symposium in which participants
present their work to CSHL's scientific community. Students are housed on CSHL's
110-acre campus, within walking distance of laboratories and dining halls.
Participants receive room and board and a summer stipend and have access to
campus amenities. Students apply online, supplying a personal statement, two
letters of recommendation, and academic records. REU participants are selected
based on academics, motivation, and demonstrated potential.

It is anticipated that 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or those from underrepresented groups, will be trained in CSHL's
REU in BCN. Participants will learn to interrogate biological questions with
computational tools and techniques. Through the 10-week REU experience,
participants will learn how research is conducted. Many will present the results
of their work at national scientific conferences, furthering their identity as
independent scientists.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) is
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are
tracked after the program to determine career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.cshl.edu/Education/NSF-REU-in-Bioinformatics-and-Computational-
Neuroscience.html, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Anne Churchland,
churchland@cshl.edu), the co-PI (Dr. Michael Schatz, mschatz@cshl.edu).