* 1559772
* SHF: Small: GOALI:  Advanced Physical Inspection of Counterfeit Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/22/2015,07/31/2017
* Domenic Forte, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 398,096.00

Counterfeit electronic components create risks when incorporated into critical
systems and infrastructures since they are often below specification and/or of
substandard quality. There are several different counterfeit types in the supply
chain today: recycled, remarked, overproduced, out-of-spec/defective, cloned,
forged documentation, and tampered. Most of the counterfeit components in the
market today are chips that are not equipped with mechanisms to aid in detection
of each counterfeit type. Thus, detection relies mostly on physical inspection
and electrical testing. In this work, the main objective is to improve the
effectiveness of physical inspection tests which appears to be the most
promising way of detecting all types of counterfeits. In this project,
exhaustive characterization of counterfeit and authentic ICs is being performed
in order to develop targeted defect taxonomies and a database of defect
measurements for the research community. For the first time, counterfeit defects
are quantified in order to develop algorithms that automatically classify
suspect ICs as counterfeit or authentic In addition the PIs are developing novel
non-destructive characterization techniques which shall reduce test time
significantly. Artifacts that will be shared include sample images and
measurements of all defects found as well as aggregated information related to
frequency of defects, mapping of defects to counterfeit type, etc. Since the
proposed methods will be able to detect counterfeits of all types of
microprocessors, application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS), and analog
devices, many critical applications within automotive, military, medical, and
transportation systems will benefit from this research. Finally, benefits for
society include trustworthy electronics for healthcare and dependable computing
platforms for intelligence, weather forecasting, financial transactions,
military systems, cyber physical systems, and so forth.