* 1559312
* Collaborative Research: pH Dynamics and Interactive Effects of Multiple Processes in a River-Dominated Eutrophic Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Nancy Rabalais, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2020
* USD 177,417.00

Ocean acidification (OA) refers to the lowering of ocean pH (or increasing
acidity) due to uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). A great deal of
research has been done to understand how the open ocean is influenced by OA, but
coastal systems have received little attention. In the northern Gulf of Mexico
(nGOM) shelf region, pH in bottom waters can measure up to 0.45 units less than
the pH of the pre-industrial surface ocean, in comparison to the 0.1 overall pH
decrease across the entire ocean. Carbonate chemistry in the ocean is greatly
influenced by even small changes in pH, so these seemingly minor changes lead to
much greater impacts on the biology and chemistry of the ocean. The researchers
plan to study coastal OA in the nGOM, a region subject to high inputs of
nutrients from the Mississippi River. These inputs of anthropogenic nitrogen
mostly derived from fertilizers leads to increased respiration rates which
decreases oxygen concentrations in the water column to the point of hypoxia in
the summer. This study will inform us how OA in coastal waters subject to
eutrophication and hypoxia will impact the chemistry and biology of the region.
The researchers are dedicated to outreach programs in the Gulf and east coast
regions, interacting with K-12 students and teachers, undergraduate/graduate
student training, and various outreach efforts (family workshops on OA, lectures
for the public and federal, state, and local representatives). Also, a project
website will be created to disseminate the research results to a wider audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased uptakes of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) by
the ocean has led to a 0.1 unit decrease in seawater pH and carbonate mineral
saturation state, a process known as Ocean Acidification (OA), which threatens
the heath of marine organisms, alters marine ecosystems, and biogeochemical
processes. Considerable attention has been focused on understanding the impact
of OA on the open ocean but less attention has been given to coastal regions.
Recent studies indicate that pH in bottom waters of the northern Gulf of Mexico
(nGOM) shelf can be as much as 0.45 units lower relative to pre-industrial
values. This occurs because the acidification resulting from increased CO2
inputs (both atmospheric inputs and in-situ respiration) decreases the buffering
capacity of seawater. This interactive effect will increase with time,
decreasing summertime nGOM bottom-water pH by an estimated 0.85 units and
driving carbonate minerals to undersaturation by the end of this century.
Researchers from the University of Delaware and the Louisiana Universities
Marine Consortium will carry out a combined field, laboratory, and modeling
program to address the following questions. (1) What are the physical, chemical,
and biological controls on acidification in coastal waters impacted by the
large, nutrient-laden Mississippi River?; (2) What is the link between coastal-
water acidification, eutrophication, and hypoxia; (3) How do low pH and high CO2
concentrations in bottom waters affect CO2 out-gassing during fall and winter
and storm periods when the water column is mixed?; and (4) What are the
influences of changing river inputs under anthropogenic forcing on coastal water
acidification?&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research aim to further our
understanding of the processes influencing ocean acidification in coastal waters
subject to eutrophication and hypoxia both in the GOM and river-dominated shelf
ecosystems globally.