* 1559215
* Collaborative Research: CaCO3 Dissolution in the North Pacific Ocean: Comparison of Lab and Field Rates with Biogenic and Abiogenic Carbonates
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2020
* USD 532,818.00

Ocean acidification (OA) is the decrease in seawater pH due to increased oceanic
uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. The impact of
this uptake in the marine environment is lessened by the dissolution of calcium
carbonate (CaCO3) to calcium and carbonate ions, allowing carbonate ions to bind
free hydrogen ions that cause the decrease in pH. Researchers from the
University of Southern California and California Institute of Technology have
developed a new method for determining carbonate dissolution rates that work in
both laboratory and field settings. Preliminary data using this technique has
revealed a distinct difference in measured rates between those obtained in the
laboratory and those in the field. It is crucial that laboratory and field
measurements be standardized to be able to accurately study and compare
dissolution rate studies. As such, the researchers will perform extensive
fieldwork and laboratory to bridge the gap between these dissolution rate
measurements. Results will be widely useful to the ocean chemistry community,
especially modelers, wishing to study any aspect of ocean carbonate chemistry,
as well as paleoceanographers using carbonate material to study past ocean
conditions. Graduate students will be co-mentored by the researchers, and the
University of Southern California?s (USC) Young Researcher Program will allow
the researchers to involve local high school students. USC International
Relations students will be involved in the project, not only gaining scientific
experience, but also will learn the policy aspect of the
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) dissolution helps to
mitigate the effects of ocean acidification (OA) and is a key factor in the
ocean?s alkalinity balance. The researchers have recently developed a novel
tracer methodology which can monitor carbonate dissolution rates in both the lab
and field. This method traces the transfer of 13C from labeled solids to
seawater. Using this method has led to breakthroughs in understanding the
controls of CaCO3 dissolution kinetics, but it has also revealed that the
measurements made in a lab and in the field are not entirely in line. It is
crucial to be able to correlate these two measurements to be able to fully study
and understand the dynamics of CaCO3 dissolution. Therefore, the researchers
will extend their previous work to standardize the results of measurements in
the lab with those in the ocean. The North Pacific Ocean with a gradient in
carbonate saturation states will be used for the field study, and lab-based
experiments will allow the researchers to constrain variables such as pressure,
the dissolved inorganic carbon/alkalinity ratio, and concentrations of
phosphate. This research will further understanding of OA, the mechanisms
controlling carbonate dissolution, and how the ocean modulates its alkalinity
budget.