* 1559334
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Response Diversity and Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jessica Cattelino, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 29,900.00

Around the world, societies confront the effects of changing climatic
environments. Newspapers report melting polar ice caps, warming lakes and
oceans, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, expanding polar vortices,
worsening droughts, and intensifying super typhoons. In the face of this, all
nations, including the United States, are strategizing how best to evaluate,
adjust, and plan. Doing so, however, is complicated by the fact that although
change is global, its effects are experienced and responded to locally. How
people perceive the environment and its effects on their lives is mediated by
culture, language, and geography. Thus effective planning requires understanding
not only global forces but also local variability and the response diversity it
produces.

The research supported by this award will investigate response diversity in the
Philippines, a microcosm of environmental shifts. The Philippines has been
struck by a series of super typhoons of increasing frequency and intensity,
including Super Typhoon Haiyan in November 2013, the strongest hurricane to hit
landfall in recorded human history. The Philippines also faces altered hurricane
paths, rising sea levels, sinking islands, mass species extinctions, erratic
flooding, and droughts. It is the simultaneity of these developments and the
pervasive public awareness that has resulted, all in a single, relatively small
arena, that makes the Philippines an illuminating site for investigating
responses to environmental change. The research will be carried out by
University of California, Los Angeles, doctoral candidate, Bradley Cardozo,
under the supervision of Dr. Jessica R. Cattelino. Cardozo will focus on two
different groups with contrasting responses to the environmental crisis: (1) an
urban-based political organization, and (2) a rural farming cooperative whose
formerly landless peasant members are now experimenting with organic farming and
clean energy technologies. Cardozo will employ a combination of ethnographic
research methods, including participant observation in the daily lives and
activities of group members; structured and semi-structured interviews; and
sustained cultural immersion over the six months to be spent at each site. Using
text analysis software, he will catalogue his observations, interviews, and
recordings, identify themes, and chart key words and phrases, to delineate the
most salient and consequential features of these different responses to common
experiences. Cardozo's findings will contribute to improved social scientific
understanding of how people's varying perceptions and experiences interact with
common events. Much attention has been focused on the destructive physical
effects of the extreme weather phenomena connected to environmental change; this
project seeks to document and understand the social and cultural aftermath, as
well, and thereby to identify lessons for planners everywhere.