* 1559065
* A Study of the Adiabatic Dynamics of Buoyancy-Driven Eastern Boundary Currents in an Ocean with Eddies
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Christopher Pitt Wolfe, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 263,864.00

Boundary currents are found in the ocean on the eastern flanks of all the
world's major subtropical gyres. These eastern boundary current (EBC) regions
are extremely biologically productive relative to their small area. Their
subsequent economic impact on coastal countries has made understanding their
dynamics a high priority for the past several decades. Most EBC regions are
subjected to equatorward winds for at least part of the year. These winds drive
water offshore, leading to the upwelling of nutrient-rich water near the coast
and the formation of equatorward currents along the upwelling fronts. The
equatorward surface currents are often associated with poleward undercurrents
whose dynamics are still not entirely clear. Due to its magnitude and ubiquity,
wind-driven coastal upwelling has become the dominant paradigm for understanding
the dynamics of EBCs. In contrast, poleward boundary currents not subject to
longshore wind are also found along eastern boundaries, with the Leeuwin Current
off West Australia as the prime. These currents form in response to the large-
scale meridional gradient of surface buoyancy, which drives an eastward surface
current via thermal wind. This fluid downwells when it impinges on the eastern
boundary; the associated isopycnal deflection drives a poleward geostrophic
current. Since the meridional surface buoyancy gradient is a global and
persistent feature, this buoyancy driven downwelling may compete with wind-
driven upwelling along eastern boundaries subjected to upwelling-favorable
winds; possibly dominating the dynamics of these systems during seasons without
upwelling-favorable winds. There several examples of wind-driven EBC systems
that reverse direction and develop poleward surface currents when upwelling-
favorable winds are absent. The Davidson Current develops off the Californian
coast when equatorward winds relax in fall and winter and a similar poleward
current forms off the west coast of India when the winds weaken in winter. This
project will contribute to understanding eastern boundary currents, leading to
improvements in the numerical and conceptual models used to make decisions about
coastal management and those used to forecast events such as dead zones or
regional climate change. One of the main foci is to characterize the mechanisms
responsible for trapping eastern boundary currents near the coast in the eddying
regime. This is a long-standing, but still unresolved, problem in coastal
oceanography as the current hypotheses fail to explain the trapping of boundary
currents in the absence of strong vertical mixing and coastal topography. In
addition, this project may contribute to the understanding of inhomogeneous
oceanic turbulence. In addition, the graduate student involved in the project
will be trained in oceanography, modern approaches to the numerical modeling of
oceanic flows on large-scale computational resources, and analysis of model
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along their eastern boundaries, oceans
can have both wind-driven and buoyancy-driven currents acting in opposite
directions. When upwelling-favorable winds blow, the wind-driven equatorward
current may simply stack on top of the persistent buoyancy-driven poleward
current- this provides a possible mechanism for the formation of coastal
undercurrents. This project seeks to quantify the extent to which the buoyancy-
driven and wind-driven circulations interact and how the strength of this
interaction depends on external factors such as wind, buoyancy forcing, and
geometry. First, the dynamics of buoyancy-driven EBCs in isolation must be more
fully understood. It is not clear how the poleward currents are trapped near the
eastern boundary and what determines their width. Laminar models of buoyancy-
driven EBCs require either topographic features or unrealistically large
diapycnal diffusivities to trap the boundary currents, but quasi-adiabatic,
eddy-resolving models form trapped EBCs even without coastal topography. This
indicates that eddy momentum fluxes play an important role in trapping the
boundary current. Specifically, the investigators plan to determine the role of
eddy momentum fluxes in trapping buoyancy-forced EBCs. An important component of
this objective is the development of a representation of the effect of eddy
momentum fluxes on the EBC suitable for use in analytical or reduced-complexity
numerical models. Second, they will seek to quantify how the width, speed, and
transport of the EBC depend on external factors such as the large-scale buoyancy
gradient, diapycnal diffusivity, rotation, the &amp;#946; effect, and coastal
topography. In addition, the nature of the transient response of the EBC to
changes in the large-scale buoyancy gradient on seasonal and interannual
timescales will be examined. Finally, the investigators will focus on
understanding how the buoyancy-driven circulation interacts with the wind-driven
circulation under upwelling-favorable winds and determining whether changes in
the large-scale buoyancy gradient mainly influence the undercurrent, or directly
affect the strength and structure of the equatorward upwelling jet.