* 1559371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:   Attitudes to Genetically Modified Foods
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Paul Rozin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,696.00

Genetic engineering is commonly used in agriculture, but is also opposed by
many. The aim of this program of research is to understand the prevalence and
causes of opposition, especially moral opposition, to genetically modified (GM)
food. This research program provides immediate insight into why individuals are
opposed to GM food. It also illuminates how to begin a productive discussion
about the role of genetic engineering in the modern world, as well as the
consequences of moral beliefs for science communication more broadly.

A wealth of research has been devoted to understanding the causes of opposition
to GM food. Generally, this research has focused on rational or quasi-rational
factors, such as beliefs about GM food's risks and benefits, trust in GM food-
related institutions, and scientific literacy. This approach (which implicitly
assumes that consumers usually reason about costs and benefits to arrive at
their attitudes) remains the dominant paradigm in the study of attitudes towards
GM food. The present work expands the scope of explanations of opposition to GM
by applying established theories about sacred values and the law of contagion.
The researchers examine whether some opposition to GM food is a manifestation of
moral, sacred values, i.e., moral opposition, and whether this opposition is
related to perceptions that the process of genetic modification is disgusting
and contaminating. In a survey study with a representative sample, the research
assess the prevalence and correlates of moral and non-moral opposition to GM
food. In follow up experiments, the research manipulates factors related to
sacred values and contagion and examines the impact on moral and non-moral
opponents attitudes. This framework explains otherwise surprising phenomena
observed in GM opposition research, e.g., insensitivity to evidence about risks
and benefits of GM and generates novel predictions about factors affecting GM
attitudes, e.g., the impact of disgust and arguments grounded on moral
principles.