* 1559666
* Collaborative Research:  Evaluating Indigenous Strategies Of Multicultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Lee Panich, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 104,755.00

Drs. Lee Panich, of Santa Clara University, and Tsim Schneider, of the
University of California Santa Cruz, will direct a collaborative research
project to understand how Native American societies persisted under Euro-
American colonialism. While common understandings of colonial impacts on
indigenous peoples in the Americas have focused on depopulation and loss of
cultural traditions, archaeological research is uniquely positioned to offer
insight into the active strategies Native Americans employed to navigate the
changes of the colonial period. Archaeological data can be used to track
developments that are not well represented in historical documents, such as
long-term adjustments to indigenous social organization, mobility, and economic
connections. By examining how Native Americans drew upon existing social and
cultural patterns to negotiate increasingly complex interactions with Euro-
American colonists, scholars can better understand the autonomy exercised by
indigenous societies despite the challenges they faced in the colonial era.
Because contemporary notions of Native American sovereignty largely hinge on the
events of the colonial period, this research is directly relevant to broader
debates about indigenous culture change and the popular and governmental
recognition of Native American groups today. It is also relevant to
understanding the nature of multi-ethnic interactions which occur in many
regions of the contemporary world and how ethnic groups negotiate with and are
incorporated into nation states.&lt;br/&gt;The project expands the focus of
archaeological studies of colonialism beyond European settlements and first
contact situations to investigate how native people living outside of direct
colonial control selectively engaged with different colonial institutions over
time. Drs. Panich and Schneider, along with their research team, will examine
these issues on the Pacific Coast of central California, where local Coast Miwok
groups lived at the crossroads of the Spanish, Russian, Mexican, and American
frontiers. The research is designed to evaluate Native Americans' different
strategies for maintaining autonomy at four politically and economically
important village sites that were occupied from prehistoric times through the
colonial period. Data will be drawn from targeted archaeological investigations,
state-of-the-art laboratory analysis of archaeological materials collected
during the mid-twentieth century, a GIS database of regional archaeological
sites, and a systematic review of relevant ethnographic and historical
literature. Working in conjunction with the Federated Indians of Graton
Rancheria, the researchers will provide training in archaeological methods to
tribal scholars as well as university students. The investigators will work
closely with the tribe and local landowners to use the results of the project to
develop culturally sensitive stewardship guidelines and public interpretive
materials.