* 1559777
* I-Corps:  Developing Sustainable Technologies for Removing Contaminants from Water using Natural Zeolite
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Ivonne Santiago, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

World-wide, serious inorganic contaminants in drinking water are a growing
concern, particularly those resulting from industrial operations, such as mine-
impacted rivers and streams, because these may themselves be sources of drinking
water. However, current methods for the removal of pollutants such as arsenic,
fluoride, strontium, uranium, iron, manganese, hardness and other heavy metals
from industrial effluents are both difficult and expensive. Furthermore, these
systems are often not used because they involve high capital, operational, and
maintenance costs that require toxic chemicals, and produce solid residuals that
need specialized handling and disposal. This I-Corps project will explore the
commercial feasibility of a sustainable, simple, low-cost technology for water
treatment. It is based on the use of zeolite, a natural mineral that is abundant
and low cost. Removal by adsorption onto natural zeolites is the most
economically feasible technology alternative for treating contaminated water. It
is also anticipated that the zeolites and contaminants can be separated after
treatment allowing the re-use of the zeolites and marketing of the contaminants
for other industrial uses. The proposed technology can be used in a number of
settings and for a number of potential end-users, regardless of where treatment
is needed. It can be implemented at a central location in large volumes and then
distributed through pipelines or bottled. It can be used by individuals in small
volumes at a point of use or point of entry. It can be used by industries that
require treatment of controlled or uncontrolled discharges of wastes. It can be
used by industries that provide water treatment solutions for rivers, streams,
or ground water. Everyone is interested in affordable alternatives to providing
water suitable for human use or consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to develop an innovative technology with significant commercial
potential for removing heavy metals and other inorganic contaminants from water.
To achieve this goal, during the life of the project, the I-Corps team will 1)
scope and assess the potential for commercialization of the proposed technology;
2) articulate the value propositions; 3) compare the costs of existing systems
versus the proposed technology; and 4) determine methods to incorporate and test
proposed materials into new or existing manufactured filters/systems. The UTEP
team will determine the commercialization potential by conducting 100 interviews
and developing a business model canvas that includes building blocks such as key
partnerships, channels, key activities, revenue streams, and cost structures.
The team will test the proposed technology into selected manufactured
filters/systems and test and determine the potential for regeneration of zeolite
versus disposal. The project has the potential for both technical and non-
technical contributions. The proposed technology will provide individual
consumers, public utilities, and industry alike, with a simple and cost-
effective way to treat water contaminated with inorganic materials. Studies have
the potential to develop a cost-effective arsenic "litmus" test. Additionally,
the protocol derived from this project will be reproducible at a minimal cost in
developing countries by using regionally available materials, and can be set up
with a social entrepreneurial business model. Finally, the project will provide
a foundation to develop an integrated curriculum in Innovation and
Entrepreneurship (I&amp;E) in a minority Hispanic Serving Institution, such as
UTEP, to increase the number of female and Hispanic innovators as well as
underrepresented minorities in STEM.