* 1559933
* REU Site: EcoInformatics Summer Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Rebecca Hutchinson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 287,793.00

Non-Technical: This REU site will help support NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science in two key ways, by 1) providing mentored, high-quality
research experience to a diverse group of undergraduates who will become the
next generation of scientists and managers, and 2) making incremental
advancements in the field of EcoInformatics (EI). EcoInformatics unites theory
and methods of informatics (e.g. computer science, mathematics, statistics, and
engineering) with disciplines involving ecosystems and their management (e.g.
ecology, geomorphology, botany). A central objective of the program is to
increase the diversity in the STEM fields, and thus the project aims to attract
students from a broad range of ethnicities, cultures, and life experiences.
Students will spend 8 weeks at the HJ Andrews Experimental Forest, an NSF-funded
LTER site and "cyberforest," working in interdisciplinary teams. As part of the
program, participants will engage in professional development activities on
topics including effectively communicating science, ethics in research, and
career alternatives following graduate school. Research under this REU program
will focus on informational and ecological networks, applying network analysis
tools from computer science, mathematics, and statistics to better understand
ecosystem networks and their resilience to disturbance. Broadly, research on the
resiliency of networked informational systems and ecosystems following
disturbances is relevant across society, informing everything from the
management of cyber attacks to pollinators to flow releases from dams. The
nation needs a workforce of scientists, engineers, mathematicians, and computer
scientists trained to work in this area, and more generally to succeed in a
society transformed by the information technology revolution. This REU program
will engage and help retain students in field of STEM and develop skills to
solve contemporary environmental problems in a mentored and interdisciplinary
setting.

Technical: The overarching goal of this REU site is to provide mentored, high-
quality research experience to a diverse group of undergraduates, while making
incremental advancements in the field of EcoInformatics (EI). EI unites theory
and methods of informatics (e.g. computer science, mathematics, statistics, and
engineering) with disciplines involving ecosystems and their management (e.g.
ecology, geomorphology, botany). The objectives of the proposed REU Site are to:
a) Advance the disciplinary and synthetic, interdisciplinary skills of
participants, b) Develop professionals to lead and communicate science, c)
Enhance diversity in the STEM fields, and d) Develop novel research on networked
systems. Research under this proposed renewal will focus on informational and
ecological networks, applying network analysis tools from computer science,
mathematics, and statistics to better understand ecosystem networks and their
resilience to disturbance. Example projects will focus on how plant-pollinator
network structures achieve resilience in the face of climatic variability,
natural selection, and loss and fragmentation of meadow habitats, or how
statistical, mathematical, and computer science models of entropy can be
advanced and applied in investigations of how stream network functions (flow of
water, sediment, drift of aquatic insects) respond to perturbations. Students
will spend 8 weeks at the HJ Andrews Experimental Forest, an NSF-funded LTER
site and "cyberforest," with mentoring from an interdisciplinary group of
collaborating STEM researchers. In addition, professional development activities
will be delivered throughout the summer on a variety of topics that include
effectively communicating science, ethics in research, and career alternatives
following graduate school. This program will target qualified students who
originate from: 1) non-traditional backgrounds (first generation college, older
students), 2) under-represented minority groups (Native American, Hispanic, and
women students), and 3) academic institutions with limited research
opportunities in STEM. The integrated measurement and modeling research that REU
students conduct in this program will generate new, fundamental knowledge on the
stability and resilience of networks to perturbations, which can be relevant to
other networked systems in society. Furthermore, this REU program will help
develop the workforce of scientists, engineers, mathematicians, and computer
scientists trained to succeed in a society transformed by the information
technology revolution.