* 1559403
* IRES: US-Australia Collaboration on New High Strength, High Ductility Classes of High Entropy Alloys through Intermetallic Manipulation
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Lori Bassman, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 229,898.00

Abstract for proposal 1559403 PI: Lori Bassman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: IRES: US-Australia collaboration on new high strength, high ductility
classes of high entropy alloys through intermetallic
manipulation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Harvey Mudd
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional alloys used in engineering
applications consist primarily of one or two elements, with other elements added
in relatively small quantities to enhance material properties. However, the
inclusion of large quantities of additional elements typically causes alloys to
become brittle. Recent work, including that by American undergraduate students
working with researchers at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in
Australia and Prof. Lori Bassman of Harvey Mudd College (HMC), has led to the
development of novel metal alloys using a new strategy. These advanced alloys,
called high entropy alloys (HEAs), have carefully selected compositions with
approximately equal amounts of several elements and have demonstrated excellent
material properties. This project will greatly expand the range of combinations
of elements that can be used to create successful HEAs. With the proposed new
strategy will come increased promise for creating alloys with improved
combinations of strength, ductility and cost. During ten week periods in the
summers of 2017 to 2019, twelve undergraduate students will conduct experimental
and computational research at UNSW towards this goal. The lead collaborators,
Dr. Kevin Laws and Prof. Michael Ferry in the UNSW School of Materials Science
and Engineering, and researchers in the UNSW Electron Microscope Unit have
worked with HMC undergraduates for many years. They will continue to provide
students with discipline-specific expertise and mentoring unavailable at HMC as
well as extensive access to physical metallurgy laboratories, microscope
facilities and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the HEA field so far
has focused on identification of specific systems of elements that can form one
or two simple solid solution phases with high thermal stability and no brittle
intermetallic phases. In this project new HEAs will be developed by increasing
the ductility of intermetallic phases that occur in other systems. Through this
alloy development, the students and their UNSW mentors will refine the
fundamental principles that govern HEA formation and atomic ordering and explore
the deformation mechanisms associated with greatly enhanced strength and
ductility in HEAs over conventional alloys. The specific experimental projects
to be performed by HMC undergraduates include alloy design, alloy fabrication,
mechanical characterization and microstructural characterization. Computational
projects will involve first-principles modeling of alloy structures and
properties. These experiences will contribute to the maturation of the students
into confident, enthusiastic researchers who are prepared for science and
engineering careers in international research environments. At least half of the
participating students will be female, and underrepresented minority students
will be specifically recruited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by
the IRES program of the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.