* 1559812
* REU Site: Collaborative Proposal: Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2019
* David Grewell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,367.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The overall objective of this REU site project is to
provide undergraduate students with hands-on research opportunities to explore
the scientific frontiers of bioplastics and biocomposites within the context of
the industrially relevant research environment provided by the Center of
Bioplastic and Biocomposites (CB2). The project aims to attract and retain
students in STEM careers and to inspire national students to pursue graduate
work with a focus on sustainable technologies and materials. This 9.5 week
summer project provides a unique research experience and prepares undergraduate
students for the scientific and technical challenges faced in the nascent field
of bioplastics and biocomposites. Participants will gain a greater understanding
of and appreciation for the importance of sustainable technologies and materials
in meeting national renewable goals and the rewarding research career
opportunities available. The program builds on existing relationships with
industry already engaged in the Center of Bioplastic and Biocomposites both at
Iowa State University and Washington State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The NSF I/UCR Center of
Bioplastic and Biocomposites (CB2) was established in order to (1) to improve
the basic understanding of the synthesis, processing, properties, and
compounding of bioplastic and biocomposite materials; (2) to develop reliable
material characteristics data for industrial partners; and (3) to support large-
scale implementation of renewable materials. The overall goal of the center is
to provide the scientific basis for a successful transition from petrochemical
raw materials to domestic sources for polymers, in particular renewable and
biodegradable plant-based oils, carbohydrates, and proteins. This crucial
transition will reduce the environmental impact of plastic production,
manufacturing, and disposal and create new businesses and markets within the US.
This fast growing industry depends on a well-prepared workforce that is familiar
with research and development of plant-based materials and cutting edge
manufacturing technologies tailored to these materials. Students participating
in the REU focused on Sustainable Technologies and Materials will learn: (1) how
to conduct research as part of a collaborative research team; (2) how to present
and publish their findings; (3) the role of ethics in research; (4) the
scientific and technical challenges in the area of sustainable materials and
technologies; and (5) that research offers rewarding career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acknowledgement: This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.