* 1559647
* I-Corps:  Market Research, Customer Interviews, and Customer Discovery for Novel Cancer Biomarkers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Adam Godzik, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Bringing a drug from discovery to market can be a costly gamble in the range of
billion of dollars on average, potentially taking a decade or more. What makes
matters worse is that only a tiny fraction of potential drugs that are pursued
end up making it to market. Drugs make it or break it during clinical trials, a
critical step in the drug development process where the drugs are given to
patients to test if they are safe, and to test if they will actually have the
desired outcome (known as efficacy). Clinical trials are sometimes referred to
as the "valley of death," because so many promising drugs fail to demonstrate
their safety or efficacy in humans that they are tested on, and thus are barred
by the FDA from being sold. One way to improve the success rates of clinical
trials is find a way to predict, ahead of time, which patients will respond
favorably to a drug. A biomarker is simply a measureable characteristic of an
individual human that can accurately predict a property, such as drug response.
Hence, when recruiting patients for clinical trials, one can test for
biomarkers. If an experimental drug has a predictive biomarker, pharmaceutical
companies can try to select only those patients who have this biomarker,
increasing the chances that they can prove their drug works (has high efficacy)
during clinical trials, and ultimately increase the chances that their drug will
pass FDA approval and escape the "valley of death." This is important for two
main stakeholders. First, patients need more drugs to reach the market so that
they can be cured, as well as more biomarkers to help physicians prescribe drugs
that will work on them personally. Second, pharmaceutical companies want more
drugs to reach the market so that they can increase returns on research and
development, reduce drug-production costs, and increase their
revenue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting if a drug will work or not in a patient
before the patient has ever even taken the drug is still in its infancy, and has
been most adopted in oncology. Current approaches to discovering predictive
biomarkers revolve around using statistics to correlate mutations in patients'
genes to drug response. Yet, additional information, such as the fact that genes
are made up of different units or that genes are blueprints for proteins that
interact with each other, is completely ignored. Including this information,
this team has discovered new approaches to finding biomarkers even though they
are looking at the same data. This team's current progress has been almost
exclusively limited to publicly available datasets (such as The Cancer Genome
Atlas, The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia, etc.), but with this data alone
algorithms have been created to elucidate biomarkers and patented 171 previously
unknown biomarkers. This yteam has also created a non-commercial tool
www.cancer3d.org to allow scientists to access its analysis for their research
purposes. The team's goal is to gain access to pharmaceutical companies
proprietary data sets which they have generated as they prepare for their
clinical trials, analyze their data (or provide tools for them where they can
analyze it themselves), find new biomarkers for their experimental drug, and
license these biomarkers to the company. A strong predictive biomarker for a
cancer drug can easily help get a drug to market, help cancer patients
everywhere, and create significant value; biomarkers have been sold for tens of
millions of dollars. Through the NSF I-Corps program, this team hopes to learn
and improve on customer identification and discovery, customer interactions, how
to move from market research to customer acquisition, discover if the team is
offering a product that people will want, and ultimately improve and learn on
every aspect of commercializing a research project.