* 1559787
* REU Site: Clean Energy Bridge to Research (CEBR)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

In this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site, funded by the
Chemistry REU Program at the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Defense's (DOD's) Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate Research
Experiences (ASSURE) Program, Professor Christine K. Luscombe at the University
of Washington aims to accelerate the adoption of a clean energy future by
training a new generation of scientists. This site has a focus on recruiting
veterans and Native Americans. To this end, the Clean Energy to Bridge (CEBR)
REU leverages strong relationships with community colleges, which are important
pipelines for veteran and URM students, to recruit participants. CEBR engages
six Pioneer students (freshmen at community colleges) and up to three community
college instructors in a short 4-week Pioneer summer, while six Bridge students
(sophomores at community colleges) participate in a full 10-week Bridge summer.
The pioneer student pathway focuses on early stage students where research
experience can have a career altering impact. The Bridge program consists of a
10-week research experience supplemented with professional development classes.
The goal of the bridge summer program exposes students to research, but also
eases the transition from community colleges to a 4-year schools by allowing
them to arrive early on campus before the academic year starts. By having a two
summer-long programs with community college instructor involvement, CEBR
increases student recruitment and the retention of Native Americans and veterans
in the science fields, specifically in the clean energy
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy sector is one of the fastest-growing
components of the world economy. Continuing demand for energy and the creation
of renewable energy resources necessitates the development of new materials and
device technologies. With this in mind, the CEBR REU program is based around two
main research areas: advanced materials for energy (AME) and energy systems and
integration (ESI). Participants in the AME thrust focus on developing novel
materials for solar energy conversion and electrical energy storage devices. The
research includes organic and inorganic materials. The ESI thrust enables new
energy technologies, such as solar energy production and massive battery
storage. CEBR students work with ESI researchers to build innovative software
and hardware tools that accelerate the integration of solar energy and
electrical energy storage with the grid, enabling a scalable clean energy
future. Students are exposed to activities spanning chemistry, physics,
materials science and engineering, chemical engineering, and electrical
engineering.