* 1559927
* REU Site: Microbiology at The University of Iowa
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* David Weiss, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 269,052.00

This REU Site award to The University of Iowa, located in Iowa City, IA, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016-2018.
The scientific focus of the research program is microbiology. Each student will
conduct an independent laboratory research project under the guidance of a
faculty and a graduate student co-mentor from the Department of Microbiology.
Lectures, workshops and cohort-building activities will promote professional
development, familiarize students with graduate school and career options, and
provide training in responsible conduct of research. Students will present their
findings at a University-wide symposium and at regional and national meetings.
The program is open to undergraduates who are interested in scientific research
and are U.S. citizens or permanent residents. Recruitment will use both
traditional mailings and various forms of electronic outreach. Special emphasis
will be given to recruitment of students from demographic groups that are
underrepresented in the sciences and/or students from small colleges (including
community colleges) where opportunities for research are lacking. Students will
be selected based on academic record, letters of recommendation and potential
for outstanding research in the biological sciences. Post-program mentoring will
promote retention of students in the sciences, while tracking will assess the
lasting influences of the research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.medicine.uiowa.edu/microbiology/summer/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
David Weiss at david-weiss@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Linda McCarter at linda-
mccarter@uiowa.edu).