* 1559015
* Robust Counterfactual Predictions in Neoclassical Models of International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Arnaud Costinot, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 447,930.00

Economists and policy-makers rely on models of the global economy to predict the
impact that changes in trade policy, such as import tariffs, will have on
production, wages, employment, and consumer prices. These models are constrained
so as to replicate features of the observed past, but how exactly a researcher
imposes those constraints is notoriously difficult, and hence inevitably
uncertain and subject to debate. The investigators aim to address this problem
by developing tools that make the connection between model and observed
historical data as simple as possible given the predictions that these models
are commonly used to make. As a result, economists should be able to answer key
policy questions concerning international trade with greater confidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the challenges inherent in isolating quasi-
experimental variation in general equilibrium settings, the standard approach to
answering counterfactual questions in international trade is to rely on
Computational General Equilibrium (CGE) models. This project develops a new way
of constructing robust, nonparametric counterfactual predictions using CGE
models. This research builds on the equivalence between neoclassical economies
and reduced exchange economies in which countries simply trade factor services.
This equivalence is important for its simplifying power. In a reduced exchange
economy, competitive equilibria can be characterized fully by an analysis of the
reduced factor demand system that summarizes all agents' preferences over factor
services. Thus, for a number of counterfactual questions, like the welfare
impact of uniform changes in trade costs, one does not need the complete
knowledge of demand and production functions across countries and industries --
all one needs to know is the substitutability between factors from different
countries. The investigators therefore propose to develop tools, and collect new
data, aimed at estimating this substitutability. One such approach will rely on
measures of the factor content of trade. A second approach will rely on using
the observed data to construct the best possible nonparametric bounds on general
equilibrium welfare changes.