* 1559504
* Estimation and Inference in Nonlinear Models with Multidimensional Heterogeneity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ivan Fernandez-Val, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 246,759.00

The project will develop new statistical tools to analyze relationships between
economic variables using models with multiple sources of unobserved
heterogeneity. Accounting for such rich heterogeneity is important in economic
applications because the relationships between variables are expected to be
heterogeneous even among individuals with the same observable characteristics.
For example, two individuals with the same age, gender, and race can experience
very different returns to high school graduation on earnings. The investigator
will analyze nonlinear models with multidimensional latent or unobservable
variables, which allow for rich patterns of observed and unobserved
heterogeneity. They include binary and other limited response models with random
coefficients and/or factor error structure. The objects of interest in these
models are often summary measures of the heterogeneous effects such as averages
or quantiles.

Nonlinear models with multidimensional heterogeneity pose theoretical and
practical challenges such as the choice and computation of the effects to
report, and the quantification of the sampling uncertainty associated with the
estimated effects. This project aims to tackle all these challenges for an
important class of models estimated from cross sectional and panel data. More
specifically, the project will address: (1) summarizing and reporting effects in
nonlinear models with multidimensional heterogeneity, (2) developing the
statistical properties of distribution regression as a flexible tool to model,
estimate and make inference on quantile effects of continuous and discrete
responses in cross sectional and panel data applications, (3) deriving bias
corrections for fixed effects estimators of limited response panel models with
factor error structure, and (4) identification of binary response models with
multidimensional heterogeneity. The methods proposed will be illustrated with
several empirical applications from labor economics, health economics, and
international trade.