* 1559508
* Electrostatic Charging in Wind-Blown Dust
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,930.00

Electrostatic charging in wind-blown dust&lt;br/&gt;Daniel J. Lacks and R. Mohan
Sankaran&lt;br/&gt;Case Western Reserve
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) program will provide an international research
experience at the Lanzhou University in China for four students from the United
States each year. The intellectual merit of the work is to advance the
scientific understanding of electrostatic charging in granular systems, both
generally and specifically for the case of wind-blown dust. Electrostatic
charging of granular systems is ubiquitous and has important consequences in
both industrial and natural processes, but is very poorly understood. The
impressive facilities at Lanzhou University, which include a wind-tunnel and a
desert research station, offer a unique opportunity to carry out studies in a
controlled but realistic environment and increase our understanding of particle
charging in wind-blown systems. The broader impact of the program is to train US
students in research with a global perspective; China is an ideal location for
such a program, as the country has become a worldwide leader in industry,
commerce and scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of
the study will be to carry out measurements of particle fluxes, particle size
distributions, and particle charge distributions as a function of elevation in
wind-blown dust systems. We will also measure electric fields as a function of
elevation which will allow us to compare with previous studies, and correlate
with particle flux, size and charging On one hand, we aim to understand how
these electrostatic effects vary with parameters such as wind speed, overall
particle size distribution, and humidity, and on the other hand how the
electrostatic effects arise in natural conditions and what their consequences
may be on dust migration. Our strategy will be to: (a) develop and validate
methodology in laboratory scale experiments; (b) carry out well-controlled large
scale wind tunnel experiments, where wind speed and direction, as well as other
relevant parameters (e.g., particle size distribution, humidity), can be
controlled; and (c) carry out field experiments in the desert, where the
conditions (wind speed and direction, humidity, etc.) are not controlled and
will vary significantly during the course of the experimentation, but where the
results are most meaningful in regard to environmental and climatic
implications. Students will work in interdisciplinary teams, serving in
different roles throughout the project from designing experiments to carrying
out field studies, and analyzing data.