* 1559320
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Victim Compensation
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Erik Thulin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,949.00

Past research on victim compensation specifically has focused on empathy as its
primary motivator. However, recent research has found that, when someone
experiences a loss due to the violation of a social norm, moral indignation
rather than empathy drives third parties to compensate victims. This research
project builds on that finding to investigate the underlying motivation for
anger-driven compensation. Using behavioral games from experimental economics
and scale measures from psychology, this research tests the general hypothesis
that people compensate victims of social norm violations in order to signal
their own endorsement of the norm. This research advances the science of giving
by providing a more nuanced view of the psychological determinants of giving
behavior. This understanding lays the framework for further applied work to
increase voluntary assistance as well as norm conformity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
large body of psychological work has shown that compensation is driven by
feeling empathic concern for the victim. Compensatory behavior has been
explained as a form of efficient resource sharing through indirect reciprocity.
Recent research, however, has demonstrated that, when a loss is due to the
violation of a social norm, moral anger, and not empathic concern, drives third
parties to compensate victims. Given this difference in motivation from other
types of compensatory behavior, this result suggests a distinct psychological
mechanism underlying the compensation of victims of social norm violations. As
the punishment of norm violators has also been shown to be motivated by anger,
punishment and compensation may both be driven by the same psychological
mechanism and shaped by the same evolutionary pressures. In light of this
similarity, this research develops the norm broadcasting hypothesis: the
function of compensating the victim of a social norm violation is to signal the
compensator's endorsement of the violated norm. Adapting models of third party
punishment, this research explores two possible hypotheses underlying the
benefits that this public broadcasting delivers to the compensator, both of
which could simultaneously contribute to the emergence of this behavior. The
first is the reputation broadcasting hypothesis: by compensators signaling their
endorsement of the norm, observers will prefer interacting with the compensator
in the future. The second is the norm stabilization hypothesis: by signaling
their endorsement of the norm, the compensator mitigates the norm undermining
effect of the violation, increasing the likelihood that the norm is maintained
and, in the case of cooperative norms, increasing the expected benefit to the
compensator from cooperation's surplus generating properties in future
interactions. Using a series of modified trust games, the four proposed studies
test these three hypotheses. Because the finding that moral anger drives the
compensation of victims of norm violations grounds this project, the first study
replicates this result with monetary incentives. The second study, designed to
test the general norm broadcasting hypothesis, measures whether third parties
compensate more when they are being observed by others. The third study tests a
prediction of the norm stabilization hypothesis: that those who observe the
victim of a norm violation being compensated are more likely to obey the norm
themselves. Lastly, the fourth study tests a prediction of the reputation
broadcasting hypothesis: that people prefer those who previously compensated a
norm violation victim when selecting a partner for a game in a similar social
context.