* 1559845
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Transportation Electrification
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 386,033.00

This renewal of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at
the University of Maryland College Park (UMCP) will provide undergraduate
students with a strong academic background and research experience focusing on
sustainable transportation systems. Recruitment specifically will focus on
women, underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities and students from
colleges and universities where research opportunities in STEM are limited. All
the REU Site projects are related to the area of transportation electrification,
which acts as a common intellectual focus. The program will enhance the
practical and theoretical foundation of students in the areas of power
electronics, energy storage (battery, ultra capacitor and fuel cell), controls,
optimization and mathematical modeling of grid integrated vehicles, and
sustainable transportations by exploring creative, original, and transformative
concepts. Over 40% of green house gas and 70% of emissions come from
transportation which is largely dependent on one source of fuel, which is
petroleum. Electrification of transportation is one of the ways to become
independent of oil. The main broader impact of this REU program is ensuring the
highest quality integrated education and research to meet the emerging workforce
and educational needs of U.S. automotive and energy industries by educating
young and talented undergraduate students in this field. It is essential to
point out that since the transportation industry is going through a major
restructuring it is critical to train young minds in this field. The integrated
research and educational activities of this REU Site will certainly facilitate
this objective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this REU Site
program will engage undergraduate students in a 10-week intensive, summer
research experience focused on sustainable transportation systems. The primary
objectives of this REU program are to 1) annually recruit undergraduate students
specifically from underrepresented groups and institutions with limited research
opportunities, train them in basic research and provide laboratory experience in
transportation electrification-related engineering projects, 2) promote the
skills to become a successful researcher by providing insights into research
methodologies, self-discipline, team integration, reporting and exchanging
new&lt;br/&gt;knowledge, 3) expose students to the broader implications of their
research, 4) help students prepare for graduate school and define career
pathways, 5) integrate ethics discussion and training into all aspects of their
experience, 6) develop collegial interactions between students and faculty and
between students themselves, 7) increase the number of students, specifically
from underrepresented groups, pursuing graduate studies in the field of
transportation electrification, and 8) provide opportunities for participants to
present and publish their work with faculty mentors.