* 1559166
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Impact of Tidal Mixing on the Meridional Overturning Circulation of the Oceans during the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Gokhan Danabasoglu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 61,940.00

In the contemporary ocean, most of the tidal energy is dissipated on shallow
continental shelves, whereas a smaller portion causes mixing in the deep ocean,
which powers the Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC). Studies of paleo-
tides suggest that during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), due to the sea level
drop of about 120 m, this situation was drastically different and dissipation
was shifted from the shallow shelves into the deep ocean. This finding has
prompted the hypothesis that the meridional overturning circulation during the
Last Glacial Maximum must have been stronger. However, recent research results
aimed at quantifying the effects of this dissipation shift on the LGM MOC came
to conflicting conclusions, ranging from negligible effects to a large increase
in the MOC. This project seeks to resolve these differences and test the
aforementioned hypothesis. It will also provide the first quantification of the
effects of realistic, data constrained, LGM stratification on turbulent
diffusivities, mixing and the MOC. Other uncertainties will also be quantified
thus leading to a comprehensive estimate of changes in tidal mixing and its
impacts on the LGM MOC. Thus this project will lead to a better understanding of
the processes that control planetary-scale ocean circulation changes and their
associated biogeochemical cycles in fundamentally different climates. A better
understanding of the driving mechanisms for the MOC during the LGM has the
potential to improve its quantification with important implications for efforts
to quantify the glacial ocean?s carbon cycle and the resolution of the great
puzzle of the glacial - interglacial variations in atmospheric carbon dioxide. A
beneficial side effect of this project may also be that it improves the present
day simulation of tidal mixing, diffusivities and circulation in two climate
models that are widely used by the scientific community and influence the design
of future Paleoclimate Modeling Intercomparison Projects. A post-doctoral
scientist will be supported and trained in running and analyzing a tide model.
An undergraduate student will be exposed to research through a summer
internship. A conference session will be organized with the goal to bring
together modern physical oceanographers and paleoceanographers to foster
interdisciplinary exchange of ideas.

A detailed modeling study to investigate effects of tidal mixing on the present
day and Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC) will
be conducted using a hierarchy of numerical models. Simulations with a global
tide model will calculate distributions of tidal energy dissipation, which will
be supplied to two global climate/ocean circulation models to quantify their
effects on mixing and the MOC. Sensitivity experiments will explore
uncertainties due to different proposed parameterizations of internal wave drag,
tide model resolution, LGM stratification, floating ice, spatial variations in
sea level, and the vertical decay of mixing above the sea floor on the results.
Climate model simulations will be conducted with an intermediate complexity
model and a state-of-the-science earth system model. Present day simulations
will be evaluated by comparison to observational estimates of diapycnal
diffusivities and tracer distributions. The effects of different circulations on
biogeochemical cycles and isotopes of carbon and nitrogen will also be
simulated. Finally, the LGM model results will be compared to paleo-
reconstructions from available proxy records in order to evaluate the simulated
circulations.