* 1559867
* REU Site: Innovative Engineering Using Renewable Resources
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Susan Burkett, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 373,954.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Alabama (UA) Tuscaloosa offers research opportunities centered on innovative
engineering with bamboo to undergraduate students from institutions with limited
research opportunities and from populations underrepresented in engineering.
Bamboo is a renewable resource and has garnered attention in Alabama as an
agricultural crop that can play an important part in numerous engineering
applications. Bamboo cultivation in the U.S. is not limited to Alabama. It is
much more widespread in terms of farming and applications. Over 1/3 of the U.S.
grows bamboo as a commercial crop. The project intends to leverage this crop
because it is important but not limited to Alabama. The application areas
address global sustainability problems. It also has properties that lead to
promising applications and may be a viable alternative to slower-growing timber.
A wide spectrum of multidisciplinary research projects will allow undergraduate
students from multiple engineering disciplines to work together on problems with
broad societal impact centering around the use of a renewable resource for
various engineering applications that promote healthful and sustainable living.
While the project topics will engage students in multiple disciplines, the theme
is focused and allows students to work collectively on exciting and relevant
problems to advance their overall knowledge of renewable resources for
sustainability as well as learn how to advance discovery for commercial
purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this 10-week REU Site
program include: 1) training of undergraduates to work on problems with broad
societal impact; 2) developing technical and professional skills offering
increased future opportunities; 3) networking with fellow REU students at UA and
participating faculty mentors; and 4) raising student interest in pursuing
graduate studies. Students will be recruited nationwide using professional
contacts, programs such as the AL Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation, the Florida Advanced Technological Education Center, and various
listserv/websites.