* 1559073
* Collaborative Research: The Interplay between Debts and Entitlements
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Laurent Bouton, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 153,837.00

Governments at all levels make decisions about spending that have long-term
effects. For example, governments committed to large pension payments may have
difficulty in meeting debt obligations. The results can be serious: for example,
in the United States cities such as San Bernardino and Detroit have defaulted on
their debts. Understanding the interplay between the incentive to accumulate
debt and to promise entitlements is of crucial importance for understanding
these actual and possible future episodes. In this project, the investigators
use economic theory to analyze the political determinants of debt and
entitlements and the relationship between these two components of governmental,
fiscal obligations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a large literature on the
political economy of debt and many papers on pensions, there is almost no work
that studies the political economy of the interaction between debt and
entitlements. This project aims at developing a new framework to fill this
important gap. This research contrasts debt and entitlements in resource
allocations: debt transfers resources across periods, whereas entitlements
directly target the future allocation of resources. The investigators introduce
the study of entitlements into a dynamic political economy models, and analyze
the impact of entitlements on debt. The research also examines how the levels of
debt and entitlements change as the persistence of political power changes, or
as the political system becomes more unstable. The project further investigates
the determinants and the consequences of the joint growth in government debt and
entitlements since the 1970s. Moreover, this research develops a novel way to
evaluate fiscal rules that constrain the growth of debt and entitlements.