* 1559880
* REU Site:  NanoSAFE Multifunctional Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Lisa Holland, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 380,015.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU activity is to
enhance workforce development through unique research in nanotechnology and to
increase participation in graduate level education of women, underrepresented
minorities, veterans, and persons from economically depressed areas. REU Site
participants will be provided with interdisciplinary research opportunities that
focus on the discovery of advanced performance multifunctional nanomaterials,
which are designed concurrently with toxicity testing. This emerging area of
nanotechnology is significant to accommodate the dramatic increase in commercial
nanoparticle production. This is achieved through the development of enabling
technology and fundamental research to generate high performance materials and
address the environmental, health, and safety characteristics of nanoparticles.
This REU project leverages substantial research infrastructure as well as
ongoing WVU-NIOSH collaborative research in nanotoxicology. These initiatives
have accelerated research and education in the nanosciences in West Virginia and
create an exceptional nanotechnology training site. A total of 18 faculty
members from the WVU Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering,
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Physics,
and Health Sciences are committed to serve as research mentors as part of a
comprehensive training program that effectively fosters problem-solving skills
critical to intellectual and research independence. Participants learn about
communication, collaboration, technical presentation skills, resume preparation,
and graduate education. Collegial relationships are developed through team-
building activities and weekly interdisciplinary team meetings. Several
undergraduate participants will publish research results and all undergraduates
present their work at the annual WVU Summer Undergraduate Research Symposium.
Involvement in this REU Site improves the scientific workforce by increasing
participant retention in interdisciplinary STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;REU participants are
trained on research projects that support the design of safer and more effective
nanoparticles that have been characterized and assessed for potential toxicity.
The research activities focus on multifunctional nanomaterials and support
improved material design with attention to properties that impact human and
environmental health. The REU Site provides a diverse pool of projects through
18 faculty advisors each supporting independent research integrated within three
NanoSAFE areas of focus: (1) design and fabrication of advanced performance
nanomaterials, (2) biomolecular and inorganic material characterization, (3) and
toxicity assessment. These research foci support an iterative approach enabling
researchers to realize high performance nanomaterials that can safely support
manufacturing processes. Faculty collaborate across research groups and students
have access to cutting-edge technology in nanolithography, nanotemplating,
material self-assembly, electrochemistry, spectroscopy, microscopy, fluidics,
and unique tools required to elucidate complex facets of nanotoxicity. Upon
completing this REU experience, undergraduate students will actively contribute
to innovative research that advances nanotechnology manufacturing, while
receiving professional development throughout the 10-week summer activity
through workshops, speakers, and scientific conferences.