* 1559367
* Experimental Evidence of the Effectiveness of Mechanisms Designed to Increase Tax Compliance
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Benjamin Olken, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2022
* USD 101,134.00

Experimental Evidence of the Effectiveness of Mechanisms Designed to Increase
Tax Compliance - Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low tax revenues significantly
limit governments' ability to provide essential public services. Despite the
gravity of this problem, few systematic attempts have been made to design and
evaluate feasible, scalable ways to enhance revenue collection and public sector
performance. Through four related but distinct studies, this project will fill
this gap by examining the impact of incentive policies on public employee
performance, as well as the roles of citizen engagement and tax collectors'
ability on revenue collection. Given the critical importance of these issues and
the embedded and sustained nature of the researcher-policymaker partnerships,
the results will provide practical guidance on increasing tax revenues to a
large audience of policymakers worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there has
been significant work done on the optimal design of statutory taxes (e.g.,
Pomeranz 2014, Kleven and Waseem 2013), there has been less focus on increasing
revenue and enforcement within a given system of taxation. This project seeks to
explore enforcement and compliance issues contributing to the low collection of
urban property taxes and examine the effectiveness of schemes designed to
address those issues. The project consists of four studies. The first is a new
randomized trial that addresses tax morale and the willingness of citizens to
pay taxes. This component seeks to strengthen the link between tax payment and
service provision by eliciting taxpayers' service preferences and sharing this
information with their local governments. Localities will be randomly assigned
to either receive the information from this preference elicitation or not, and
those that receive it will be randomly assigned to allocate a portion of their
budgets based on taxpayer preferences or to spend as normal. Tracking revenues,
allocations, service provision, and citizen beliefs will provide a clean
empirical estimate of the impact of these schemes on taxpayer attitudes and
actual revenues. The next two studies focus on incentivizing tax collector
performance. In the second study, tax collectors were randomly assigned to
compete for preferable job postings based on their performance, which was
measured by the increase in recovery or the tax base. This design allows for
clean testing of the impact of these non-financial incentives on revenues and
collector behavior, which will be analyzed during the course of this project.
The third study will evaluate the long-term impacts of a previous study, in
which tax collectors were randomly assigned to receive performance pay for two
years based on revenue collection, audits, and/or subjective ratings. This
performance pay ended two years ago, and the current study will determine
whether this past period of performance pay had a persistent effect on tax
collection' information that can help design the optimal duration for and
interval between such schemes. The final study will analyze the impact of
individual inspectors' characteristics on revenues by using the overlap of
different collectors in the same region to separate individual from regional
effects.