* 1559505
* IRES Collaborative Research: Student-Assisted Global Exoplanet Search (SAGES)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Robert Knop, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 01/31/2020
* USD 135,702.00

IRES-SAGES will train U.S. undergraduate students to discover and characterize
planets outside our solar system. Students will travel abroad to receive
mentorship from international experts. The students will bring their acquired
skills and research products back to the US where they will continue their
investigations, train fellow students, disseminate their findings, and develop
outreach activities for their local communities and K-12 schools. The students'
research will look for gas giants in close orbits around especially bright stars
- planets known as 'hot Jupiters.' The students' home institutions and the
foreign institutions they will visit are members of the Kilodegree Extremely
Little Telescope (KELT) project, a global collaboration with a proven record of
discovering these planets. Participation in IRES-SAGES will prepare the students
for employment in physics- and space-related industries, advance the field of
astrophysics research, promote national and international interests in space
exploration, and improve scientific literacy in the US through outreach
activities. The recruitment of IRES-SAGES students will target demographic
groups traditionally underrepresented in the physical science
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surveys for exoplanet transits - dimmings of a star
when one of its planets partially eclipses it - have been largely limited to
stars fainter than tenth magnitude. KELT was created to search for planets
transiting brighter stars through the use of telescopes specially designed to
prevent image saturation. Only about two dozen hot Jupiters transiting stars
brighter than tenth magnitude are known, but they are responsible for nearly all
of the published literature on exoplanetary atmospheres, direct thermal
emission, and spin-orbit alignment. Until more transiting super-Earths and
Neptunes are discovered around bright stars and technology advances to the point
where we can investigate them more thoroughly, hot Jupiters transiting bright
stars remain the best sites for individual exoplanet exploration. KELT has
discovered several of these planets through its global network of observatories
and astronomers with different key specialties. IRES-SAGES will leverage this
network to train US students in the discovery and characterization of these
planets, as well as the wider range of planet types targeted by the
microlensing, radial velocity, and transit programs of KELT?s foreign partners.