* 1559989
* REU Site: Environmental Engineering Solutions for Pollution Prevention (EESPP-REU)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* John Atkinson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 320,138.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Buffalo trains undergraduate researchers to address regional and
global pollution prevention concerns within 3 themes: detection, source control,
and remediation. Inherent with pollution prevention studies is the potential for
societal benefits through improvements to human health or economics. Consistent
with the program's research themes, projects may identify pollutants that were
previously unrecognized, develop control technologies that limit air or water
pollution emissions, or remediate sites that threaten human health. Research
projects in this REU Site integrate engineering and science to solve pollution
prevention issues relevant to the Buffalo-Niagara region and the globe. Each
project is expected to have an immediate impact on environmental or human health
and/or the economy of western New York. Students from underrepresented groups
including women, minorities, and students with minimal exposure to STEM research
from local, regional and national colleges or universities will be recruited.

During the ten-week summer program students are paired with a research mentor to
conduct transformative pollution prevention research and make focused
contributions to faculty projects in thematic research clusters addressing
pollutant detection, source control, and remediation. These themes, considered
together, address the wider "Pollution Prevention" focus of this REU program.
Weekly group meetings of the REU cohort foster student-student communications
using training workshops and professional or social networking opportunities. A
community service program, piloted and improved throughout the previous two REU
programs, will continue to be implemented in this REU program to provide
concrete evidence of societal impact. A concluding Research Symposium, as well
as support for post-REU conference presentations and publications, provides
students opportunities to hone their communication skills, disseminate research
results and expand opportunities for knowledge advancement. The REU program
stresses its graduate school enrollment assessment by providing GRE prep
training to interested participants.