* 1559446
* Financial Intermediaries in a Modern Economy:  Risk Taking and Liquidity Provision
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Monika Piazzesi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 428,000.00

The research team plans two projects that analyze two properties of modern
banks. First, modern banks are exposed to risk not only through traditional
ownership of risk assets (loans and securities) but also through their trading
books, and in particular their positions from making markets in derivatives. The
research team will develop a new approach to measure these risk exposures that
uses regulatory data and the dynamics of interest rates. A second key property
of modern banks is that they, along with other intermediaries such as financial
clearinghouses, offer payment services to clients. The clients include
households, firms, and institution investors such as broker-dealers and asset
managers. Existing models of business cycles and asset prices do not typically
include these payment services. The team will develop a model of the economy
that includes such services and will use the model to quantify how inflation and
asset prices respond to monetary policy and economic shocks. The research funded
by this award will give policy makers and regulators new tools and models to
predict the effects of economic policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
approaches to the measurement of this risk using regulatory or stock market data
have not been able to compare time variation in risk across positions. For
example, the measures cannot be used to determine whether derivative positions
hedge other business. In practice regulators therefore rely on stress tests. The
new approach exploits the factor structure in interest rates to represent many
bank positions (including derivatives) in terms of simple factor portfolios. A
transparent algorithm delivers, for every bank position and every date, exposure
numbers that are comparable across dates, banks, and positions. The second
project builds a dynamic equilibrium model in which goods and services are paid
for with inside money provided by banks or clearinghouses. The model jointly
determines asset prices and inflation as well as the volume of payments. The
model includes data on payments and bank positions and uses the data to make
quantitative predictions.