* 1559717
* EAGER: Transformative Modeling Studies of Magnetosphere-Ionosphere/Thermosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2017
* Paul Song, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 11/30/2017
* USD 296,683.00

The space environment surrounding the Earth is extremely dynamic, responding
rapidly to the changing plasma and electromagnetic fields arriving from the Sun.
Storms in space can trigger explosively (like earthquakes and volcanoes),
driving strong electric currents through the upper atmosphere, which induce
currents in the solid earth that can disrupt power grids; redistributing the
charged particles within the embedded layers of the ionosphere, which can
interfere with GPS navigation systems; and heating the upper atmosphere, which
increases drag degrading the orbits of satellites. Global models of the high-
altitude geospace environment are electromagnetic in nature and can follow these
rapid changes in the magnetic fields and currents surrounding Earth, not so
models of the magnetically coupled lower altitude ionosphere/upper atmosphere,
which are electrostatic in nature. This proposal is focused on the development
of a first-of-its-kind global electromagnetic model of the ionosphere/upper
atmosphere system that, if successful will ultimately be incorporated into next-
generation space weather models. This project is appropriate for the EAGER
program. It is high risk but the reward, if it succeeds, is a new generation of
global magnetosphere-ionosphere models that could potentially change views on
some of the most fundamental aspects of the coupling between space and the upper
atmosphere during the rapid onset of disturbances and possibly trigger new
discoveries by supplying predictions of other effects to search for in the
observations. The results will ultimately improve capabilities for space weather
prediction and are potentially of interest to the study of planetary
atmospheres, accretion disks, nebula, and the interstellar medium. The training
of a graduate student at the University of Massachusetts-Lowell on this grant is
an excellent means of transferring knowledge about this complex numerical
methodology to the next generation of space scientists and is a near-term
broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present models of the ionosphere-
thermosphere assume that the magnetic field close to Earth is constant. But fast
time-scale processes like explosive auroral activity are not correctly
represented unless the changes in the magnetic field produced by electric
currents closing through the ionosphere are solved for self-consistently. A
major impediment to developing such a model using present explicit numerical
algorithms has been the intractably short time steps (as short as 1 millionth of
a second at 100 kilometers altitude) required to maintain stability of the
solution, which dictate unrealistically long computer run times in order to
follow the evolution of the system. The PI is implementing new numerical
technology not widely known in the geospace community based on implicit
algorithms that enable the use of much longer time steps, and also optimizing
the model to run on high-performance computers. The new electromagnetic model
will then be used in a number of numerical experiments to explore controversial
features of rapidly developing disturbances in the coupled geospace - upper
atmosphere system.