* 1559021
* Collaborative Research: Regional variation of phytoplankton diversity and biogeochemical functioning in the subtropical Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Michael Lomas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2019
* USD 319,657.00

The Indian Ocean accounts for nearly a fifth of global ocean photosynthesis and
is likely a key component in global ocean nutrient and carbon cycles. However,
the Indian Ocean may be the least studied major marine body on the planet. Our
limited understanding suggests extensive variations in physical and chemical
environmental conditions, but how this variation influences biodiversity,
nutrient stress, and more broadly regional differences in the functioning of
phytoplankton is unknown. To help address these gaps, the investigators will
conduct a study by joining an already-funded major research cruise to this
region. It will cover a northern region with some of the highest temperatures
recorded in open ocean waters, an area around 10Â°S of predicted (but not tested
in situ) iron stress, and a southern subtropical gyre with unique nitrogen to
phosphorous(or N:P) ratios. The focus of this project is to quantify and
synthesize the interconnectedness of environmental conditions, phytoplankton
diversity and genome content, and nutrient biogeochemistry, with the goal of
understanding how these may lead to unique biogeochemical regions in Indian
Ocean. The research will have broader impacts on many levels. First, it will
increase public awareness of the role of phytoplankton on ocean functioning,
climate, and people's lives through a new partnership with the Aquarium of the
Pacific (AOP), which is the fourth most-attended aquarium in the nation.
Secondly, the project will train a postdoctoral scholar as well as a graduate
and undergraduate students. Third, the research will dramatically increase our
basic knowledge ocean biogeochemistry and in many cases will be the first
measurements of their kind made in the Indian Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address two major questions: How do environmental conditions,
phytoplankton diversity, phytoplankton physiology, and biogeochemistry vary
across the central Indian Ocean? Are there distinct biogeochemical regimes in
the central IO? The researchers hypothesize that environmental conditions,
including the relative availability of nitrogen (N) and iron (Fe), lead to three
distinct phytoplankton communities and biogeochemical regimes. They will employ
a series of advanced analytical tools including high sensitivity measurements of
dissolved and particulate nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron), genomics,
bioassays to test for nutrient stress, and cell-sorting of specific taxa
followed by measures of nutrient content and uptake. A focus of this project is
to quantify and synthesize the interconnectedness of environmental conditions,
phytoplankton diversity and genome content, and nutrient biogeochemistry, and
how these lead to unique biogeochemical regions in Indian Ocean. This extensive
set of observations can ultimately be linked to ocean models and satellite data
to provide a comprehensive view of regional differences in chemistry,
biodiversity and phytoplankton biogeochemical functioning in the Indian Ocean.