* 1559276
* The role of organic and metal cofactors on the biogenic synthesis of halogenated volatile hydrocarbons
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Sergio Sanudo-Wilhelmy, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 681,034.00

Volatile halogenated hydrocarbon gases, in this case halomethanes, are produced
naturally by organisms in the ocean; which then serves as a source of these
biogenic gases to the atmosphere. Their chemical reactions in the atmosphere are
very similar to those of anthropogenic chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). While CFCs
are well-studied because they consume the ozone in the upper atmosphere that
shields the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation, halomethanes have been
largely neglected, even though they currently account for 25% of the ozone
depletion. As anthropogenic CFC levels steadily decline, however, halomethanes
are predicted to account for 50% of ozone depletion by 2050. Based on limited
study thus far, marine halomethane production has been ascribed mainly to
phytoplankton and macro algae. This project will build on new and compelling
data that suggests marine heterotrophic bacteria could also be major producers
of halomethanes. The data produced here will provide the critical evaluation
required to address discrepancies in global halomethane budgets which currently
are out of balance due to an unknown source to the atmosphere, evaluating the
hypothesis that marine heterotrophic bacteria can supply this missing source.
Concerns over the stability of the earth's stratospheric ozone layer make this
valuable and necessary research with added value of providing support for
engaged undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral education at the University of
Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research on the production of
marine halomethanes has focused on phytoplankton and macro algae, while
potential bacterial contributions to the processe have been neglected. This
research proposes to study the role of marine heterotrophic bacteria on the
production of halomethanes. It has been noted in past studies that there are
discrepancies in the global atmospheric halomethane budget, and it is possible
this is due to a large missing bacterial source. Additionally, this research
will evaluate the potential importance of vitamin B12, methionine, and vanadium
cofactors on the synthesis of halomethanes in bacteria. A large portion of
marine bacteria cannot synthesize methylation co-enzymes, and therefore, would
require available B12, methionine, and vanadium from external sources to
complete the methylation step. This study will also measure concentrations of
halomethanes, B12, methionine, and vanadium in upwelling regions as well as at a
long-term time series site in order to put constraints on the variability of
halomethanes concentrations for use in global linked air-sea models.