* 1559733
* Implementation of a relational database for the Sternberg Museum paleontology collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Laura Wilson, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 197,597.00

Fort Hays State University's Sternberg Museum of Natural History (FHSM) is
awarded a grant to digitized, image, curate, and archive paleontology specimen
data into a centralized and publically accessible database. FHSM serves as a
major public fossil repository and educational institution. The paleontology
collection represents over 100 years of fossil collecting and includes
vertebrate and invertebrate holdings that are critical for understanding past
life in the Great Plains. The specimens are used extensively in research and as
the basis for educational programs and exhibits. Many specimens within the
collection have been donated by local landowners and need to be fully curated
and integrated into the collection. Additionally, the collection lacks a digital
database and no specimen data are available online. This project will digitally
preserve irreplaceable data and make specimen data (including images) available
online for the first time. The digitization and sharing of these data will
provide researchers, educators, students, and the general public with easy
access to the collection, benefitting a broad audience.

Funding ensures that digital records of FHSM specimens are properly achieved and
easily accessible for research and educational uses. Project goals include
transcribing hand-written records, building a relational database with online
platform, integrating data and metadata into existing research databases,
curating backlogged specimens, 2D and 3D imaging of fossil specimens, and
developing educational resources. All paleontology specimens and specimen data
will be digitized and databased into CollectiveAccess data management system,
which is being adopted to house collection data. The application of modern
collection management standards will enable researchers and educators from
around the world access to specimen data. The Sternberg Museum provides science
education for a large, yet rural, region, making online access to material
imperative to the educational mission of the Museum. This project will also
employ multiple Fort Hays State University graduate and undergraduate students
over a three-year period. These students will be trained in curatorial and
research techniques using the specimens digitized during the course of this
project. Overall, this project will greatly enhance the significance of the FHSM
paleontology collection by improving organization, accessibility, and research
and education potential. Additional information about the paleontology
collection at the Sternberg Museum can be found at
http://sternberg.fhsu.edu/research-collections/collections/paleontology/.