* 1559769
* REU Site: Translational Ecology for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Shannon LaDeau, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 732,758.00

This REU Site award to the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, located in
Millbrook, NY, will support the training of 10 students for 12 weeks during the
summers of 2016-2020. Students join the unique Cary community of 100 scientists
and staff to gain first-hand experience in ecological research with a focus on
Translational Ecology. The program interweaves: 1) Cutting Edge Independent
Research - working closely with a mentor scientist students identify questions,
design and carry out research, and then analyze and present results. 2)
Reflective Practice and Training - students attend Scientific Writing and
Statistics/R Workshops, as well as a course in Responsible Conduct of Research
training. 3) Translation -- students participate in a Communication Workshop,
and write "elevator speeches" and lay-friendly research summaries. The Forum on
Translational Ecology showcases a diversity of careers and approaches to
applying and translating ecology. In the Sharing Science Program, students teach
ecology to youngsters and reflect on translation through education.
Undergraduate freshmen, sophomores, juniors or first semester seniors apply on-
line, and are selected by project directors with input from the mentor of their
preferred project. Preference is given to students who stand to benefit most
from participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 50
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program over the 5-year period. Cary REU students contribute to
the field of ecology through publications, presentations, and bringing new
insights to the field. The program has significant impact on students' education
and career. Nearly three quarters of past participants attended graduate school
and 90% now work in science, education or an environment-related
job.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students complete other program surveys and respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system, and alumni are contacted every year to
document longer-term outcomes. More information is available at
http://www.caryinstitute.org/students/reu-program, or from PI: Dr. Alan R.
Berkowitz, (845) 677-7600 x311, berkowitza@caryinstitute.org or Co-PI: Dr.
Shannon LaDeau, (845) 677-7600 x204, ladeaus@caryinstitute.org