* 1559629
* I-Corps: PlusOne: Whole Home Non-Contact Breathing Monitor to Prevent Overdose Death
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2015,02/28/2017
* Neal Patwari, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

A patient taking a prescription opioid pain reliever, while sleeping, can have
ones' breathing rate slow to a dangerous level and then stop. The drug overdose
problem has become an epidemic with 40,000 U.S. deaths annually, five times more
deadly than twenty years ago, and now is the leading cause of accidental death
in the U.S. This project proposes to monitor people at risk of prescription drug
overdose in their home using the PlusOne monitor, a wireless network of sensors
deployed in a home that collect and process radio channel data in order to
continuously estimate breathing rate. The sensors are noncontact and always on,
and work wherever the person is in his or her home. If a person is "still" and
the breathing rate is dangerously low, the system alerts a caretaker by text or
call, or automatically calls 911. Although prescription drug overdose deaths
happen at a higher rate than motor vehicle deaths in the US, no safety systems
have been developed to reduce the overdose death rate. If successful, this
commercial system could dramatically reduce the death rate. Beyond the
prescription drug safety market, this I-Corps team believes a noncontact
breathing monitoring system has application in personal health monitoring, baby
monitoring, and search and rescue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team hypothesizes
that drug rehabilitation centers will value the improved safety that the PlusOne
monitor provides and will pay to deploy it in the homes of their patients when
they are released. While other products exist to monitor breathing rate, they
require the person to be physically connected to, or within a short distance of
the device. The PlusOne system is a network that monitors the radio wave
propagation channel between each pair of deployed sensors, forming a mesh that
fully covers a home. No other product has the capability to be always on and
cover an entire home. In this project the team will perform customer segment
validation to determine how to successfully bring this safety product to
market&amp;#894; (2) further develop a prototype for customer and partner
demonstrations&amp;#894; and (3)&lt;br/&gt;perform further validation in human
subjects studies. If successful, the team will position the technology for
investment, future regulatory approval, and success in the market, and in so
doing, be able to provide a safety system for people who are in greatest danger
of a prescription opioid overdose.