* 1559014
* Behavioral Responses to Taxation and Inequality: Evidence from Policy Variation Using Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Emmanuel Saez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 274,680.00

This project aims at understanding whether taxes and transfers can be effective
tools to address income inequality, and how they affect the economy both at the
US level and the state level. The investigators use administrative data from IRS
returns to analyze the effects of taxes and transfers on both inequality and
economic activity. The proposed activity will significantly advance our
knowledge in the analysis of inequality, taxes, and transfers. Such an
understanding is crucial to evaluate the costs and benefits of government tax
and transfer policies and hence help policy makers design better tax and
transfer systems. This research will also develop a model for partnerships
between government statistical agencies (the office of Tax Analysis of the US
Treasury and the Statistics of Income division of the IRS) and researchers that
could be fruitful both for advancing scientific knowledge but also for improving
the design and the practical implementation of tax and transfer policies. In the
case of the California Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) project, lessons from the
research could be used to further improve the design of the EITC program.
Lastly, the investigators integrate the measurement of economic growth with the
measurement of inequality by developing a new tool "Distributional National
Accounts". This new tool has the potential to inform the current debate on
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research uses administrative
data to analyze behavioral responses to taxation and inequality in four related
contexts: (1) evaluate the effects of the 2013 tax increases at the top of the
distribution on income reporting, tax avoidance, and economic activity; (2)
evaluate the 2015 California EITC on both tax evasion and labor supply of single
parents; (3) evaluate the effects of state income and inheritances taxes on the
mobility of individuals across US states; (4) combine US tax return data with
National account data to create Distributional National Accounts in order to
integrate national accounting analysis with inequality analysis and be able to
provide statistics on the distribution of overall economic growth by socio-
economic groups in the United States. The first three projects offer innovative
research designs analyzing large administrative data using tax policy
variations, while the last project aims at offering better distributional
statistics to the public that can help bridge the gap between the analysis of
economic growth and inequality analysis.