* 1559481
* Property Rights, Leases, Competition and Regulation in the Development of U.S. Shale Resources
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* James Roberts, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 395,910.00

The recent boom in shale oil and gas extraction has been one of the most
important developments in the U.S. energy market in the past decade. While many
researchers are studying the impact and functioning of shale oil and gas
markets, the proposed research aims at studying a new and important aspect
regarding the leases on private as well as publicly-owned land which exploration
firms acquire for their shale gas extraction activity. Given that the regulatory
infrastructure in many states is not well developed for this new industry,
individually negotiated lease agreements become de facto regulatory tool in this
industry, but little is known about how they perform in terms of standard
economic criteria. By analyzing the interplay between private negotiations of
lease clauses, government regulation, and market power, the proposed research
will inform ongoing legislative debates about the best way to regulate drilling
activity. Moreover, it will contribute to a more general economic discussion
about the value of individual negotiations versus top-down regulation in
mitigating potential negative externalities of business activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use novel datasets to analyze
questions central to the increased interaction between residential populations
and oil and gas extraction activity due to recently developed horizontal
drilling techniques. Three of the proposed projects will provide an integrated
picture of the development of various activities surrounding affected
properties. These projects are focused on measuring the value landowners and
exploration companies place on various lease clauses, their respective abilities
to bargain for such clauses when negotiating leases, the roles that regulation
and competition for access to minerals play in such negotiations, and the impact
of leasing and drilling on housing markets. The fourth and final project will
focus on the interplay between firm competition and regulation in oil and gas
lease auctions held by the federal and state governments. It will make use of
competitive auction data to infer the implied costs of recent, and hotly-
debated, changes in the regulation of drilling and exploratory activity. The
project will also provide a guide to governments holding such auctions about
better ways to design these sales.