* 1559868
* REU Site: Computational Biology Summer Research Experience at Rutgers - Camden
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Joseph Martin, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 366,655.00

This REU Site award to Rutgers University - Camden, located in Camden, NJ, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016-18.
This project is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences (MPS).
Participating faculty from Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics and
Physics will provide an interdisciplinary summer research experience to
undergraduate students with a strong focus on the combination of experimental
and computational approaches for the study of biological systems. Students will
acquire skills in mathematical modeling, experimental setup and computational
biology. The program will include enrichment sessions geared towards
strengthening knowledge on the broad theme of scientific research. The program
employs an eclectic and comprehensive approach to recruiting, including
partnerships with community colleges. Individual project descriptions and an
online application can be found at http://ccib.camden.rutgers.edu/reu/.
Selection will be made by the project leaders based on eligibility criteria that
includes freshman, sophomore or associate's degree level status, a cumulative
3.0 GPA, completion of at least one undergraduate science course as well as
interest and potential in research. Past cohorts have included diverse students
from underrepresented groups, veterans, and community colleges.

A total of 30 students from schools with limited research opportunities will be
trained in the program. The projects will introduce students to an integrated
approach to research in computational biology; develop academic, professional,
and personal skills; foster a collaborative environment encouraging discovery
and innovation; expose students to areas of relevance for scientific research
and development such as ethical conduct and technology transfer; and finally,
equip participants to make well-informed decisions on their academic and
professional career. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (BIO) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program is completed to determine student career paths. Students will be asked
to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available at
http://ccib.camden.rutgers.edu/reu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Benedetto
Piccoli at piccoli@camden.rutgers.edu) or Co-PI (Dr. Joe Martin at
joe.martin@camden.rutgers.edu).