* 1559970
* REU Site: Advancing Human Health from Nano to Network
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Beth Olivares, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2019
* USD 408,573.00

The past decades have produced enormous advancements in biological sciences that
have increased the understanding of the human body and led to a host of new
research opportunities, ranging from drug design and the development of next-
generation medical implants to facilitating remote medical care. Students from a
range of engineering disciplines are primed to meet the challenges presented by
these new research opportunities and can apply their diverse knowledge,
experiences and skills to improve an array of human health concerns. The REU
Site: "Advancing Human Health: From Nano to Network" at the University of
Rochester will provide intensive research experiences for underrepresented
minority and women engineering students from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Tribal Colleges, Hispanic-serving Institutions, and non research-
intensive institutions. The aim is to provide beneficial mentoring to these
students, to help retain and encourage them to pursue such research in future
graduate programs and industry careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
Site is the substantive and meaningful involvement of underrepresented minority
and women undergraduate students in high-level research. As a nurturing tier-1
research institution, the University of Rochester (UR) will provide exemplary
undergraduate research experiences to students who are particularly
underrepresented in the STEM fields. The REU Site program will help students
develop a personal investigative learning style, practice and learn appropriate
research methods and ethics, and develop strong oral and written communication
skills. The primary focus will be full-time hands-on scientific research as a
member of an established research team. Participants will complete an
independent research project in one of the following areas: 1) biomaterials, 2)
medical optics for breast cancer, 3) biomedical ultrasound tissue engineering,
4) auditory engineering, 5) dental biomechanics, 6) polymers for biomedical
applications, 7) biosensors, 8) robots for rehabilitation, and 9) optics for
medical applications. Each student will have a specific research problem, a
faculty adviser, and a professional adviser in the UR Kearns Center. The program
will include: high level research opportunities for students historically
underrepresented in engineering (at least 75% of the participants); extensive
professional development opportunities; career development and a demystification
of the graduate school process; and a range of networking and mentoring
opportunities. The students will also be exposed to other research areas through
a series of oral presentations and engagement in a poster session.