* 1559715
* Divergent Catalysis for Metal Carbene Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2015,06/30/2019
* Michael Doyle, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael Doyle of the University of Texas at San Antonio is
investigating catalytically generated metal carbenes as synthetic tools for the
construction of complex organic compounds. This research provides fundamental
advances in catalysis for metal carbene formation and reactions and offers
research opportunities for the education of students who are preparing for
careers in the chemical sciences. The research program includes initiatives to
increase diversity, particularly through greater participation of Hispanic and
African American students, and undergraduate participation in research. Efforts
are undertaken to cultivate an international consortia to investigate critical
unsolved problems in chemical catalysis for metal carbene generation and
reactions.

Catalytic processes using carbene precursors that operate with stereocontrol and
diversity in product formation are under investigation. Professor Doyle is
pursuing the development of donor-acceptor cyclopropenes as effective carbene
precursors. The research provides catalysts with divergent reactivities and that
improve the stereoselectivity in intramolecular metal carbene additions. The
research broadens the scope and expands the versatility of chemical
transformations that occur through metal carbene intermediates.