* 1559752
* I-Corps: A Sensor Technology Box for Smart Health
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The U.S. Census Bureau reports that the U.S. population of people aged 65 and up
will grow more than double in between 2010 and 2050. The market for remote
patient monitoring is expected to grow from $10.6 billion in 2012 to $21.2
billion in 2017. Inspired by this growing market need, this project aims to
build an integrated and reliable sensor system that can be deployed for
independent living applications across multiple homes for monitoring functional,
behavioral and cognitive health of older adults. This enables the older adults
to live independently in their own home environment and helps them age
gracefully. The project targets to develop a low-cost interoperable platform
technology which is highly-available and affordable by low-income group. The
sensor prototypes and services developed in this project will be deployed in
retirement community and assisted living centers in greater Baltimore
metropolitan area. &lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project involves designing a low-
cost solution connecting the varied sensor technologies and diverse software
platforms to an end-user controlled system for independent living applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to minimize the sensor malfunctioning,
power consumption, network resource usage, connectivity and bandwidth
requirements; producing a scalable and reliable system that can be rapidly
deployed in home environment with minimal overhead. The specific goals of the
project include: (1) design inexpensive miniaturized ARM-based motion sensor
nodes with high reliability, (2) integrate the sensors with service-oriented
architecture and models, (3) develop activity recognition algorithms, and (4)
evaluate the overall system performance. These goals will be reevaluated through
rigorous testing, deployment and customers' feedback during the I-Corps
curriculum. By streamlining the proposed solutions in a low-cost, reliable and
interoperable system the project is expected to accelerate the rapid development
and deployment of a one-stop technological solution for remote home health and
wellness monitoring. The team will investigate the potential market opportunity
by interviewing the customers, develop proof-of-concept prototype and deploy
that in real settings for the validations. The feedback from the users will be
incorporated in the prototype design phase and a business plan will be
postulated at the end of the I-Corps program.