* 1559776
* REU Site: REU in Discrete and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Aklilu Zeleke, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2019
* USD 287,199.00

The REU Site in Discrete and Applied Mathematics is an eight week summer
research experience for undergraduate students. The program stimulates interest
in the mathematical sciences through research on accessible and open research
problems. This program targets students at an earlier stage of their
undergraduate studies and provides a research opportunity for those students who
might otherwise have decided against a career in the mathematical sciences
before ever learning about the exciting opportunities and challenges present in
mathematics research.

Each year, nine promising undergraduates are selected to participate. Students
learn to read research articles; to formulate conjectures and construct
examples; to program simulations; to concentrate, listen, and ask questions; to
generalize and simplify proofs; and to disseminate their discoveries. Students
are immersed in an environment where the mathematical ideas are new and not
fully understood. Students work in one of three separate research groups.
Students present their progress on a weekly basis. Students present at regional
and national conferences on undergraduate research. Students write a research
article suitable for submission to an appropriate mathematics or science
journal. Students' discoveries contribute to many fields of mathematics
research: computational biology and modeling, combinatorial games, combinatorial
knot theory, recursive polynomials, analysis of large data sets in biology, and
others.