* 1559778
* Compact Bayesian Models of Massive Social Graphs
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Joshua Blumenstock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

This research project will develop and apply new statistical models that capture
dynamic, local structure in large-scale social networks. As digital technologies
proliferate around the world, social science researchers increasingly have
access to data that reflect granular and nuanced patterns of human interactions
and social behavior. This is a change from traditional research on social
networks, which requires expensive and time-consuming survey modules. Given the
cost of collecting network data from surveys, most knowledge about the role of
individuals' social networks in behavior comes from data about relatively small
networks observed at a single time period. In contrast, the investigators will
apply their methods to data that are unsolicited and arise as electronic logs
generated through social media and communication services. In such instances,
interactions occur in real time and involve millions of unique individuals.
Examining such data provides insights into the patterns of day-to-day
interactions that shape individuals' social context. The techniques to be
developed will model rich network structure with intuitive and simplified
representations that will make them easier to integrate into social science
research. Open-source software will be made available through CRAN and the
Python Package Repository. Aggregated data and related materials required to
replicate results of published articles will be available thru ICPSR or GitHub.

This project will develop a Bayesian framework that parsimoniously represent the
sub-structures of very large graphs with a novel approach to sparse coding. The
project also will provide an intuitive set of methods that are designed to
enable social scientists to better understand the latent structure in new forms
of massive social network data. Despite the promise of unsolicited data sources,
the size and granularity of the data present substantial challenges. From a
statistical perspective, the massive size and heterogeneity of the data confound
existing computational tools. From a social science perspective, the data
represent the manifestations of deeper social relationships. This project
bridges the gap between the mathematical/statistical descriptions of these large
social network graphs and the underlying social structure. The Bayesian
representation of local network structure will build upon related research on
network motifs and random graph models, enabling meaningful inference about
real-world network processes. The sparse coding approach will allow for the
compact and scalable representation of extremely large groups. The project will
contribute to related statistical literatures in Bayesian models for social
networks, Bayesian model uncertainty, and network inference.