* 1559862
* REU Site:   Hazards and Risks of Climate Change in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Anne Egger, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 360,039.00

The hazards and risks associated with climate change are a pressing concern in
the Pacific Northwest. Assessing risks associated with climate-related hazards
requires an interdisciplinary approach that explores the nature of the hazard
itself; the economic, social, and political vulnerabilities of the communities
in the region; and communication strategies that reach a diverse audience. The
primary goal of this project is to introduce students to and engage them in
interdisciplinary hazards research that is relevant to their lives and
livelihoods, and to do so early in their college careers. The project will bring
up to 10 students per year from community colleges, tribal colleges, and
universities throughout the Pacific Northwest to Central Washington University
to conduct research spanning multiple disciplines, including hydrology,
atmospheric science, sociology, geography, geology, and documentary film-making.
Students will also work together on a grand challenge project to survey their
communities about their perceived risks to climate change, integrate their
individual research projects, and develop resources for communicating about
climate change risks back to their own communities. They will present the
results of their work at a regional conference hosted at
CWU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional goal of this project is to develop a
community around the idea of interdisciplinary climate hazards and risks
research, one that can not only advance our understanding of these topics, but
one that serves as a support network for transfer students, especially those
from two-year colleges, to succeed in the four-year college environment. Many
students at regional community colleges are from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the STEM disciplines, and their communities are particularly
vulnerable to the effects of climate change. This project will support ongoing
interactions between students, faculty at their home institution, faculty and
students at Central Washington University, and the surrounding communities,
emphasizing the role of research in building resiliency.