* 1559240
* IRES: Carroll University CREATE Program
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Michael Schuder, Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project provides a
12-week research experience at the University of Strathclyde in Scotland for
fifteen Carroll University students. The goals of the project are twofold.
First, to develop students? cross-disciplinary scientific research skills by
embedding them in projects and facilities that are not available at a small
undergraduate institution. To achieve this goal, each student will join a
research group and project in the Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry at
Strathcylde for a summer of research. The second goal is to prepare students to
thrive in an interdependent and multicultural scientific environment (and future
career) by emphasizing the cultural aspects of the experience. This program
produces increased cross-cultural awareness and competence - derived from a pre-
trip cultural competence course, cultural seminars overseas, and the experience
of living and working in another culture for a summer. In order to support
broader participation in this project, special effort is given to recruiting
into the program students from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in
the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that the students will
undertake is cutting-edge and highly relevant to today?s world. While at
Strathclyde, our students will carry out individual projects related to
alternative energy technology, nanoscience and materials chemistry. In
particular, they will work on self-assembled organic photovoltaic materials,
redox flow battery systems, and nanoparticle assemblies for healthcare
diagnostics and therapy. The students will benefit from working on some of the
most advanced instrumentation available, while collaborating with researchers
who are pre-eminent in their fields. All students will present their work at
local and national meetings, and we expect that many of the students will also
contribute to peer-reviewed publications, thus helping to disseminate their
results to the broader scientific community.