* 1559518
* IRES: USPRISM: U.S.-Scotland Program for Research on Integration of renewable energy resources and SMart grid
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ali Mehrizi-Sani, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 03/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) program, organized
by Professors Ali Mehrizi-Sani and Chen-Ching Liu from Washington State
University (WSU), in collaboration with Prof. Stephen McArthur and his
colleagues from the University of Strathclyde (Scotland), provides six US
students with the opportunity to participate in the diverse smart grid research
atmosphere at one of leading, most highly funded, and most entrepreneurial
European universities. This program is developed out of a 20-year collaborative
relationship between WSU and the University of Strathclyde. The students will
undertake projects to address challenges in renewable energy integration.
Ultimately, the research performed in this program will help increase the
utilization of distributed renewable energy resources in the power system of the
future, the smart grid. This research benefits our society and environment by
(i) increasing penetration of renewable energy resources, (ii) increasing career
interest in power system and the smart grid, and (iii) improving the quality and
quantity of the power engineering workforce in the United States. These benefits
directly translate into a more capable and larger student intake that can
address the workforce shortage problem; it also helps the transition to a modern
power grid with higher efficiency, reliability, and resiliency.

The students in this program will perform research relevant to smart grid and
the electric power system. Electrical power is critical to the U.S. economy.
However, most of the current U.S. electric infrastructure is outdated. What
exacerbates this problem is that this infrastructure still runs mainly on legacy
control, monitoring, and protection systems that may not realize its full
potential. While environmental concerns and energy independence recommend
utilizing renewable resources in the power system, one of the U.S. grand energy
challenges remains to integrate large amounts of renewable energy. These
challenges also add to the difficulty of enforcing resiliency of the power
system to major disturbances and events. The research to be undertaken in this
project seeks to address this challenge through activities on (i) accurate and
fast controllers for integration of renewables, (ii) resilient distribution
systems, and (iii) and system-agnostic controls of microgrid resources. Compared
to the United States, many European countries have a more mature experience in
the utilization of renewable energy resources. The University of Strathclyde
maintains one of the largest power programs in Europe and, as a prime example of
an institution with proven track record in research and industry collaboration,
is an ideal partner in this project that combines an international research
experience for students with outstanding research capacity.