* 1559758
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Synergistic Exploitation of Network Dynamics and Knowledge Heterogeneity in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/17/2015,01/31/2018
* Ravi Tandon, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 01/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

The ubiquity and accelerated growth of wireless networks and services is
critically dependent on the availability and efficient use of wireless spectrum.
Increasing demand for spectrum is already pushing the current commercial
wireless networks to their limits and accentuates the need for transformative
approaches for wireless system design. In order to meet this demand, wireless
networks are rapidly evolving towards a highly dense, user-deployed,
heterogeneous infrastructure characterized by aggressive spectral reuse. Such
evolutionary architectures can realize high data rates although they must
operate in the presence of severe interference. In traditional system design,
interference is viewed as a negative externality with the end goal being its
suppression or mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new
approaches for embracing interference through synergistic exploitation of
feedback, network dynamics and network knowledge heterogeneity. The key angle
leveraged in this work is to exploit interference as side information. The
project will characterize the gain provided by feedback, and analyze the
scalability and dependence of such gains on network topology. In addition, the
researchers investigate the impact of dynamical variations in network topology
and devise algorithms that harness such variations to enhance the overall
network performance. The researchers also investigate the optimal utilization of
heterogeneous channel knowledge for multi-flow multi-antenna wireless systems,
by considering scenarios in which network channel knowledge exhibits variability
in spatial and temporal domains and developing algorithms to exploit such
variability.