* 1559929
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Phenotypic plasticity research for community college students
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* C. Britt Carlson, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 44,184.00

This REU Site award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign located in
Urbana, IL, and Parkland College, located in Champaign, IL, will support the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-2019.
Participants will conduct research in the area of phenotypic plasticity, the
phenomenon of a single genotype producing multiple phenotypes depending on
environment. The program will begin with a two-week "boot-camp" on topics
ranging from specific laboratory methods to discussions of research ethics.
Students will then join a research immersion program within a research lab at
the University of Illinois. Possible research projects include the interaction
between genotype and ozone pollution on maize growth, the effect of
environmental stress on neuroanatomy, and the interactions of genes and
environment on fish behavior. Students will present their research at an
undergraduate research symposium on the University of Illinois campus as well as
their community college. Applications will be accepted beginning in December
preceding the summer program and final decisions on admittance made by March
31st. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students over
three years will be trained in the program. This REU Site will focus on students
from community colleges, which typically have very few research opportunities.
Community colleges often have a large percentage of underrepresented groups and
this REU Site will encourage applications from these groups. Students will learn
how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://dev2.igb.illinois.edu/reu-plasticity/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Nathan Schroeder at nes@illinois.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. C. Britt Carlson at
ccarlson@parkland.edu).