* 1559843
* RUI:  Synthesis of Macrocyclic Polymers Using Radical Trap Assisted-Intramolecular Atom Transfer Radical Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Eric Tillman, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 46,972.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Eric Tillman of Bucknell University will
devise synthetic routes leading to macrocyclic polymers, which posses a set of
properties distinct from their linear analogs and offer potential advantages in
diverse areas in which polymers are used. The focus of this proposal is the
addition of a radical trap, such as a nitroso group, to an end-to-end atom
transfer radical coupling reaction of a dihalogenated linear precursor, creating
a scenario where the halogenated chain ends no longer require simultaneous
activation to undergo ring closure. This synthetic route will be applied to the
synthesis of a variety of macrocyclic architectures, from cyclic diblock
copolymers, chromophore-functionalized cyclic polymers, and even complex
multicyclic structures. As a broader impact of the research, undergraduate and
Masters-level students will gain valuable training in both synthesis and
characterization of polymeric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are long
chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of everyday life that
utilize plastics, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive
and aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. Cyclic
polymers offer a set of properties that often differ substantially from the
linear polymers from which they are derived, yet are notoriously difficult to
synthesize. Cyclic polymers may be potentially useful in a variety of
applications, such as electronic materials and drug delivery vehicles. This
research focuses on both developing a new, straightforward route to preparing
cyclic polymers and applying this strategy to prepare polymers displaying
complex cyclic architectures.