* 1559654
* REU Site: Research in Chemistry at West Virginia University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michelle Richards-Babb, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Professors Richards-Babb, Popp, and colleagues in the C. Eugene Bennett
Department of Chemistry at West Virginia University host a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site. This project is funded by the REU Sites Program
in the Chemistry Division and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) both at the National Science Foundation (NSF) to support 10
students for 10 weeks in each of the three grant years. Undergraduate student
participants are integrated into chemistry-focused scientific investigations in
order to train the next generation of U.S. scientists. This project largely
supports students from primarily undergraduate institutions and community
colleges, especially women, underrepresented minorities, U.S. Armed Forces
veterans and persons from economically depressed areas (e.g., Appalachia).
Involvement improves the likelihood that participants enroll in graduate-level
training in chemistry or a related discipline, thereby improving the scientific
workforce of the United States. Participants are provided with a comprehensive
program that rapidly moves them toward research independence. This preparation
includes day-to-day research work intermingled with training in: the research
process and cutting-edge scientific instrumentation; laboratory safety;
scientific ethics; communication; and collaboration. Research projects are
focused on the potential of research to benefit society both directly and
indirectly in the fields of health care, forensics/criminology, energy,
sustainability, and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
solving fundamental scientific problems related to the chemistry of health
including: the development of therapeutic drugs for detection or treatment of
diseases (e.g., Alzheimer's, cancer); new catalytic reactions including the
synthesis of pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals using sustainable and
biocompatible methods, and the examination of the combustion process, both
experimentally and theoretically, in order to reduce environmentally harmful
emissions. The research includes: the synthesis of cycloparaphenylenes as
templates for carbon nanotubes; the use of scanning probe techniques to study
nanoscale mechanical responses of biologically relevant surfaces; the use of
laser pump-probe spectroscopy to study the kinetics of radical combustion
products; the development of ion mobility-mass spectrometry methods studying
oligomer formation by the huntingtin protein; the application of vapor pressure
and Antoine plots to explain how temperature affects the weathering of gasoline
samples in fire debris; and the synthesis of copper-catalyzed oxidative
decarboxylative coupling products and their characterization via NMR, IR, and
mass spectrometry. REU participants carry out their research in collaboration
with faculty and graduate students and are trained on modern scientific
equipment (NMR, IR, IMS-MS, scanning probe techniques, laser-pump probe
spectroscopy, etc.) and/or in the use of computer modeling software.