* 1559469
* The impact of participation policies on socioeconomic interactions.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Arun Chandrasekhar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2022
* USD 406,377.00

The PIs propose to study how affirmative action influences the social and
economic network structure between groups. They also will measure how the change
in network structure in turn affects other key outcomes (e.g., speed or extent
of social learning). To do both of these things they will (i) conduct household
surveys to elicit network data, attitudes, and political utilization; (ii) match
the survey data to past political reservation assignment rules to study how
beliefs and social network structure change in response to constitutional
provisions to protect the most disadvantaged groups; (iii) conduct experiments
to study the impact of network change on the willingness of members of one group
to pass information to members of the other group. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will study the effect of political reservation on the structure of social
and economic networks. Reservation of disfranchised members and women to
positions of leadership could affect the network in several ways. Reservation
can affect attitudes, either positively or negatively, and influence the
resources the reserved group has access to when a member of its community is in
a position of leadership. Each of these forces can affect the incentives or
willingness to maintain, form or cut links across groups, which may then have
effects on the overall structure of the social network. Further, since the
social network is the surface on which other processes, such as social learning,
takes place, the way affirmative action affects the network structure could have
far-reaching implications, influencing how well individuals learn about new
opportunities such as jobs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan on developing and
estimating a simple model of network formation. Next, they will conduct
experiments about information exchange geared to measuring the resistance to
passing information across groups and how that resistance responds to
affirmative action exposure. Finally, they will conduct an experiment to capture
how attitudes influence job search: does exposure to affirmative action
influence the degree to which information about new job opportunities spreads?