* 1559286
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic variation as a driver of host and symbiont response to increased temperature on coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,249.00

On coral reefs, mutualisms with single celled algae (Symbiodinium) and reef
species literally and figuratively form the foundation of reef ecosystems. Coral
reefs are among the most threatened ecosystems under a changing climate and are
rapidly declining due to increasing levels of environmental stress, namely
increased temperatures. Climate change is resulting in even warmer ocean
temperatures that threaten associations between Symbiodinium and their hosts. In
this project the investigators examine the genetic diversity of Symbiodinium and
the potential for this important species to evolve in response to temperature.
The project will also address whether the ecological and evolutionary dynamics
of the Symbiodinium population affect the performance of their host. If so, this
suggests that the evolution of microscopic organisms with short generation times
could confer adaptation to longer-lived host species on ecologically and
economically vital coral reefs. Given that diversity is already being lost on
many reefs, considering how evolutionary changes in Symbiodinium will affect
reef species is crucial for predicting the responses of reefs to future climate
change. This project provides training for two graduate students and several
undergraduates at a Hispanic-serving institution. This work includes outreach to
the students and the general public through the Aquarium of Niagara, local K-12
schools, and web-based education modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of
evolution on contemporary ecological processes are at the forefront of research
in evolutionary ecology. This project will answer the call for experiments
elucidating the effects of genetic variation in Symbiodinium performance and the
effect on the response of the holobiont (host and symbiont) to increased
temperature. These experiments examine the effects of temperature through both
ecological and evolutionary mechanisms and will determine the relative
importance of adaptation and acclimatization in replicated experimental
populations. The investigators will examine how genetic variation within a
species (Symbiodinium antillogorgium) affects symbiont performance in culture
and in the host and how this affects the response of the holobiont to increased
temperature. Further, the project examines whether holobiont response to
increased temperature associated with climate change depends on particular GxG
host-symbiont combinations. Moreover, the investigators will examine the effects
of symbiont history on mutualist hosts, which have been largely ignored in eco-
evolutionary studies. These experiments provide a first step in predicting
whether invertebrate hosts on coral reefs will respond to global change via
adaptation of their symbionts.