* 1559209
* Expectation Coordination and Agent-level Learning
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* George Evans, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 317,599.00

The PIs propose work that will use agent- level modeling methods to address
research questions in macroeconomics. The PIs want to examine the behavior of a
computational model of an entire economy. In this model, firms and consumers are
boundedly rational and use adaptive learning rules. The PIs plan to embed this
framework into a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model and to allow for
heterogeneous agents; so-called DSGE models are widely used in macroeconomics,
and the PIs will use both Real Business Cycle and New Keynesian models. These
DSGE models often have multiple possible outcomes that can be supported by
rational behavior on the part of individuals via self-fulfilling prophecies.
Economists call these "sunspot" equilibria; if everyone in the economy thinks
that a signal, perhaps in the form of some external event (even an astronomical
event that has no effect on the planet), predicts an upcoming recession, then
after seeing the signal, people may start spending less money in anticipation of
possible layoffs, and employers may begin to lay off workers in anticipation of
a drop in sales. The result is a recession, even though the signal itself has no
direct effect on any individual in the economy. The PIs will examine when
sunspot equilibria are stable over time when people learn from experience, thus
formalizing the process by which fear of recession leads to recession Modeling
people as computational agents with a simple adaptive learning rule is one way
to examine the stability of sunspot equilibria. They will also examine the
effect of government policies such as monetary and fiscal policy in models with
this kind of adaptive learning.

The goal here is to examine agent-level learning in general equilibrium
environments. Recent work by the research team has demonstrated that boundedly
rational agents can learn to solve dynamic optimization problems over time by in
effect replacing them with repeated two-period problems, while updating in each
period their forecasts of shadow prices of key state variables. The project will
embed this and related implementations of learning into DSGE models. The agent-
level approach facilitates solving computational models with heterogeneous firms
and households; this allows both for the study of macroeconomic policy and for
the examination of wealth inequality. The PIs will re-examine the learning
stability of sunspot equilibria in Real Business Cycle and New Keynesian models.
They will also examine models in which the zero-lower-bound on interest rates
leads to multiple steady states. And they will examine the impact of fiscal
policy and government spending multipliers in New Keynesian models with
learning. The proposed research will have specific implications for both
monetary and fiscal policy, in addition to demonstrating how the PI?s bounded
optimality approach can be used in a wide range of applied macroeconomic models.