* 1559661
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Natural Resources and Immigration Policy in the Era of Trade Liberalization
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Adrian Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2017
* USD 18,879.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the determinants
of immigration policies in wealthy advanced democracies around the world, an
issue highly relevant to current debates on immigration and refugee flows. In
general, the PI views the politics of immigration as the tug of war between
voters who oppose low-skilled workers on various grounds and firms who favor
foreign labor. In contrast to much of the existing literature on immigration
that tends to focus on native voters' preferences for immigration, the PI
focuses on the role of labor-intensive firms in immigration policymaking. He
classifies firms into two broad categories, firms that face competition in the
international goods market (tradable sector) and firms that offer domestic
services that cannot be traded (non-tradable sector). The PI argues that firms
in the tradable sector are much more likely to support more open immigration
policy and identify two factors that explain the decline of pro-immigration
firms: a sudden windfall from capital-intensive natural resources, such as oil
and natural gas, and increasing competition in the global goods market. Using
new data on immigration policy and field research in the Netherlands and
Scandinavia, the PI demonstrates that his theoretical framework is not limited
to the U.S. and Canada but is generalizable across a variety of cases. He also
finds that a country's immigration policy does not generally respond to short-
term labor needs or unorganized native opposition, but merely reflects the
relative political power of pro- or anti-immigration
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes advantage of newly assembled data
on immigration policies of wealthy economies around the world. Following the
existing literature, the PI classifies immigration policy into more than a dozen
policy dimensions, including citizenship regime, restrictions on inflows, and
immigrant rights. The PI uses a principal component analysis to extract two
factors scores, one that measures the policy restrictive of immigration entry
and the other that measures the scope of immigrant rights. Using the time-series
cross-sectional data on immigration policy, he runs a set of ordinary least
squares analyses to test the effects of trade liberalization and natural
resource booms on immigration policy development. To complement the statistical
analyses in the project, he uses in-depth interviews and archival research for
the culturally and politically similar welfare states in the Netherlands and
Scandinavia while incorporating country-specific political institutions into the
qualitative research. This study sheds light on what preferences firms hold
toward immigration and how they seek to influence immigration policy making in
the absence of institutionalized lobbying.