* 1559973
* REU Site: Materials for Energy and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Daniel Steinberg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 292,562.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at Princeton
University offers state-of-the-art materials science research experiences with a
special emphasis on sustainable energy production, to diverse and talented
cohorts of students from a variety of institutions, particularly those with
limited or no research opportunities. Sustainable energy is one of the greatest
scientific and engineering challenges of the 21st century, and materials science
is essential to developing environmentally sound, carbon-neutral solutions. This
program will provide training for the next generation of engineers and
scientists to tackle the challenges of sustainable energy and protecting the
environment. The centerpiece of the program is a meaningful research experience
with direct mentorship by a faculty advisor. The REU experience expands the
horizons of participating students, opening new intellectual frontiers and
career opportunities via seminars, where students learn about a spectrum of
scientific problems that have implications for our technology-focused world.
Students will have the opportunity to explore career options via tours to
industrial and government laboratories and will be introduced to key tools for
data acquisition, data processing and modeling, and experimental design. These
tools permeate the modern research lab, and will be valuable skills for the
students throughout their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers
undergraduates, in collaboration with Princeton faculty, postdoctoral fellows
and graduate students, opportunities to conduct research during a 9-week summer
program, on renewable energy sources (new photovoltaic materials), hydrogen
production with carbon capture (carbon-sequestration technologies),
electrochemical energy conversion and storage (batteries, fuel cells, and
ultracapacitors), and environmental monitoring. The discoveries made during
these collaborations will be communicated to the broader scientific community
via publications and presentations. In addition, students will participate in a
range of activities outside the lab to learn more about the wider research
community and to hone the skills needed to become successful contributors to the
community. These include: 1) Professional development workshops on technical
writing, oral presentations and career options. 2) Exposure to non-academic
career paths through tours of national research labs and industrial R&amp;D
labs. 3) Broadening intellectual awareness through weekly seminars on faculty
research entrepreneurship, and research ethics. 4) Teambuilding activities to
create an informal environment to interact and learn from peers and mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.