* 1559497
* Collaborative Research: IRES: Development of Novel Paper-Based Devices to Assess the Quality of Pharmaceuticals and Water in the Developing World
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2022
* USD 54,630.00

This IRES student training project will support research experiences in Nepal
and Kenya by a total of 15 students (12 undergraduate and 3 graduate students)
over three years. The students will develop, produce and evaluate paper-based
devices used to test pharmaceutical quality and water quality. The primary goal
of the project is to help students become more passionate about the power of
science and engineering to solve global challenges while also developing
valuable analysis and design skills. The project is led by principal
investigator (PI) Dr. Toni Barstis of St. Mary's College, with co-PIs Dr. Reena
Lamichhane Khadka and Dr. Donald Paetkau also of St. Mary's, and Dr. Marya
Lieberman of the University of Notre Dame. The international mentors are Dr.
Basant Giri of the Kathmandu Institute of Applied Sciences in Nepal, and Dr.
Beatrice Jakait and Dr. Sonak Pastakia of the Academic Model Providing Access to
Healthcare program (AMPATH) in Kenya. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates suggest
that in developing countries such as Nepal and Kenya up to 30% of the medicines
are falsified or substandard and up to 90% of the water sources may be
contaminated with bacteria. However, most tests used in the U.S. to evaluate
water or pharmaceutical purity are too complicated for use in developing
countries, requiring steady power sources, ultrapure water or other expensive
materials. The paper-based assays that this project will develop and evaluate
are low-cost, require only small volumes of liquid, use readily available
materials, and require no power source. The devices and this training have
potential value anywhere a cheap, easy to use testing method is needed. Through
this project U.S. students will have the opportunity to build competency as
global scientists and engineers by developing collaborative relationships with
students and research mentors in Nepal and Kenya, and seeing how their
scientific knowledge can make a difference in communities. Applicants will be
primarily chosen from St. Mary's College, an all-women liberal arts college, and
from alumni of a Notre Dame REU that targeted students from primarily
undergraduate institutions and included many women, first generation-to-attend-
college students and underrepresented minorities, providing strong potential for
this project to include a diverse range of student participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three cohorts of U.S. students will conduct research in
the summers of 2017-2019 to develop paper-based, milli-fluidic analytical
devices (PADs) to analyze pharmaceuticals and drinking water. Students will
design and field-test the devices, comparing the outcomes from the PADs with
"gold standard" analytical methods including High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) and Mass Spectrometry (MS). Students will work at sites in
Nepal and Kenya, where previous international collaborations by the PIs have
laid the groundwork for safe living and working conditions for the participants
and where the students can make genuinely useful contributions to ongoing
projects led by the Nepali and Kenyan mentors. U.S. students traveling to Nepal
and Kenya will first work together at their home institutions designing and
manufacturing PADs, while in electronic contact with their international mentors
and the international students who will be part of the research teams. The U.S.
students will then spend at least four weeks in their respective country
collecting samples, conducting field and lab testing, engaging in cultural
activities, and meeting with experts and community members impacted by the
research. Students will also be in electronic contact with the other country
group to compare data and experiences during the time abroad. The summer program
will conclude at the home institutions with further analyses and data
validation, presentation locally and with international students electronically,
and report preparation for presentation to the appropriate country agencies.
Users of the research results may include: WHO RapidAlert Network, the Nepali
Department of Drug Administration, the Nepal Water Supply Corporation, UNICEF-
Nepal, and the Kenyan Pharmacy and Poisons Board.