* 1559308
* IRES-International Research in Geosciences (Earth and Atmospheric Sciences) in Ethiopia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Solomon Bililign, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,898.00

This proposal focuses on providing international educational and research
opportunities in geosciences for US students and underrepresented minorities in
a non-traditional study abroad destination, in this case Ethiopia. Only 4% of
international undergraduate student research experiences are in Africa. Recent
research has documented the benefits of these international experiences
including: increased knowledge of other cultures, world geography, cultural
relativism, and global interdependence. Students in general show increasing
enthusiasm about problems of global importance that have practical consequences
and are strongly attracted to interdisciplinary courses, especially those of
societal relevance. The collaborations in this proposal will aid the effort of
developing a globally engaged workforce in the US and provide the opportunity
for students to tackle problems of global magnitude as members of the world
community. This project can have a significant impact on the participation of
U.S. students in geosciences education and research at both participating U.S.
institutions. We expect that students participating in the international study,
research training program and field experience abroad will acquire knowledge and
research skills in geosciences and will be encouraged to pursue academic and/or
industrial careers in these areas. The scientists and students at North Carolina
A&amp;T University (NCA&amp;T) and in Ethiopia are benefiting from the
collaboration, as they are now developing long lasting relationships that create
the conditions for joint global projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethiopia serves
as an ideal natural laboratory for training US students in the geosciences. The
main Ethiopian Rift and the Afar Depression region is the only location on
earth, other than Iceland, where the transition from continental to oceanic rift
is being studied. The East African Rift System crossing through Ethiopia is one
the geologic wonders of the world, a place where the earth's tectonic forces are
presently trying to create new plates by splitting apart old ones. Ethiopia and
sub-Saharan Africa is also home to some of the highest levels of atmospheric
aerosols from biomass-burning (BB) and BB is believed to be a major driver of
regional carbon, energy, and water cycles. Selected IRES students will work
alongside research mentors from NCA&amp;T, Addis Ababa University (AAU) and
Appalachian State University (ASU) and student researchers from AAU to (1)
conduct geophysics research including exploring geothermal energy and
groundwater sources; (2) initiate long-term measurements of atmospheric aerosols
in Addis Ababa; and (3) conduct laboratory-based studies of BB aerosol optical
properties (4) apply Fourier Transform spectroscopic techniques to develop
carbon monoxide (CO) emission inventories. The proposed activities build upon
existing research capabilities at the three universities and collaborations
between NCA&amp;T and AAU, which have involved numerous US undergraduates in
international research experiences. The research experiences will be conducted
in a region of the world that serves as an ideal natural geoscience laboratory
(Earth and atmospheric sciences) and which has traditionally been neglected for
international student research opportunities. U.S. student participants will
work alongside AAU students and faculty researchers who are leaders in their
field on interdisciplinary geoscience projects that will instill Earth system
science approach and have societal implications, including geothermal energy,
water resources, plate tectonics, and relationships between regional air quality
and climate change.