* 1559886
* REU Site:  The TIM Consortium: A Dispersed REU Site in Theoretically Interesting Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Keith Russell, NORTHERN KENTUCKY UNIVERSITY RESEARCH FOUNDATION (DO NOT USE)
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 349,984.00

This award funded by the Division of Chemistry Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites Program supports a dispersed REU site led by
Professor K. C. Russell at Northern Kentucky University. The site also includes
senior researchers and their undergraduate students at Grand Valley State
University, the University of Richmond, the University of San Diego, and Colby
College. Research projects supported in this site are focused on the study of
"theoretically interesting molecules" in the fields of synthetic organic,
physical organic, organometallic, and materials chemistry. The REU site supports
eleven undergraduate research students per summer in a ten-week program. Broader
impacts are addressed through the recruitment of students from local two-year
colleges and from four-year institutions that lack significant opportunities for
undergraduate research. The site seeks to prepare the diverse student cohort
participating for further study in the chemical sciences and graduate school,
with eventual employment as part of the country's technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate research projects include: (1) the
exploration of calcium-catalyzed addition reactions (Prof. Kristine Nolin,
University of Richmond); (2) the synthesis and characterization of novel [12]-
and [14]-annulenes (Prof. K. C. Russell, Northern Kentucky University); (3) the
synthesis and evaluation of extraction agents for Ln-Ln and Ln-An separations
(Shannon Biros, Grand Valley State University); (4) the synthesis of self-
assembled architectures from end-functionalized polysaccharides (Prof. Peter
Iovine, University of San Diego); and (5) the synthesis of rigid oxacalixarene
scaffolds (Prof. Jeffrey Katz, Colby College). In addition to research
activities, the student participants take part in an integrated ethics
curriculum that includes training modules and case studies based on current
events within the scientific community.