* 1559700
* REU Site: Imaging and Mechanics-based Projects on Accidental Cases of Trauma (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Joel Stitzel, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Wake Forest
University (WFU) School of Medicine offers multidisciplinary biomedical
engineering opportunities involving accidental trauma research that aim to
prevent, mitigate, and improve the fundamental understanding of injury.
Objectives of this REU program emphasize research training, education,
mentorship, and focus on inspiring under-represented students to pursue
biomedical research and career opportunities. Students from underrepresented
groups including women, minorities, and students with minimal exposure to STEM
research from community colleges or universities without undergraduate research
opportunities will be recruited. The intended impact is to impart training and
education on engineering research and the research process, cultivate lasting
mentoring relationships, and foster an interest in research and higher education
in the REU participants. Research training, education on the research process
and professional development topics, and mentorship are provided to REU
participants through imaging and mechanics-based projects related to the
prevention, mitigation, treatment, and scientific understanding of accidental
trauma. Contributions from the offered projects within this REU Site project
will include development of injury prediction models, vehicle and sporting
safety improvements, and advancements in osteoporosis prevention, surgical
fixation of injuries, trauma resuscitation procedures, and cancer radiation
therapies.

During a ten-week summer program, student activities will include hands-on
research training that encourages participants to make creative contributions to
research projects. Participants will receive mentoring from faculty and graduate
students, and will attend a weekly Research Training Seminar Series, networking,
outreach, and social events. Participants will write an abstract and give an
oral presentation at an Undergraduate Summer Research Symposium. Twelve students
each year will be selected based on evidence of academic achievement, high
potential to benefit from the research experience, and the student's
contribution to the geographic, ethnic, and gender diversity of the REU
participant group. Students will gain a fundamental understanding of injury
research, will develop into more independent researchers, and will be encouraged
to pursue educational and career opportunities in biomedical research. Research
findings will be disseminated via publications and presentations co-authored by
REU participants. The REU Site program is based at Wake Forest University (WFU)
Health Sciences, with locations of proposed research at WFU Innovation Quarter
and WFU Baptist Health.