* 1559008
* Collaborative Research: A community 3D seismic investigation of fault property controls on slow-slip along the Hikurangi megathrust
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Gregory Moore, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 129,793.00

Subduction fault zones, where one of Earth's tectonic plates is forced beneath
another plate, produce the most powerful and destructive earthquakes and
tsunamis on the planet. What controls this fault slip behavior is virtually
unknown and yet it is critical for understanding and assessing global seismic
hazards. While these great subduction zone earthquakes release seismic energy in
a matter of seconds to minutes, recent discoveries reveal another style of fault
movement called slow slip earthquakes (SSEs) that take days, weeks or months to
occur. While not as damaging as major earthquakes, these slow slip earthquakes
are nonetheless thought to be a critical process in how strain builds up and is
subsequently released on subduction zone fault systems. Slow slip earthquakes
may also act as indicators of where, and possibly when, large damaging
earthquakes might occur. The subduction zone along the east coast of the New
Zealand North Island regularly (~ every 4 years) produces unusually shallow (4-5
km below the sea surface) slow slip earthquakes compared to the typical 20-50 km
depths found in other areas such as the Cascadia and Alaska subduction zones on
the west coast of the U.S. This project will conduct a 3D seismic survey that is
designed to image the shallow slow slip region of the New Zealand subduction
zone, map the fault systems, determine what conditions are associated with slow
slip behavior and how they differ from conditions associated with subduction
zones that generate great earthquakes. The project includes substantial
international collaboration with New Zealand, Japanese and United Kingdom
researchers on the seismic imaging as well as direct links with an international
ocean drilling program designed to drill into the zone of slow slip. The project
involves an early career scientist and several graduate students who will work
on various aspects of the research for their thesis work. Additional students
will be involved in the field data collection from all participating countries.
Public outreach in the form of media coverage, news stories, public lectures and
ship tours will be coordinated with New Zealand organizations and
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slip on plate boundary faults associated
with recorded earthquakes typically fails to account for all of the expected
plate motion predicted by geodetic methods or global models. Exciting advances
in the last decade have recognized and documented transient slow slip
earthquakes as another mode to accommodate plate convergence at subduction
margins. This project addresses the mechanics of subduction thrusts and the
conditions that lead to the wide variety of slip behaviors by carrying out the
first-ever 3D seismic dataset acquired over a subduction thrust dominated by
aseismic creep. The project will use the research vessel R/V Langseth to acquire
an open-access 3D seismic reflection data set in a 15 x 60 km area offshore New
Zealand's Hikurangi trench and forearc. These data will provide high-resolution
images and seismic attributes of a transient-slip plate boundary megathrust
identified by the research community as an important point of comparison to
predominantly locked subduction thrusts such as Nankai, Tohoku, Cascadia, and
Costa Rica. Seismic attributes linked to high fluid pressures are a promising
indicator of conditions favorable for slow slip earthquakes and the Northern
Hikurangi margin has well-documented slow slip earthquakes at 4-5 km depth -
shallow enough for detailed seismic imaging and seismic attribute measurements.
The 3D seismic images and attributes will allow for an accurate documentation of
the structural, stratigraphic, and hydrogeologic conditions that lead to
generation of slow slip earthquakes along a subduction megathrust. International
collaborative experiments will record Langseth shots during 3D acquisition and
develop the first ever high-resolution 3D velocity models across a subduction
zone using 3D full-waveform inversion, which will overlap and extend beyond the
3D volume.