* 1559664
* Collaborative Research: Interdependency in Decision Making, A Holistic Approach to Understanding Community Recovery from Catastrophes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/22/2015,07/31/2018
* Divya Chandrasekhar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 07/31/2018
* USD 39,432.00

This study analyzes the recovery process from Hurricane Sandy in New York City
to develop a better theoretical understanding of how the inter-related decisions
and actions of residents, businesses and government policymakers intersect in
creating successful or failed recovery outcomes. Long-term recovery from major
disasters has been one of the least studied phases of the disaster cycle, and
because of its complexity it has largely been studied only in a piecemeal
fashion. Yet, as numerous recent disasters have shown, recovery planners face
enormous challenges and require better understanding of the specific dynamics of
this process. The research analyzes New York City's recovery over a three-year
period to better understand how and why effective community recovery happens.
Data collected through large-scale surveys, in-depth case studies and analysis
of government policies will be used to test a conceptual framework of integrated
disaster recovery decision-making based on questions such as: What factors
contribute to household recovery decisions and how are they related to
businesses recovery success? What factors contribute to business recovery
decisions and to what extent are they related to household recovery success? How
do these relationships change or evolve over time? Do government and
institutions' policies and programs capture the recovery needs and priorities of
households and businesses initially and over time? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better
understanding the ways in which household, business and government decisions
interrelate is critical to helping planners, politicians and recovery managers
develop more robust and resilient communities. The study will contribute to a
mostly under-studied aspect of the disaster recovery process and help improve
policy and assistance response to disaster-affected communities. These findings
will add to the still evolving knowledge base on the complexities of urban and
mega-urban responses to catastrophic disasters that continue to impact American
cities such as New York, a premier global city that was seemingly diligent in
long-term planning and pre-storm preparation but was still severely affected by
Sandy. This illustrates the need for better understanding of response and
recovery to disasters and the findings from this research will directly
contribute to better planning and policy-making.