* 1559874
* REU Site: An REU Site in Interdisciplinary Chemistry at Oklahoma State University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Smita Mohanty, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 291,000.00

Professors White, Mohanty, and colleagues in the Chemistry Department at
Oklahoma State University host an Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site. This project is funded by the REU Sites Program in the Chemistry Division
and the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) both at
the National Science Foundation (NSF) to support 12 students for 10 weeks in
each of the three grant years. This REU site exposes early career stage
undergraduates to interdisciplinary research in modern chemical sciences,
including advanced materials, chemical sensors, nanochemistry, and chemical
biology. Broader impacts of this work include the exposure of all REU
participants to industrial and government scientists, emphasizing broadened
perspectives on chemistry careers, increasing exposure of students from
underrepresented groups to the chemical sciences, and actively involving REU
participants in the larger research landscape of a comprehensive doctoral
research university. Oklahoma has one of the highest Native American populations
in the country and specific relationships with faculty at four-year
undergraduate institutions are in place to help facilitate their recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nineteen active research groups host students at the
Oklahoma State University REU Site. Examples of specific projects include
investigations to promote understanding of how polymer chain organization
influences the useful material properties of macromolecules, NMR studies of the
effects of glycosylation on the structure, dynamics, and interactions of
membrane proteins, and the development of earth-abundant transition metal
complexes of N-heterocyclic carbenes. Other included projects range from
synthetic methods development and drug synthesis to the development of organic
semiconductors and electronic materials that can be used in organic electronics,
sensors, and bioelectronics. Students recruited from the local area include
Native Americans and students from primarily undergraduate schools.