* 1559077
* IRES: Vertically Integrated Team for Structural DNA NanoTech in Denmark
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Thomas LaBean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2020
* USD 249,946.00

IRES: Vertically Integrated Team for Structural DNA NanoTech in Denmark

This project sponsors a vertically integrated team (diverse members from
education levels spanning high school through post-doctoral) of 5 or 6
participants per year from North Carolina for travel to Aarhus University in
Denmark to pursue month-long research projects. Scientifically, the research
project will advance the engineering of biological macromolecules (DNA and
proteins) for formation of materials with their structures controlled on the
nanometer length scale. The team leader will recruit participants from groups
commonly underrepresented in science and engineering disciplines including
minority and female students. This international research training experience
will provide participants with unique opportunities to enlarge their scientific
networks and to experience first-hand the benefits of cultural mixing. The
project is important and deserves NSF funding, because it will develop molecular
tools as well as scientific personnel capable of advancing nanoscience goals
critical to the electronics and medical fields. US participants will benefit
from significant scientific and social interactions with foreign students and
faculty on-site in Denmark. The project will produce significant outcomes
including cutting-edge research results and impactful research training
experiences for participating American students. The senior investigators
involved have received funding through the Danish National Research Foundation
which primarily funds Danish students both in Denmark and on visits to the NCSU
lab. IRES funding complements the Danish investment by allowing US students to
participate in research at Aarhus.

The project's scientific focus will be on the development of self-assembling
DNA nanostructures and on their application toward nanofabrication of
electronic, photonic, and biomedical devices. The NCSU team has used DNA as a
building material to implement molecular computers, and to organize proteins and
metallic nanoparticles with molecular-scale precision, while the Aarhus team is
expert in DNA-guided chemistry for programmed synthesis of very large organic
molecules. Developing ways to control matter on the nanoscale by exploiting the
same construction principles used by biology (i.e. molecular recognition) holds
great promise for diverse nanofabrication and biomedical applications.
Engineered supramolecular complexes comprised of DNA, polypeptides, and
inorganic nanomaterials provide the right length scale, range of physicochemical
interactions, and complexity of shapes for interfacing effectively with
biological structures. As such, DNA nanotechnology represents a perfect approach
for creating custom diagnostic and ?smart? therapeutic agents for medical
applications. Likewise, these same principles and materials are ideal for
developing bionanofabrication procedures to compete with lithography for
generation of electronic devices and circuits. Pursuit of biomimetic materials
science, including molecular engineering for bottom-up assembly of complex
nanostructures with diverse chemical, biological, photonic, or electronic
functions, requires highly interdisciplinary teams. This cross-disciplinary work
will therefore provide opportunities for very broad-based educational
experiences to the participants. The cross-pollination provided by IRES funded
international travel will lead to molecular materials engineering advances which
could impact many fields of science and technology through applications in low-
power nanoelectronics, programmable nanochemistry, novel biosensors, and smart
therapeutics for biomedicine.