* 1559968
* REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering -- From Biomaterials to Stem Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Charles Roth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 412,491.00

The REU Site: Cellular Bioengineering -- From Biomaterials to Stem Cells offers
students exciting research projects that introduce them to a broad array of
topics grounded in Cellular Bioengineering. Cellular Bioengineering encompasses
a number of cutting edge research fields and articulates with nanotechnology,
advanced materials, systems biology and stem cells. Training undergraduate
students with diverse backgrounds in Cellular Bioengineering will broaden the
research base and lead to an expanded and better-trained workforce in this
rapidly expanding field. Program elements in innovation, entrepreneurship, and
translational research enhance the students' marketable skill set and increase
the potential for their current and future discoveries to be converted to
technological advances of great impact. Unlike the traditional research that
undergraduates typically conduct, the REU Site program is leveraging broad-based
training through engineering projects that additionally integrate efforts across
the life sciences and physical sciences. The recruitment efforts specifically
target individuals who normally have limited research opportunities, including
those from underrepresented groups and from colleges without substantial
graduate research and training. The program expects to expand the pipeline of
students entering graduate programs, by helping to engage a group who would
likely have not considered graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site
is employing standardized elements of research training and professional
development to accelerate the students' learning curve and inoculate them into
active laboratories that are pursuing high-impact Cellular Bioengineering
research. The program is employing active mentoring, collaboration, and regular
monitoring of the students to achieve its goals. Project areas that the students
will work on include: 1) Multi-modal cues for phenotypic control of neural
cells, 2) Polymer nanoformulations for delivery of macromolecular therapeutics,
3) High Throughput, Automated, Single Cell Electroporation, 4) Encapsulated MSC
Regulation of Inflammatory Environments, 5) Cell and tissue engineering
approaches to tendon and ligament healing, 6) Reprogrammed Stem Cells and 3-D
Microenvironments, 7) High Throughput Platform for Drug Metabolism Screening in
Fatty Liver Cells, 8) Interactions of lipid-based nanocarriers with vascular
endothelia and macrophages, 9) Designing Scaffold Cues for Retinal Pigment
Epithelial Tissue Engineering, 10) Subcellular structural dynamics and
mechanotransduction to branching neurons, and 11) Non-destructive measurement of
tissue morphomechanical properties. A Cellular Bioengineering Boot Camp
introduces participants to laboratory and imaging skills that accelerates their
integration into their research labs. A focus on Innovation and Entrepreneurship
parallels the recent NSF I-Corps initiative for translational research to
capitalize on the potential for new technology that emanates from the research.
A component of the program is a clinical immersion, where the REU scholars will
observe clinicians in the surgical unit. The Scholars use these experiences to
identify needs and problems and brainstorm about innovations and technologies to
solve these problems. Under the guidance of faculty from the Center for
Innovative Ventures of Emerging Technologies, the students build business plans
around these ideas. Weekly seminars and discussion groups allow tracking and
monitoring of the Scholars' experiences while concurrently engaging them in
professional development. Incorporation of a mentoring workshop for the graduate
students who serve as "near-peer" mentors further broadens the impact of the
program.