* 1559274
* A New Method for Assessing the Magnitude and Impact of Shallow Seawater/Pore water Exchange in Salt Marsh Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Timothy Shaw, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2019
* USD 259,308.00

Tidal marshes are critical junctions between marine and terrestrial chemical
processes. The chemical and physical processes that tidal marsh sediments
undergo determine the nature of the transformation and accumulation of
particulate organic carbon (POC) at the marine to terrestrial interface.
Physical transport of pore water through marsh sediments greatly influences the
availability of carbon and nutrients that can undergo transformative reactions
at the marine to terrestrial interface. Past studies have shown that there is a
discrepancy between predicted rates of pore water flow and calculated estimates
from tracer studies. Because this flow is crucial to the chemistry of sediment
at the terrestrial to marine interface, which is the first junction of the
chemical species exported to the ocean, it is important to explain the
discrepancy between expected rates of flow and observed rates. This study will
use a known tracer method based on natural isotopic ratios (224Radon/228Thorium)
and will develop a new method (223Radon/ 227Actinium) to evaluate the export of
POC due to pore water flow in tidal marsh sediments, which will have much
broader impacts to the overall marine carbon budget. Results from this work will
also be integrated into workshops that will educate students and teachers from
outside of oceanography about oceanographic carbon and climate research.
Presentations will also be developed in collaboration with the South Carolina
State Museum as part of the Science Caf√© series. Additionally, one graduate
student and one undergraduate student will be supported by this
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicted advection rates of pore water in very
fine-grained tidal marsh sediments have been shown to significantly differ from
rates calculated using tracer studies. Because tidal marshes are a crucial
chemical link at the marine terrestrial interface, and advection has a
significant impact on the availability of chemical species to undergo diagenetic
reactions at this interface, it is of significant importance to evaluate this
discrepancy. Export of particulate organic carbon (POC) and dissolved organic
carbon (DIC), in particular, are of interest, due to the impact on microbial
communities within sediments. This research aims to validate the method of
224Ra/228Th disequilibrium to calculate pore water exchange rates. Previous
studies using this method have provided evidence for more rapid pore water
exchange than would generally be expected in such fine-grained sediments, which
are less permeable than coarser grained sediment. Additionally, this research
will attempt to develop the disequilibrium method for 223Ra/227Ac. The
researchers will evaluate the impact of advection rates on the export of
chemical species in salt marshes.