* 1559231
* IRES: Late Paleozoic Gondwanan Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Margaret Fraiser, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,512.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The late Paleozoic ice age (LPIA) was the longest, most
widespread glacial interval on Earth after complex, multicellular organisms
evolved. Despite the significance of this time interval for understanding
contemporary global change, it is understudied in non-tropical regions of
Pangea. It is of fundamental importance to establish a deep-time perspective on
changing paleoecosystems to predict future perturbations in global systems. We
will train future Earth scientists in hypothesis-driven, field-based research in
Argentina. The scientific research objectives will be met using fossils,
sedimentary rocks, and the geochemistry of these rocks and fossils. Outreach
activities aimed at increasing the participation of traditionally
underrepresented groups in the Geosciences form the core of the broader impacts
of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;We proposed a multi-
faceted program of research and student mentorship on late Paleozoic ice age
(LPIA) paleoecosystems. The LPIA is regarded as the best pre-Quaternary analogue
for contemporary global change. Despite the significance of this time interval
in the climate history of Earth, our understanding of the response of marine and
terrestrial ecosystems to late Paleozoic climate and environmental change
remains poorly understood. Our multidisciplinary research will include
paleoecological, geochemical, and stratigraphic analyses on extensively
preserved floral and faunal fossils in southern and western Argentina. To
recruit a broader cross section of the diverse SE Wisconsin area to the
Geosciences, our rigorous recruitment and training strategy involves new
outreach programs created by the PIs and leveraging existing multi-institutional
collaborations. Different cohorts of undergraduate and graduate students will
travel with the PIs to Argentina for up to 4 weeks each year to conduct research
on paleoclimatic and paleoecologic change during the LPIA. Respected Argentinian
specialists will provide expertise on different aspects of LPIA paleoecosystems,
including biostratigraphy.