* 1559686
* Collaborative Research: The Positive Role of Queues on Customer Value Perception: Mathematical Models and Laboratory Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Laurens Debo, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2018
* USD 46,606.00

The main goal of this collaborative research project is to develop behaviorally
enhanced mathematical models grounded in queuing theory that allow predicting
human behavior in customer service environments. These models will be evaluated
and tested through laboratory and field experiments. Managing congestion
(waiting lines) is of primary concern for most organizations providing some sort
of service to customers. Customers are typically annoyed by long waiting times
and therefore tend not to join long queues. Recent empirical and experimental
studies provide new evidence that, in service environments in which the service
value is uncertain, long queues may impact the value perception in a positive
way. As a consequence, long queues may actually attract more customers and these
customers may spend more when they see that the queue behind them is longer.

The research, if successful, will develop a set of principles that guides
service organizations to better understand and utilize this phenomenon.
Applications can be found in service settings (e.g. waiting in a restaurant), as
well as in health care settings (e.g. waiting for elective surgery) in which the
quality of the outcome is somewhat uncertain. We expect to improve the quality
of service (benefiting customers) and profit of service systems (benefiting
organizations or businesses). Furthermore, the results of the research are
expected to strengthen the field of behavioral queueing models: (i) by
developing a set of advanced mathematical models of queues with parameters
corresponding to human biases and behavior, (ii) by creating a series of lab and
field experiments that captures the essence of human behavior in service
environment with uncertainty in service quality, and (iii) by establishing an
online queueing simulator and data base for designing behavioral queueing
experiments.