* 1559741
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Explaining Presidents' Use of Humanitarian Justifications for Military Intervention.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Sarah Maxey, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,150.00

General Summary

In every military intervention of the past twenty-five years, U.S. presidents
have used humanitarian justifications?references to the protection of
civilians?to explain military action to the U.S. public. The project focuses on
the use of humanitarian claims in interventions driven primarily by national
security concerns to better understand how these justifications affect the
relationship between the public and war. the PI argues that high levels of
public support for humanitarian interventions create an incentive for presidents
to stretch the limits of humanitarian claims, which can have two unintended and
potentially negative consequences. First, presidents may use humanitarian
justifications to convince the public to support otherwise unpopular
interventions. Second, the over-use of humanitarian claims may create a
skeptical public, making it harder to build support to prevent mass atrocities
in the future. The PI investigates the consequences of this use of the
humanitarian frame in three ways: 1) she considers how the prominence of
humanitarian justifications has changed over time, 2) she examines when
presidents are most likely to rely on humanitarian claims, and 3) she examines
whether there are limits to the public' willingness to accept humanitarian
explanations. The research has implications for when the U.S. will intervene in
the future, especially in response to mass atrocities, and for the public's
ability to hold presidents accountable for military action.

Technical Summary

To examine the role of humanitarian justifications in contemporary U.S. military
interventions, the PI employs a multi-methods approach with three distinct
steps: 1) content analysis of presidential speeches, 2) comparative case studies
of interventions, and 3) a survey experiment on the conditions under which
individuals support humanitarian appeals. First, the PI uses dictionary-based
content analysis of national presidential addresses to construct an original
dataset that tracks the frequency of three justification categories for all
potential U.S. interventions from 1945 to 2013. Second, she examines three pairs
of interventions and non-interventions from three presidential administrations.
Using primary sources from the National Security Archives and presidential
libraries, these case studies examine when, within cases of intervention,
presidents are most likely to emphasize humanitarian claims. The case studies
also highlight how and why humanitarian concerns become a part of official
justifications for military action and the role of international actors. Third,
the PI uses a survey experiment to investigate the conditions under which
humanitarian justifications increase support for intervention. In particular, it
considers whether support is conditional on the public's belief that
humanitarian claims are sincere and that military action is primarily motivated
by humanitarian concerns.