* 1559643
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining Voters Attachments to Charismatic Legacies
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Caitlin Andrews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2017
* USD 18,900.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom suggests that
charismatic leaders' allure fades quickly after their deaths. Why, then, do many
individuals become and remain attached to the legacies of some charismatic
leaders? The PI conducts a survey experiment that directly tests the strategies
and conditions under which new leaders can reactivate citizens' attachment to
political parties that were established as vehicles for charismatic leaders in
order to garner political support. The results of this study will inform debates
about the nature and consequences of charismatic leadership across disciplines
including political science, sociology, psychology, and business management.
Furthermore, the project will clarify how different types of attachment to
charismatic legacies might strengthen or undermine democratic representation and
electoral competition. Finally, the results can serve to inform political
communication and campaign strategy in countries with strong charismatic
legacies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the nature and evolution of citizens' attachments to weakly
institutionalized political movements founded by charismatic leaders. The PI
argues that new leaders can tap into the charismatic founders' legacies to
sustain or reactivate support through one of three mechanisms: 1) a programmatic
mechanism that link citizens' ties to the movement through programs and
policies; 2)a grassroots mechanism that posits that citizens' attachments are
preserved through participation in the movement' organizations; 3) a
personalistic mechanism that indicates that citizens' attachments remain
anchored in the founder's charisma. The PI test these three mechanisms through a
survey experiment that examines the relative influence of each mechanism on
citizens' attachment to the legacy parties. Individuals are randomly assigned to
read a short news piece containing one of four experimental conditions, three of
which will prime either the programmatic, grassroots, or personalistic aspects
of the movement, and the fourth of which will contain no prime. Subsequently,
participants will answer questions about their identification with the movement,
support for its leaders, emotional attachment, and political attitudes and
behaviors. The PI uses difference-of-means and difference-of-proportions tests
to examine which mechanism provides the basis for followers' attachments to the
movement. The Pi uses Argentina and Venezuela as the cases of interest.