* 1559485
* Empirical Studies of Business-to-Business Bargaining: Evidence from Hospital Input Markets
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Ashley Swanson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 398,314.00

Intermediate goods markets make up nearly half of U.S. GDP, and prices in these
markets are often determined by bargaining between buyers and suppliers.
However, few empirical studies have examined intermediate goods markets and
negotiated prices. This project aims to study economic and policy questions in
intermediate goods markets, using a novel dataset on negotiated prices of
medical supplies between hospitals and suppliers. The investigators will examine
the role of information, market structures, and healthcare organizations in
business-to-business price negotiations. This project will yield new insights
into the fundamental determinants of health care costs. The proposed research
will also have direct bearing on several current policy debates regarding
transparency in hospital supply markets, antitrust treatment of hospitals and
physician-hospital relationships, and Medicare reimbursement policy.

This research project consists of three studies that provide one of the first
comprehensive studies of markets for hospital supplies and negotiated prices.
The first study analyzes the role of information in negotiated prices for
coronary stents, using differences-in-differences identification strategies
based on both timing of hospitals' joining a benchmarking database and new
products entering the market. In the second study, the investigators link
bargaining outcomes with market structures and hospital organizational
characteristics to test bargaining theory and examine the role of organizational
economics and market power in bargaining. The third study combines the hospital
purchasing data with changes in Medicare procedure reimbursement to understand
how these willingness-to-pay shocks are passed through the vertical supply
chain.