* 1559273
* Legal Forms of Firm Organization, Corporate Governance, and Business Expansion in the Middle East between 1887 and 1950
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Cihan Artunc, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 290,716.00

Despite extensive studies on the adoption of legal forms of business
organization and its relation to commercial expansion in the U.S. and Western
Europe, the evolution of firm organization in the Middle East has received
little attention. Due to the Middle East's important status in the past and
present world economy, and its long and varied history of economic reforms, a
greater understanding of Middle East economic history will yield insights about
the region's historical development as well as determinants of business growth
today. This project examines how legal institutions affect business formation
and expansion, and more generally, what types of legal rules might be effective
in fostering investment and commercial growth. Understanding the legal
structures that promote business growth and establishment of a robust private
sector reveals political and legal insights that promote successful enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores these questions by constructing a
large, novel dataset of Turkish and Egyptian partnerships and corporations at
the firm level between 1887 and 1950. The main sources of this dataset are
business directories and commercial newspapers that published partnership
contracts and corporation charters. The investigator will use this firm-level
dataset to develop and test a theory of partnership formation and dissolution;
examine the relationship between legal forms of firm organization,
transplantation of European law, and business expansion; explore the links
between corporate governance, industrialization and the political economy of
these two countries; and investigate the disappearance of non-Muslim enterprises
which had long dominated the Middle East's commercial life. The examination of
corporations and their boards of directors, especially the formation of an
interlocking directorate made up of securities underwriters and government
members, will reveal the role of corporate governance and the state in
industrialization, industrial organization, and firm performance.