* 1559855
* REU Site: DIMACS REU in Computing Theory and Applications Impacting Society
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Margaret Cozzens, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 413,771.00

This project is the continuation of an ongoing REU site at DIMACS (Rutgers
University). Undergraduate students recruited from across the nation participate
in summer research projects relating to foundations and applications of
theoretical computer science. Each year, the program recruits 10 outstanding
undergraduate students from diverse groups including women, underrepresented
groups, and non-research institutions. A strong point of this site is the
experience and expertise of the mentoring team, which has been able to produce
valuable research experiences and excellent research publications in the past.
Many past students have gone on to pursue successful research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site offers a wide variety of projects ranging
from theoretical topics such as circuit complexity, graph matching, and error-
correcting codes to more applied topics such as robot planning, active learning,
security and privacy. It also offers socially relevant projects such as food
webs, analyzing immune-tumor interactions, and genome folding. Many of these are
leading-edge research projects that not only develop students' research skills
but also give them exposure to respective research areas. The students also
benefit from DIMACS industry partners in the region. The project will lead to
publishable research and contribute to building the future work force.