* 1559040
* Rates, timing, &amp; nature of sub-orbital sea-level change during MIS 5e
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* David Foster, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 503,905.00

Projections for the magnitude and rate of sea-level change in the future are
highly dependent on ice sheet models that simulate the response of the polar ice
sheets to sustained warming. Unfortunately, the physics associated with ice
sheet collapse is not fully understood, requiring a different approach to
estimate future ice sheet response. This project seeks to quantify rates of sea-
level change during a past warm period known as the last interglacial, ~125,000
years ago. This information can then be used to constrain our projections of the
rate of future sea-level rise. In particular, the principal investigator will
investigate the rate of sea-level changes during this past warm period
associated with meter-scale sea-level oscillations. The oscillations have been
inferred from the features observed in sedimentary records from around the globe
that suggest a dynamic instability in polar ice sheets during the warm period.
The project includes student training and education (Ph.D. and masters students,
and undergraduate students). A marine science class from the University of
Florida will go to a sampling site in southern Florida to gain valuable field
experience. There is strong international collaboration between the principal
investigator, U.S. students, and researchers from Mexico and Australia. Joint
support for U.S. students to collaborate with researchers from Australia was
provided by the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address existing debates
regarding the timing and nature of sea-level oscillations during Marine Isotope
Stage (MIS) 5e. The approach is to study several key fossil reef sequences
around the globe using a multidisciplinary approach that combines detailed
analysis of taphonomy, diagenesis, reef assemblages, paleowater depth
indicators, carbonate sedimentology and petrography, stratigraphy, glacial
isostatic adjustment, surveying, and geochemical and geochronological data.
Conventional bulk U-Th analyses will be complemented with laser ablation U-Th
ages to investigate micro-scale carbonate phases and to evaluate spatial scales
of preservation within the samples.