* 1559887
* REU Site: Environmental science and policy in the nation's capital
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Matthew Hamilton, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 362,636.00

This REU Site award to Georgetown University, located in Washington, DC, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2016-2018. The program will enhance each student's ability to perform scientific
research independently and expand their awareness of how such research dovetails
with public policy. Students will work actively on an authentic environmental
science research project advised by one of 13 faculty members. Research projects
will be in environmental science fields including ecology, population biology,
mathematical modeling, climate change, and earth science. Participants will
learn an array of research skills including responsible conduct of research,
formulating hypotheses, data management, and scientific writing. Students will
participate in a full-day Communicating Science workshop to learn approaches to
explaining scientific information to diverse audiences. Weekly seminars will
bring to campus local professionals working in science policy to discuss their
work, their careers, and career resources. Each student will produce a research
poster and present at a summer research symposium. Because matching applicants
to appropriate mentors is essential, advance communication with prospective
mentors in the program is encouraged. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Student participants will be
drawn from the Baltimore-Washington DC region as well as nationally. The program
will emphasize recruitment of students with research potential from groups
underrepresented in environmental sciences and first-generation college
students. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://biology.georgetown.edu/REU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Matthew B.
Hamilton at matthew.hamilton@georgetown.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Martha Weiss at
weissm@georgetown.edu). This REU site is co-funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences), and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences).