* 1559179
* Light-dependent regulation of coccolithophore host-virus interactions: mechanistic insights and implications for structuring infection in the surface ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Kay Bidle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/29/2020
* USD 698,546.00

Phytoplankton, microscopic photosynthetic algae, form the basis of marine
foodwebs and are responsible for producing nearly half the oxygen on the planet,
yet represent &lt;1% of Earth's biomass. Steady-state maintenance of a high
production to biomass ratio implies that, on average, these organisms grow, die
and are replaced once every week. Predatory infection by viruses has emerged as
the primary mechanism responsible for the high mortality rates of phytoplankton
populations. Despite the importance of viral mortality in structuring marine
microbial ecosystems, little is known about the fundamental mechanisms that
regulate host-virus interactions. Phytoplankton are inherently dependent on
light and photosynthesis. Given the need for host resources, the viruses that
infect these organisms must, therefore, also fundamentally depend on light and
photosynthesis. This project will explore the relationship between light and
viral infection to develop a framework for how light influences viral infection
and phytoplankton mortality in the surface ocean. The widespread phytoplankton
species Emiliania huxleyi, and its associated virus, Coccolithovirus, has
emerged as the prominent model system for investigating algal-viral interactions
due to its ecological relevance and collective mechanistic insight from numerous
physiological, molecular, biochemical, genomic, and field studies. Laboratory-
based culture studies will be used to elucidate the role light plays in
mediating infection in E. huxleyi, specifically addressing whether light is
required for viral infection as well as identifying the light-regulated host
metabolic processes that viruses may co-opt for successful infection and
production. These observations will then be extended to natural populations
using manipulative, field-based experiments to elucidate the role light plays in
structuring infection in the surface ocean. This project provides hands-on
training for a Rutgers University undergraduate student, as well as a
postdoctoral researcher. To facilitate ocean literacy, researchers will work
with the Education and Public Outreach staff and Tilapia Film, LLC to develop an
educational video based on research findings and the Next Generation Science
Standards. This video, aimed at middle, high school, and undergraduate students,
expands on an already successful video series that highlights scientific
practices through real research investigations. It will be open access and
disseminated through existing connections to the New Jersey Science Teacher
Association, the National Science Teachers Association, the National Marine
Educators Association, and the National Biology Teachers Association.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predatory infection by viruses is the primary mechanism
responsible for the high lysis rates observed in phytoplankton populations. As
the most abundant biological entities in aquatic environments, viruses turn over
more than a quarter of the photosynthetically-fixed carbon, thereby fueling
microbial foodwebs and short-circuiting carbon export to higher trophic levels
and the deep sea. Despite its importance, estimates of viral-induced mortality
are rarely included in global models of net primary productivity and deep carbon
export, in part because we lack a mechanistic understanding of the fundamental
factors that regulate host-virus interactions. For viruses infecting obligate
photoautotrophs, there is an inherent and fundamental interaction between light
and the infection process, as well as a dependence on light-regulated host
metabolic processes that may be required for viral replication. Using the model
algal host, Emiliania huxleyi and its associated Coccolithovirus, this project
addresses the hypotheses that: 1) infection dynamics in E. huxleyi are driven
through light-dependent processes, specifically that light mediates viral entry
and replication, and that viruses redirect host energy to maximize viral
replication, and 2) light increases viral decay relieving hosts of viral
pressure. This mechanistic, cellular framework will then be used to elucidate
the role light plays in structuring infection in natural coccolithophore
populations using manipulative field-based experiments. Given that light is one
of the most fundamental, readily, and easily measured features of the ocean,
this work will ultimately provide a context for modeling the biogeochemical
impact of viral infection in the global ocean.