* 1559447
* IRES: SOBRE MEXICO: Student Opportunities for Biological Research in Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Beck, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2020
* USD 249,499.00

SOBRE Mexico - Student Opportunities for Biological Research in Mexico

This program will partner students from Central Washington University (CWU) with
top scientists from Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) to explore
tropical dry forest ecology in a world-class biological field station in western
Mexico. Each year, for three years, cohorts of 5 students will spend 8 weeks at
Estación de Biología, Chamela (EBCh) working alongside UNAM and CWU mentors on
three general avenues of investigation: 1) interactions in the parasite-host
system centered on the agents of Chagas disease (kissing bugs), 2) ecological
responses of vertebrates to intense seasonality, and 3) current and future
effects of a major coastal highway on ecological connectivity of vertebrates.
The world-class facilities and pristine forests of EBCh attract leading
scientists from México and throughout the world to conduct cutting-edge
research. This setting will provide an exceptional opportunity for students to
develop academic relationships with Mexican scientists and their students,
laying the foundation for future collaborations. This program will help build
the next generation of internationally-literate scientists by guiding bilingual
Hispanic-American students to conduct science, facilitating language and
cultural literacy with their non-Spanish speaking peers, and developing the
skills, connections, and confidence to pursue careers in the sciences. The
program will also create opportunities for CWU faculty to develop collaborations
with Mexican scientists and encourage Mexican scholars to visit CWU where they
can share their insights, discoveries, and culture with our broader community.

The Chamela/Cuitzmala biosphere reserve in western Mexico is surrounded by some
of the best examples of seasonally dry tropical forest (SDTF) remaining in the
world. SDTF comprise almost half of the world's tropical forests, representing a
larger fraction than rain forests. They provide a set of ecosystem services that
rival wet forests, and they harbor a remarkable concentration of endemic
species, many of which are threatened or endangered. Despite their importance,
SDTFs are among the least studied and most threatened of the world's forested
ecosystems and, as a result, are at greater risk than are wet forests. Students
will work UNAM's Institute of Biology to investigate the relationships among
blood-feeding triatomine insects, the parasite they carry, Trypanosoma cruzi,
and the mammals the insects feed on. This work will aid in our understanding of
which mammals in SDTF serve as reservoirs of Chagas disease. Other students will
track reptiles and amphibians in the forest during the extreme transition from
dry season to wet season in July. This research will contribute new insights
into how vertebrate ectotherms manage strong seasonality, a defining feature of
SDTF. Some students may investigate parrot ecology in SDTF, exploring variation
in food and nesting resources for parrots and other cavity-nesting birds. Others
will use remote cameras and transect surveys to monitor wildlife activity in the
forest and along Mexican highway 200, which bisects the biosphere reserve.
Results from this project will be used to guide decisions on how best to
minimize habitat fragmentation associated with planned expansion of that
highway. Students will be members of a cohesive team working together on ongoing
research by our Mexican mentors to address relevant and important issues in the
structure, functioning and conservation of SDTF.