* 1559785
* Collaborative research: Food insecurity and mental health in global perspective: Social and nutritional pathways
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Lesley Weaver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 109,970.00

Social inequality is recognized as a fundamental cause of many forms of human
suffering. Although rooted in particular social and economic orders, social
inequality also manifests in individual biology and psychology. However, the
complex and interacting connections involved are not well understood; physical
and mental health disparities can be both the cause and the effect of social
inequality. Understanding how these disparities interact is important because
they can be mutually-reinforcing and thus difficult to escape once the cycle has
begun. The research supported by this award will investigate these linkages
through the lens of food insecurity and the pathways that connect it to mental
ill health, as mediated by cultural and social differences. Although the
research will be conducted outside of the United States to take advantage of
analytically useful comparisons, its findings will be universally
applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken by
anthropologists Dr. Lesley J. Weaver (University of Alabama) and Dr. Craig A.
Hadley (Emory University) in three rapidly developing communities in Brazil,
Ethiopia, and Haiti. These research sites were chosen because all three have
experienced food shortages in recent memory and in each setting, social
inequality is creating noticeable disparities in life chances. At the same time,
the three research sites also differ in scientifically useful ways: they have
culturally distinct food cultures and each has a different degree of integration
with the global economy. In each site, the researchers will collect information
on social and cultural meanings associated with the acquisition, preparation,
and consumption of foods; they will do mental and physical health assessments;
and they will look at the relationships between these data to weigh the
importance of biological (especially nutritional) and cultural factors as
pathways that connect food insecurity to mental ill health. Data will be
gathered through interviews about health and well-being; participant
observation; the collection of basic health biometrics; and the administration
of culturally adapted mental health scales. Cross-site comparisons will allow
the researchers to assess whether or not there is a shared experience of food
insecurity and mental health problems that we are likely to see in other global
locations, including the United States. Findings from this research will help to
better understand the connection between human society, culture, biology, and
psychology. Results also will help to improve the effectiveness of development
and aid programs designed to alleviate mental health problems and food
insecurity and alleviate some of the harmful effects of social inequality.