* 1559452
* IRES: International Collaboration on Fabrication and Characterization of CdX(X=S,Se) Based Nanohybrids for Photovoltaic and Photocatalytic Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Justyna Widera-Kalinowska, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 12/31/2019
* USD 246,645.00

Increasing awareness of environmental issues has led to interest in renewable
energy sources and waste materials recycling. This collaborative project between
Adelphi University (US) and Warsaw University (Poland) will address these topics
by focusing research on the development of novel, smart materials for
alternative energy sources and new methods of water purification using solar
energy. The project will increase the number of future U.S. workers who can
understand and solve these important issues while increasing their ability to
partner with international researchers who are also interested in these topics.
This US-Polish International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
provides eight-week, photochemistry and nanotechnology research opportunity for
twelve US students at Warsaw University, Poland. Specific efforts will be made
ensuring the involvement of underprivileged and underrepresented in STEM
minorities. Prior to their internships in Poland, students will spend the
academic year working in research laboratory at Adelphi University developing
essential technical skills relevant to the proposed research. This early-career
research experience will enhance the professional training and education of the
US undergraduate students by exposing them to modern instrumentation, advanced
nanotechnology research, and its practical application. IRES students will
develop global competencies through experiential education in an international
environment motivating and inspiring young US researchers to invest in future
research careers and become agents of change in today?s world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts will focus on fabrication and
characterization of nanohybrids combining CdX (X=S, Se) thin films with
conducting polymers and wide-bandgap semiconducting metal oxides for
photovoltaic and photocatalytic applications. Detailed studies of the
nanohybrids formation process and their characterization will help to identify
the key parameters influencing the semiconductor heterojunction quality, such
as: materials? choice, their synthesis and processing, in order to correlate
their composition, structure and performance. The experiments proposed in this
project will test this hypothesis. Both, material synthesis and characterization
of the photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic properties will be performed
using state-of-the-art electrochemical, spectroscopic and microscopic
instrumentation available at Warsaw University laboratories. The US-Polish team
expects to gain a better understanding of the basic working principles of these
nanohybrid materials in order to increase their effectiveness and construct high
efficiency solar cells and photocatalytic devices for environmental remediation.
Successful completion of the proposed research would suggest solutions on some
environmental issues, such as: hazardous waste treatment and low cost, high
efficiency, alternative energy sources. The results of this project will be
disseminated by conference presentations, journal publications and community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;