* 1559607
* Collaborative Research: Sizing Up the Smoke--Evaluating and Improving Our Ability to Predict Aged Wildfire Aerosol Size Distributions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Pierce, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 372,115.00

This research is focused on studying the aging of emissions from biomass
burning. Small particles emitted from biomass combustion can react in the
atmosphere, changing their size, number, and composition. These aging processes
will be modeled and the model results will be tested against actual data from
field campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following questions will be
investigated: (1) What are the chemical processes that, when combined with the
dispersion and coagulation of biomass-burning emissions, capture the evolution
of aerosol size and number concentrations seen in the laboratory and the field?
(2) Are the secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation rates and size-
distribution changes measured in lab experiments consistent with the field
measurements of aerosol aging? If they are not, can we determine why (e.g. lack
of continuous dilution or wall losses in chamber experiments)? (3) What
properties most strongly determine the aged biomass-burning aerosol size and
number? E.g. total mass emission flux, fresh particle size, fuel type, modified
combustion efficiency, wind speed, fire area, vertical mixing depth, sunlight.
(4) Can the variability in aged biomass-burning aerosol size and number be
captured by a simple parameterization that is a function of the most important
of the above properties?