* 1559866
* REU Site:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Marcos Caballero, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2023
* USD 658,373.00

The Physics and Astronomy Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program
at Michigan State University (MSU) offers students the opportunity to conduct
advanced research in world-class facilities while being directly supervised by
faculty who are recognized experts in their discipline. In addition, peer-
mentoring and professional development are key components of the program. This
program consists of a 10-week research experience for the period of 2016-2021
for 12 REU participants each summer. The main goal is to bring the excitement of
forefront physics research to undergraduate students, and to foster their
development into outstanding scientists by helping them develop professional
skills. Especially targeted are underrepresented students in physics and
students from smaller colleges that do not have extensive research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program offers undergraduate students
the opportunity to do forefront research in a field of physics - nuclear,
condensed matter, high-energy, astrophysics, biophysics, or physics education.
Each student in the program will work on a well-defined research project under
the direction of a faculty mentor. Students choose their projects from a list
suggested by the faculty. A wide variety of projects, both experimental and
theoretical, are available. In nuclear physics, MSU is the site of the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory and the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams,
major centers located within a few steps of the Physics and Astronomy
Department. REU students will also have access to state-of-the-art research
facilities such as the Keck Microfabrication Facility, the MSU High Performance
Computing Center, and numerous single-investigator laboratories in material
science, biophysics, and physics education. Many faculty participate in national
and international collaborations and have access to data from facilities
covering a wide range of topics, from high-energy physics, neutrino and cosmic
rays, to astrophysics. The department's theoretical faculty often collaborate
with the local experimental groups and have provided excellent research
opportunities. In addition to the faculty mentors, the REU program provides
peer-mentoring and several professional-preparation workshops, including
preparation for graduate school.