* 1559059
* Lamont-Doherty Core Repository:  Curation, Service, Professional Development, Outreach (2016-2019)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,152,315.00

Samples of seafloor rocks, cores, corals, hydrothermal vent fluids and chimney
deposits, sediments, other materials are valuable scientific resources that are
collected at great expense on scientific oceanographic expeditions. Some samples
come from shallow, near-shore environments of unusual and ephemeral character
and others come from mid-ocean ridges, seamounts, the abyssal plain, the roots
of volcanic islands, and continental shelves. Many samples come from
inaccessible places miles below the surface of the ocean and are retrieved from
the seafloor by specialized robotic vehicles, human occupied submersibles,
coring devices, and/or rock dredges. To preserve these valuable samples and make
them available to other scientists for studies not envisioned by the original
collectors, the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program of the Division of Ocean
Sciences of the National Science Foundation funds four professionally run
repositories that house samples collected by seagoing scientists. This award
funds the curation, storage, and distribution of marine seafloor samples by
Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory's Lamont-Doherty Core
Repository. Samples in this repository are distributed upon request to
scientists and educators wishing to better understand the ocean basins and
continental shelves, the distribution of their resources, and how the Earth
works. Over the past 3 years, this repository has distributed more than 8,000
samples of seafloor material to US and international scientists to advance our
knowledge of the seafloor, ocean crust, mantle, seafloor volcanism, and the
history of ocean chemistry and Earth's climate. Samples from this repository
have been used to pioneer new analytical techniques and provide important
insights into seafloor, continental margin, and sub-seafloor magmatic processes.
This award augments a significant investment by Columbia University's Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory by providing financial support for the curation and
distribution of samples to those interested in studying or exhibiting samples
from the collection. The repository staff maintains the collection, ingests new
material into the collection, collects and verifies submitted information on
samples and enters these data and metadata into an online database making the
collection visible to interested parties via the Internet so scientists and
educators can find and request samples for research and education. In addition
to the continued operation of the facility, this funding provides resources for
staff to develop high resolution analytical scanning of sediment cores to
enhance their utility to researchers. Broader impacts of the work include public
outreach via tours for primary and secondary school groups, local community
organizations, and other interested parties. It also assists in postdoctoral and
graduate student training. In addition, this award provides support for an
essential piece of marine geology infrastructure that enhances the reuse of
material of high scientific value that is collected at great expense.