* 1559126
* DRMS: Improving Public Response to Weather Warnings
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Susan Joslyn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 487,688.00

Despite improvements in weather forecasts both in terms of timeliness and
accuracy, weather-related injury and death remain a serious problem. There is
growing consensus that at least part of the problem is public distrust in the
warnings themselves. This project investigates three psychological issues
related to public distrust in weather warnings. The first has to do with
inconsistency. Forecasts for high-impact weather events are often made days in
advance to allow residents time to prepare. Subsequent forecasts for the same
event may differ from earlier forecasts, giving the impression of inconsistency.
Forecasters tend to assume that people distrust inconsistent forecasts and are
reluctant to change forecasts even when better information becomes available,
preferring to sacrifice accuracy for consistency. This project tests whether
inconsistency or inaccuracy is more injurious to trust. Distrust may also arise
from the fact that severe weather events are usually presented as certain
because forecasters worry that admitting uncertainty signals incompetence. Most
people, however, understand that weather prediction involves some level of
uncertainty. Therefore too much certainty may seem implausible. This project
tests whether adding an uncertainty estimate (e.g. the probability of a tornedo
at your location) increases or decreases trust and compliance with warnings.
Finally, distrust in warning forecasts may lead to delaying precautionary action
in order to gather more information. If people wait too long, they may not have
enough time to adequately protect themselves before severe weather hits. This
project will determine the appropriate information to include in weather
warnings to inspire trust and allow people to make timely decisions. Thus, the
results of this project will influence forecast communication practices to
provide people with better and more trustworthy information upon which to base
critical weather related decisions, ultimately saving lives. The value of
accurate weather warnings with generous lead times will be realized only if the
public trusts them and acts accordingly. This research will inform "best
practices" in warning communication procedures to promote both trust in the
forecast and timely responses. As such, results of this work may well improve
compliance with warnings and save lives.

The research team investigates these issues in experimental studies, using
realistic weather-related decision tasks. Establishing the hypothesized effects
on trust and decisions in a controlled laboratory environment will permit
testing forecast communication methods to address them. Of particular interest
is the inclusion of specific uncertainty estimates. Conveying the notion that
the forecast was intended as probabilistic may reduce effects of both
inconsistency and inaccuracy. Uncertainty estimates may also attenuate delay
beyond optimal stopping by satisfying the need for additional information.
Likelihood communication, however, may need to be simplified in dynamic, time
pressured situations so color coded risk scales will also be tested. Thus, these
experiments will compare identical situations in which people receive either
probabilistic forecasts, color-codes or conventional warnings, to determine
which method leads to greater trust and better decisions. In sum, the goal is to
carve out answers to a set of specific but critical questions, using careful
experimental procedures that make direct comparisons between one situation and
another and one form of communication and another, holding all other factors
constant to yield firm conclusions about their effects. It is a cognitive-
experimental approach to what has heretofore been a problem tackled primarily
with other social science tools. This work will benefit the scientific community
at large by providing a unique theoretical understanding of the cognitive
processes involved in interpreting, trusting and acting on complex and dynamic
predictions, with implications in diverse domains.