* 1559691
* The Polar Geospatial Center: Community and Facility Support
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2024
* Claire Porter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Allen Pope
* 04/30/2024
* USD 18,914,586.00

Title: The Polar Geospatial Center: Community and Facility
Support&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Polar
Geospatial Center (PGC) is a polar science and logistics support organization at
the University of Minnesota. The research community finds itself in the midst of
a scientific and geospatial revolution sparked by the availability of an
unprecedented volume of open geospatial data, as well as access to high-
resolution optical imagery made available by the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency (NGA). In support of NSF?s Polar science mission of
understanding the earth and its systems, exploring the geographical frontier,
and performing science enabled by in polar setting, PGC uses these data to
provide mapping, GIS, and remote sensing solutions to researchers and logistics
groups. PGC provides products and services including: mapping and GIS analysis;
access to sub-meter commercial satellite imagery for the Antarctic and Arctic;
expertise to task, manage, process and deliver high-level value-added products
to the NSF polar community; domain and institutional knowledge to solve a broad
range of geospatial problems; and educational courses including online material
to transfer PGC?s knowledge and experience to the community. The PGC is
collaborating with the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency to create a
publicly available high-resolution digital elevation model (DEM) of the entire
Arctic from high-resolution satellite imagery. These data will be used by the
Arctic community to support activities including transportation, national
defense, land management, sustainable development, and scientific
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The Polar Geospatial
Center (PGC) facilitates access to geospatial resources and knowledge for the
polar community. PGC staff has a direct one-to-one relationship with each user,
tailoring product delivery to the expertise and needs of the user?s specific
science or logistics goals. To this end, PGC maintains an extensive online
archive of sub-meter electro-optical commercial imagery licensed through the
National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency?s (NGA) EnhancedView program. PGC works
to automate labor-intensive processing workflows using the Extreme Science and
Discovery Environment (XSEDE) and Blue Waters high performance computing
infrastructures, and is developing a web-based imagery and geospatial product
delivery system (FRIDGE; Federal Research Imagery Download and Geodata
Exploration). This delivery system is based around a task management and queuing
tool that interfaces with PGC?s user management database and PGC?s HPC cluster.
Polar digital elevation models (DEM) will be produced using the Surface
Extraction from TIN-based Search-space Minimization (SETSM) algorithm and the
Ames Stereo Pipeline. These products have an expected accuracy of 4m without
ground control and sub-meter accuracy when ground control is used. A key
component of PGC's mission is training of today's young geospatial students in
the use of imagery to solve scientific problems. PGC offers workshops, online
instructional material, and collaborative imagery processing workflow
development. PGC?s goal is to provide rapid and cost-effective access to
geospatial data and education for the purpose of promoting polar science.