* 1559387
* The Devoted Actor: Sacred values, identity fusion and intergroup conflict
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Jeremy Ginges, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 653,245.00

Common approaches to resource and political conflicts often assume adversaries
understand the world on the basis of rational cost-benefit choices. In contrast,
research with populations in conflict zones around the world indicate that many
violent or intractable conflicts involve what are called "devoted actors", whose
often violent actions are driven not by cost-benefit judgments but by a
commitment to sacred values (e.g. "My values are not for sale"; "Do the right
thing regardless of the consequences)", a feeling of fusion with the group, and
a set of perceptions of the motives of adversary groups. The goal of this
research is to create a theoretical framework that explores how these aspects of
human psychology interact and will lead to novel insights that will help answer
questions such as: How do people trade off competing sets of sacred values, and
ties to groups they are fused with (e.g., to family or nation)? Why do some
devoted actors choose to use violence while others refrain from violence? The
results of this work may expand possibilities for conflict reduction, including
counter-radicalization efforts and negotiation and adjudication of conflicting
values over transcultural boundaries. The research also contributes to building
the infrastructure of science and involves not only training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellow whose diversity mirrors the diversity
of the cultures studied, but also the research team continues to engage with the
communities in the research and to foster the research training of members in
these communities.

The aim of the proposed research is to understand how sacred values (SVs),
identity fusion theory (IFT), and beliefs about the nature and motives of
adversary groups influence intergroup conflicts, including their escalation into
seemingly intractable violence. This involves developing and testing theory
regarding how these three phenomena interact to produce devoted actors, people
willing to sacrifice material concerns and responsibility to primary reference
groups and suffer, die, and kill for abstract ideals (such as nation, religious
or ideological groups). Studies in the United States, the West Bank/Gaza,
Morocco and Spain investigate (a) the identity function of SVs, (b) the way SVs
and identity fusion interact under threat to influence moral trade-offs between
competing sacred values and identity groups, (c) the moderating role of beliefs
about the outgroups in facilitating violent parochial altruism, that is, self-
sacrifice for the ingroup; and (d) leverage this knowledge to develop
interventions that facilitate more cooperative intergroup interactions. To do
this, the research team employs the complementary talents of senior researchers
and students in three disciplines (social psychology, political psychology,
anthropology) who have played leading roles in developing knowledge about SVs,
IFT and the way morally motivated choices play out in resource and political
conflicts. Using innovative online and offline behavioral and self-report
measures the team has developed, the methodology integrates basic and applied
research, combining laboratory and field experiments, surveys, and interviews in
order to provide "real-world" relevance for policy makers.