* 1559819
* REU Site: Integrated Bioengineering Research, Education, and Outreach Experiences for Females and Underrepresented Minorities at WPI
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kristen Billiar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 359,854.00

This renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI), entitled, "Integrated Bioengineering
Research, Education, and Outreach Experiences for Females and Minorities at
WPI", will engage a diverse cohort of students in research projects within the
intellectual theme of Bioengineering with a focus on systematic strategies for
problem solving and mentoring. The proposed integrated training experience will
guide undergraduate students, recruited from underrepresented groups from non-
research-intensive schools, through a research project; while also helping them
understand how they could pursue an engineering career. Further, by working as
mentors to middle school girls in a week-long Bio-Design Program, they will
appreciate how their involvement in engineering can benefit the next generation
of students - building confidence in their abilities and encouraging them to
continue to postgraduate studies in engineering. For the middle school students,
participation will increase their interest in engineering and enhance their
ability to succeed in math and science courses that are essential for
engineering careers. The programs' research results will be disseminated broadly
by the PIs, participating faculty, and students via scientific publications,
conference presentations, and internet-accessble materials. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Each undergraduate student will conduct research over a ten week
summer experience on a project that is specifically designed for his/her
abilities, under the mentorship of both a faculty member and graduate student.
The ten participating REU faculty span multiple engineering departments and have
a strong history of involving undergraduates in research, manuscript
development, and conference presentations. To foster a strong, shared experience
for the students, the program will begin with a "Boot Camp" activity. Weekly
workshops that address communication, ethics, mentoring, and the nature of
research will help the students gain professional skills and personal confidence
that are critical for their success. All of the research will be conducted in a
new multidisciplinary research center.