* 1559670
* Electrocatalysis on Structure Controlled Metal Nanocrystals: Unraveling Particle Structure-Catalytic Activity Relationships
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Shouzhong Zou, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2016
* USD 117,375.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Shouzhong Zou of Miami University will carry out studies of the
relationships between nanocrystal structure and catalytic activity. Dr. Zou and
his students will study electrocatalytic activity of shape, size and composition
controlled platinum and platinum-based alloy nanocrystals towards reactions of
importance in low temperature fuel cells, using a combination of conventional
electrochemical methods, surface vibration spectroscopy, and single particle
electrochemistry. Fundamental insights of catalyst structure-activity
relationships gained from these studies will aid in rational design and
development of highly active and durable fuel cell catalysts, and breaking the
bottlenecks in the development and deployment of low temperature fuel cells.

One of the key technical challenges in fuel cell development and
commercialization is to find low-cost, highly-efficient catalysts having a long
lifetime. By identifying the structural factors dictating the catalytic activity
of nanoscale catalysts toward fuel cell reactions, the proposed research
directly addresses this pressing issue and will make significant advances in
energy conversion in fuel cells. The concepts developed in this research will be
applicable to other important structure sensitive reactions as well. In addition
this research program will train postdoctoral researchers, graduate students and
undergraduate students in electrocatalysis and fuel cells, and will also provide
outreach to high schools through a teacher-researcher program.