* 1559550
* Upwelling and Lateral Exchange Over the Patagonian Shelf and Impacts on Southern Ocean Primary Productivity
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ricardo Matano, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 447,823.00

The South Atlantic sector hosts the largest chlorophyll-a blooms of the Southern
Ocean, which are likely associated with off-shelf flows from the Patagonian
region. To have such a significant impact on the productivity of the deep ocean
the off-shelf flows from Patagonia must be large and exhibit a high nutrient
content. The overall goal of this project is to characterize the physical
processes underlying the high fertility and high volume transport of Patagonia's
outflows. It is hypothesized that the high nutrient content of the Patagonia
shelf outflows are partially sustained by a unique shelfbreak upwelling system
extending from the Drake Passage to the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence. The
hypotheses will be addressed with the analysis of a series of nested high
resolution model simulations. This research is relevant to the climate and
marine ecosystem community research. Any change in the circulation in the
western South Atlantic, nutrient and iron input to the euphotic zone,
continental margin discharge and biological activity will have a substantial
effect on the balance of outgassing of natural carbon dioxide and uptake of
anthropogenic carbon dioxide. A close study of the input of iron and its control
on the ecosystem will further enlighten us on future changes of carbon dioxide
fluxes in these regions. Furthermore, it will provide some insight on which
processes and on which scale the climate community model will have to resolve
them. The research may also help in the design of future field campaigns to
address the unresolved questions of differences in primary production between
the Pacific and Atlantic sectors of the Southern Ocean and target sites where
observations will provide answers to these questions. Graduate training will
also be an important component of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
hypothesized that this highly productive system is composed of three localized
upwelling centers: the first extending along the northern portion of the
Patagonian shelfbreak, from 48 S to the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence; the second
centered on the Burdwood Bank, a relatively shallow bank located in the northern
portion of the Drake Passage; and the third centered on the Malvinas (Falkland)
Islands. A second hypothesis is that the large off-shelf flows from Patagonia
are driven by interactions between the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) and
the bottom topography in the northern portion of the Drake Passage. To address
these hypotheses, several process-oriented numerical experiments will be
analyzed. These experiments, which are based on a high-resolution nested model
configuration, will also allow an investigation of the impact of sub-mesoscale
processes on the regional circulation. There are very few studies on the
physical mechanisms sustaining Patagonia's extraordinary shelfbreak blooms and
its mass exchanges with the Southern Ocean. In fact, there are no previous
studies on the Burdwood Bank and the Malvinas Islands upwelling centers and very
few on the exchanges between the Patagonian shelf and the Southern Ocean. There
are also no previous studies on the impact of sub-mesoscale processes on the
southwestern Atlantic circulation. A pilot study, however, shows that these
processes influence important and novel changes within the regional circulation.
The numerical experiments to be analyzed by this project are the state-of-the-
art for this region. Some of them are the legacy of previous research efforts by
this team, while others will be executed during the course of this program.