* 1559151
* Role of Mesoscale Ocean Dynamics in Air-Sea Coupling over the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 829,465.00

The atmosphere and ocean interact on a wide range of spatial and temporal
scales, and these interactions modulate weather and climate variability, as well
as oceanic uptake of anomalous heat and carbon. At the oceanic mesoscale (about
10 to 100 km scales), advection is sufficiently strong to create strong
gradients in sea surface temperature. As air blows across these very sharp
fronts, the atmosphere cannot fully adjust, which leads to significant effects
such as atmospheric cooling (warming) of warm (cold) sea surface temperatures.
These effects are well pronounced in the Southern Ocean, where powerful
mesoscale variability abounds. The main goal of this project is to explore
mesoscale atmosphere-ocean interactions in the Southern Ocean and to understand
how the ocean mesoscale creates sharp sea surface temperature fronts that
modulate these interactions. This study will serve to inform global climate
modeling efforts in terms of the identifying the key processes and required
ocean resolution needed to correctly capture air-sea interactions. The project
will advance a career of a female investigator and will train two graduate
students in the fields of Physical Oceanography and Climate
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmosphere-ocean coupling at mesoscale plays an
important, but poorly understood role in climate variability, atmosphere and
ocean dynamics, uptake of atmospheric gases and biogeochemistry. Understanding
of this coupling has large practical importance for climate modeling, because a
vast majority of climate models cannot fully resolve the mesoscale, which leads
to biases in the simulations. The main hypothesis of this project is that a
significant part of the sea surface temperature anomaly variability at the
oceanic mesoscale is driven by mesoscale oceanic advection. The analysis will be
carried out in a fully coupled model system in which mesoscale sea surface
temperature anomalies both affect and are affected by the atmosphere, and the
study will employ a blend of advanced theoretical considerations, comprehensive
coupled simulations and targeted idealized studies, all with high resolution in
the ocean. The particular focus of this study is on the Southern Ocean, both
because of its large role in climate and because mesoscale variability is
ubiquitous there, but our conclusions are expected to be relevant to the other
parts of the World Ocean. One particular strength of this research is the
merging of comprehensive climate simulations with a combination of idealized
modeling and theory, in a fully coupled regime and with dynamically consistent
mesoscale ocean circulation.