* 1559912
* REU Site: Research in Biomathematics, Enumerative Combinatorics, Networks, and Statistics at Valparaiso University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Lara Pudwell, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Cesar Silva
* 03/31/2021
* USD 324,999.00

This award supports the summer REU site Valparaiso Experience in Research by
Undergraduate Mathematicians (VERUM). VERUM will recruit twelve undergraduate
students each year. The students will work in teams of three, for nine weeks, on
solving open problems in biomathematics, enumeration, networks, or statistics.
Each group will work with a project director who will provide guidance and
feedback to the students on a daily basis. Participants will investigate open
questions of interest to the larger mathematical community, therefore yielding
potentially publishable results. The program will provide undergraduates with a
first research experience in mathematics. Most of the participants will be
students from primarily undergraduate institutions who have not yet decided on a
graduate school career path. Additional attention will be given to recruiting
participants from groups under-represented in STEM, including first-generation
college students. The award is supported by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
and the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences (BIO). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By modeling the research
experience of a mathematician, the program will produce students engaged with,
and prepared to join, the mathematical community. The program emphasizes the
professional development of the students while encouraging them to pursue
mathematically related careers and graduate studies, thus increasing the
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.
Students will become part of a small professional group that will provide
support during their undergraduate careers and beyond. As part of the program,
students will visit graduate schools to learn about the experiences of graduate
students in different types of institutions. Students will also be exposed to
different areas of mathematics by following the progress of each research group
and by listening to, and interacting with, weekly visitors to the program. VERUM
participants will increase their communication and presentation skills through
weekly group presentations, presentations at local and national conferences, and
through writing a final project report.