* 1559445
* IRES: US-Denmark Collaboration to Create Next Generation Biosensors
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Julia King, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2020
* USD 244,528.00

IRES: US-Denmark Collaboration to Create Next Generation
Biosensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a great need for the development of
fast and simple detection devices for diseases ranging from cancer to malaria.
Not only will this assist in diagnosing diseases, it will also help to monitor
treatments and allow for a quick change in treatment options if required. A
better way to tackle these challenges is to work with an interdisciplinary team
of scientists and engineers. The team will likely develop better solutions if
they are not only diverse in training, but also diverse in culture. For this
reason, we will take a diverse group of students, ranging from Michigan Tech
graduate students, undergraduates from Michigan Tech and other universities, and
community college students, and have them work for the summer in Denmark. Aarhus
University is a world-class research institution working on health diagnostics
for the future. The science and engineering students will be joined in this
experience by a communications student. This student will assist the technical
students in the creation of videos that describes their experience in the lab
and the projects they contributed to. This is a shift is how scientific
education is often taught. This project will break the cycle of engineers and
scientists only speaking to one another and help open the lines of communication
to show the public what is happening behind the laboratory doors. The technical
students will greatly benefit from the exposure to technical communication while
the communication student will learn more about working with technical
researchers. The end product will be 18 highly trained students who will have
increased opportunity to explore technical careers while producing videos that
explain to the public the importance of the research they conducted. The
technical students will also create and present posters at a local technical
conference that highlight the research conducted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today?s
global health challenges require interdisciplinary knowledge, international
research collaboration, and intercultural communication competencies. This
project will provide international research experiences for an interdisciplinary
cohort of students focused on early detection of malaria and cancer though an
established collaboration with Michigan Tech and Aarhus University in Denmark.
The goal is to create scientists and engineers who can creatively and
collaboratively solve future problems in health diagnostics and beyond, and we
strive to increase the students? perspective through this international
experience. Our team consists of a biologist, pathologist, mechanical engineer
and chemical engineers. This project will explore new disease biomarkers,
determine the clinical relevance of the biomarkers and design new microdevices
that will improve clinical adoption of the new technology. Over a three-year
period, the proposed summer international research experiences will prepare,
annually, a cohort of five diverse science and engineering students to engage in
an eight-week global biosensor research experience and one technical
communications student to document and disseminate the research efforts. A
unique aspect of this project is the inclusion of a technical communications
student. This will provide student researchers with an education in scientific
communication, which is often lacking in current scientific education, but is
extremely important for the future of scientific funding and public rapport in
the U.S. The incorporation of a technical communications student will
synergistically teach the scientific students the difficulties and importance of
scientific communication to the public. It is expected that all the participants
will return as more engaged students with an increased propensity for new ideas
and collaboration. In addition, the students will engage other students through
poster sessions of their experience and professionally produced online videos
that will provide the motivation for others to seek out international research
opportunities.