* 1559894
* REU Site: REU Research Experiences and Mentoring in Data-Driven Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 359,587.00

Non-Technical: This REU site will help support NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science by providing multi-disciplinary research experience for
undergraduates with exciting 10-week summer-based experiences in computer
science/engineering laboratories, enabling work on both fundamental and applied
data-driven problems, focused on applying machine learning techniques, data
analytics, and parallel computing technologies, and preparing them for future
scientific career. The REU students will have the opportunity to utilize state-
of-the-art high performance computing resources to tackle big data problems
present in a number of problem domains, including Bioengineering, Environmental
Engineering and Biomedical Engineering. PI's will leverage the Massachusetts
Green High Performance Computing Center located in Holyoke, MA to provide a
backdrop for this multi-disciplinary REU Site. The program will provide students
with extensive cyber-infrastructure training, equipping program participants
with the skillsets to explore the boundaries between math, science, engineering
and parallel computing that are truly multi-disciplinary. The REU Site is
located at Northeastern University in the heart of Boston.

Technical: The REU projects span a wide range of technical fields in Computer
Science and Engineering. Example projects include: applying machine learning to
cluster Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) data, data mining Twitter
feeds to identify trends in climate change, utilizing hardware accelerators to
detect cancerous tumors in 4-D Computed Tomography images, and utilizing
regression analysis on gene expressions to understand patterns in retina
regeneration. One novelty of this site is its focus on recruiting efforts,
tailoring their research experiences for students that have only completed their
freshmen year of their undergraduate education, engaging them early in research
on their academic pathway. The REU site works to create a mentoring eco-system
at both Northeastern University and the partnering institutions, developing a
model that is transferrable to other institutions. The program builds
relationships with six urban community colleges/universities to build a pipeline
of students, creating a diverse pool of REU candidates, showing students
potential pathways to graduate education and research. The program leverages the
CISE REU Toolkit for pre- and post-program surveys, as well as for recruiting.
The REU-D3 Site is focused on effecting changes in mentoring attitudes and
practices at the host and partnering academic institutions.