* 1559405
* Identifying Household Wealth Effects
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Niloy Bose, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2018
* USD 98,541.00

This project uses a unique approach to measure the effects of changes in real
estate values on household expenditures. For most homeowners, their house is
their single largest financial asset. Economic theory predicts that changes in
house values should result in changes in consumption; if the value of your house
has increased, you are richer and presumably would consider an increase in
spending. However, identifying the size of this effect is complicated. Both
house values and household consumption are also affected by a number of other
factors. For example, easy credit may increase both housing prices and
consumption. The challenge is magnified because we have limited data on
consumption at the level of individual households. This project uses a 'natural
experiment' approach. The economists will look at housing prices in a
residential area of Connecticut that was directly affected by an event that was
not predicted. This is an exogenous shock to housing values. Using information
on spending by individual households inside and outside of the affected area,
the researchers hope to identify the structural component associated with
changes in house prices. Better understanding of the relationship between house
prices and household expenditures will allow investors and policymakers to
better judge the future effects of housing market fluctuations on the
macroeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is identification of the structural
relationship between house price and household expenditures by combining a
natural experiment with credit bureau data on credit card purchases. The data
includes information on housing prices and housing characteristics on a parcel-
by-parcel basis for all parcels located in four Connecticut towns: Newton,
Monroe, Oxford, and Southbury.