* 1559370
* Forecasting and Political Discourse
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Barbara Mellers, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 489,570.00

IARPA (Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity) recently sponsored a
series of geopolitical forecasting tournaments to discover the most accurate
possible methods for crowd-sourcing and aggregating probabilistic predictions of
geopolitical events. Our group, the Good Judgment Project, competed and won the
tournament each year from 2011 to 2015. In a 2015 study based on data from this
project, Mellers, Arkes, and Chen examined changes in actively open-minded
thinking (i.e., the tendency to look for evidence that contradicts one's favored
views) between the time participants entered and exited the tournament.
Forecasters were significantly more open-minded at the end of the tournament.
Even opinionated forecasters appeared to become more circumspect when making
judgments that were publicly scored for accuracy. These incentives may have
encouraged self-critical and flexible patterns of thinking because the quest for
accuracy may have trumped the desire to maintain partisan positions. The boost
in open-mindedness (perhaps driven by the self-discipline needed to be accurate)
may well be the most important discovery of the IARPA tournaments. This project
moves this research forward with designs for new tournaments to pry open closed
minds still further. The research team examines three behavioral interventions
that might increase open-mindedness and reduce polarization that characterizes
many political debates. The discovery of methods to change opinions and
cognitive styles may reduce divisiveness and ultimately improve decision making
in a world that seems more fractured and divided than
ever.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores whether forecasting tournaments
can be designed to increase open-mindedness. The research team uses an existing
public tournament to explore three factors. The first is accountability to a
heterogeneous forecasting team with variability in political orientations. The
previous IARPA tournaments showed that team forecasts were more accurate than
independent forecasts. The researchers, however, never explored team
composition, and this factor may be critical. The second factor is group pre-
commitment to cognitive flexibility. Before the outcomes of events are known,
forecasters will state whether they would be willing to change their minds about
various debates depending on the outcomes. In "before" surveys, participants
will be asked: If outcome A occurs (or does not occur), how much should your
political party (or the other party) change its mind about issue X, "After"
surveys will measure changes in cognitive styles and political views. The third
factor is perspective taking. When forecasting questions are released, the
researchers will ask liberals to write a paragraph to express the conservative
position, and vice versa. Participants will be told that their work will be
evaluated based on how well it captures the essence of the other side's
position. The research team will use Pre and post measures of open-mindedness
and political viewpoints to evaluate the effectiveness and changes that occur
from the interventions.