* 1559844
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Data Integration Training for Globally Engaged Undergraduates
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Seth Feinberg, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2019
* USD 335,935.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This REU Site award
to Western Washington University will support the training of 30 students over a
17-week program during the three years of program duration. Students will learn
advanced statistical and demographic training in the social sciences, and apply
their training to original research projects generated in collaboration with the
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda. The REU program provides an
experience to undergraduate students that is typically not available to them at
their home institutions. Students from primarily undergraduate colleges and
universities and from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply. The
primary objective is to train social science undergraduates in research
methodology in a cross-cultural and multi-disciplinary learning environment.
This REU site helps social science students learn the basic concepts of good
science, develop data management skills, collect original data, reach
independent conclusions, mentor subsequent cohorts, and share their findings and
data with professional audiences that could benefit from student research. This
REU also provides a unique opportunity to contribute research findings to a
nation's larger focus on health, capacity building, and economic advancement.
Students work with the PIs, Rwandan colleagues, and the NISR staff to create and
administer qualitative field interviews with stakeholders responsible for
reproductive health. The research question to examine is whether there is
variation in identified needs based on gender, age, region, education, and
family status. Students also utilize existing quantitative data collected by the
NISR staff in Kigali and learn how to document data in compliance with
international standards. Student research contributes to studies on the
differences in change in reproductive health indicators by region, urban/rural
residence, education, and wealth. The REU Site participants explore additional
questions utilizing NISR data, with a particular focus on child health and
nutrition. The NSF Office of International Science and Engineering has co-funded
this project.