* 1559125
* 2016 Cooperative Congressional Election Study
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2018
* Stephen Ansolabehere, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2018
* USD 630,407.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2016 Cooperative Congressional Study
(CCES) is a collaboration of over 50 different university research teams
throughout the United States. Collectively this group designs and fields a large
sample survey of at least 50,000 American adults. The survey measures
demographics, political opinions and attitudes, and electoral behavior,
especially in the congressional elections, but also in the Presidential election
and state elections. The very large sample size allows researchers to have
sufficient data to study state electorates as well as the entire nation. The
survey is used to study who votes and why, and what explains the choices that
voters make. The CCES, which started in 2006, makes available at very low cost a
survey platform that is open to all. Since its inception, the project has
involved more than 100 different research teams and hundreds of faculty and
student researchers, and it has conducted interviews with over 250,000 American
adults. The survey helps to create and sustain a network of researchers
interested in state and national elections, survey design, and public opinion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2016
Cooperative Congressional Election Survey is developed by a consortium of
research teams. Each research team that wishes to be involved in the project
purchases a 1,000-person sample survey from the same firm. Each individual team
determines half of the questions on its survey. The other half of the content
(Common Content) is created by a design committee, drawn from the participating
teams. Common Content consists of questions that every team would like to
measure or questions that are of broad interest and require a very large sample.
The project, thus, fields as many surveys as there are teams and also produces a
single large sample survey that consists of the Common Content. The Common
Content is designed by a committee in consultation with all teams involved in
the survey. The survey will be fielded over the Internet, with samples
constructed to be nationally representative. Each team will receive the data
from its own 1,000-person survey and a dataset consisting of the 50,000+
observations from the Common Content survey. Survey data are validated using
voter validation and through comparisons of state level election results to the
survey results from the subsamples for each state. The data produced by this
project will be a 2016 Common Content dataset, along with accompanying
contextual data, as well as separate Team Content datasets and will be available
on the CCES Dataverse website.