* 1559779
* REU Site: Evolution of Biodiversity across the Tree of Life
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Thorsten Lumbsch, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2019
* USD 244,874.00

This REU Site award to the Field Museum of Natural History, located in Chicago,
IL, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2016-2018. Students will conduct hands-on research in biodiversity science and
receive training in cutting-edge techniques and analysis in evolutionary biology
through guided mentorship by museum curators and scientists. Students will learn
research techniques that include DNA sequencing and computational analysis of
genetic and genomic data, morphological measurements and phylogenetic analysis,
and microbiology and next-generation microbial sequencing. Scientific projects
to be conducted by the students include the evolution of morphological variation
in extinct therapsids, tropical bird biogeography, population genetics of
sharks, influence of disease on bird genetic diversity in urban environments,
quantitative analysis of meteorites, the influence of hydrostatic pressure on
morphological diversity in octopuses, and co-diversification of ants and their
gut bacterial communities. In addition students will receive career mentoring in
a diversity of STEM fields, gain experiences in public outreach and science
communication, receive training in ethics/responsible conduct of research, and
participate in a diversity workshop to help overcome bias in science. Selection
of applicants will be completed by the host curator or scientist and students
will be recruited from across the country, leveraging local university
connections, to insure participation of underrepresented minorities. Students
may apply online through: https://www.fieldmuseum.org/REU.

It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted and will create a video about their research
experience to share in an annual symposium. Students will gain experiences in
public outreach and science communication through sharing their research on the
public museum areas. In addition, many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. These internships will provide training for the next
generation of evolutionary biologists in collections-based organismal
bioscience.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.fieldmuseum.org/REU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Corrie Moreau at
cmoreau@fieldmuseum.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Thorsten Lumbsch at
tlumbsch@fieldmuseum.org).