* 1559379
* FEW Workshop Proposal: Defining the Opportunities and Challenges for Research and Design Strategies to Support Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Eric Rath, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 38,601.00

1559379 &lt;br/&gt;Padget, Steven R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is very
different from almost all other NSF workshops in that it has been conceived and
organized by architects, who will also lead the on-site workshop activity. The
workshop structure incorporates the classical architectural design charrette
approach, as well as a kick-off symposium. In the design charrette, groups of
student designers will collaborate to propose design solutions for a complex
INFEWS-related problem, where INFEWS denotes Innovations at the Nexus of Food,
Energy, and Water Systems. The symposium component will bring together
researchers from the Humanities, Social Sciences, Physical Sciences, Economics,
and Design Professions for presentations, panels, and discussion groups to
explore the interrelations of the social, environmental, economic, and design
aspects of INFEWS in the built environment. Symposium panel experts will
interact with design students to frame and stimulate design efforts, provide
feedback to the students' design concepts, and discuss and evaluate the design
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop objectives include: 1) identifying new
and important opportunities for multi-disciplinary research and design in
INFEWS-related arenas; 2) examining how recent advances in technology and design
can be employed in or adapted to INFEWS-related development and solutions; 3)
identifying multi-disciplinary research, design and development challenges,
knowledge gaps, and INFEWS-related research needs; and 4) identifying
documentation methods to disseminate multi-disciplinary research findings for
future design development. This Workshop provides a new paradigm for integrating
quantitative and qualitative research (analysis) with design (synthesis)
methods. It also affords interdisciplinary design teams a unique opportunity to
incorporate input from experts in various aspects of the Food, Energy, and Water
(FEW) systems into the prototyping process for tools and products. The
interacting components of the Workshop provide a useful feedback loop for the
symposium participants and the design teams. The visualization of design ideas
from the design charrette will be documented in a publication. A white paper,
authored by the workshop steering committee, will summarize symposium results
that identify interdisciplinary INFEWS research directions. Workshop activities
will be documented and disseminated using various forms of web-presence during
and after the Workshop, and the committee will pursue other publication
opportunities following the Workshop. Broader Impacts : The two-component
Workshop format will be integrated into the educational agenda of many
architecture design studios at the University of Kansas as a means to promote
undergraduate and graduate research. The workshop will also help galvanize
research collaboration among faculty across multiple disciplines and facilitate
applied research with design professionals.