* 1559540
* IRES: U.S.-Turkey Research Collaboration in Conservation Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Ece Erdogmus, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 05/31/2021
* USD 249,888.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract Proposal: 1559540 PI Name:
Erdogmus, Ece

Proposal Title: U.S.-Turkey Research Collaboration in Conservation Engineering
Institution: University of Nebraska-Lincoln (Omaha Campus) Abstract Date:
03/24/16

Rehabilitation of historical/existing structures is an area ripe for research.
With an increasing number of aging structures in the United States, there is a
growing need for workforce development to address the potential for historic
preservation in coming years. The goal of this project is to develop a cadre of
experts with specialized training and global awareness in the engineering
aspects of historical preservation projects. To address this need, Dr. Erdogmus
from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will collaborate with the Izmir
Institute of Technology (IZTECH) of Turkey. This 3-year program will bring a
group of nine US students to Turkey for a seven-week summer research in historic
preservation engineering. It is the intention of the PI to recruit at least 50%
of the cohort each year from underrepresented groups. The Turkish mentors from
IZTECH are Dr. Mine Turan and Dr. Engin Aktas, representing the Architectural
Restoration and Civil Engineering Departments, respectively. Under the
experienced leadership of the hosts and the PI, the US students participating in
the program will be provided with meaningful and comprehensive research
experiences comprised of lab-work at IZTECH campus and a variety of field-
applications that involve historical sites.

This three year U.S.-Turkey IRES program will involve American graduate and
undergraduate students in research projects at the interface of structural
engineering and conservation with three focus themes: 1) Engineering-
conservation coordination for assessment of historical structures and materials
prior to an intervention, 2) Engineering- conservation coordination for the
development of compatible materials for historical retrofits, and 3) Post-
Intervention assessment and risk analysis for the collapse-safety of structures.
Under each of these focus themes, the IRES students will conduct specific
projects and tasks; namely, the students will: a) Develop a novel method to
provide a closed feedback loop on complex sites, which involves a nondestructive
evaluation (NDE) based rating system for each element correlating the visual
assessments to its interior damage levels. This will then inform variant
constitutive models and aid in the design for the conservation intervention. b)
Investigate chemical and mechanical properties of modern cements from different
locations in order to evaluate their behavior under extreme heat, salt water,
and freeze-thaw cycles when paired with different historical stones. c) Develop
a decision making algorithm for historical structures using probabilistic
assessments and sensitivity analyses to identify safety concerns and to predict
design event recurrence intervals for which a given structure remains safe. This
algorithm will then support decisions for or against intervention, ensuring only
a minimum level of invasive intervention applied to the historic site. This work
is funded by the IRES program of NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).