* 1559029
* IRES: International Research Experience for Students on Design Automation of Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2015,10/31/2018
* Yiyu Shi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 249,746.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable U.S.
students to conduct high-quality research on design automation of three
dimensional integrated circuits (3D ICs), in collaboration with their faculty
mentors at National Tsing Hua University (NTHU) in Taiwan. Such experiences
expose U.S. students to the international research community at a critical early
stage in their careers. It is expected that through participating in this
project, U.S. students will gain extensive experience on the research of 3D ICs,
on the international semiconductor prospects, on the culture in Taiwan, and on
performing and collaborating in an international environment in general. The
experience will also be shared to the broader community through the involvement
of personal social media, Web 2.0 based forum, carefully integrated activities
such as research for undergraduate students, as well as outreach events for
local schools. In particular, this project will have a dedicated focus on the
career development of minorities and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES
project provides U.S. students with valuable research experience related to the
design automation of three-dimensional integrated circuits (3D ICs) in Hsin-Chu,
Taiwan, where the world's largest semiconductor industry is located. The project
will select five (5) graduate students and two (2) undergraduate students
nation-wide each year and support them to visit the Computer Science Department
at National Tsing Hua University (NTHU) over a period of twelve (12) weeks. They
will be mentored by the professors at NTHU. The primary research objective is to
address fundamental issues in 3D ICs and to bridge the gap between advanced 3D
fabrication processes and the designers using these technologies. The Moore's
Law states that the transistor density on integrated circuits doubles
approximately every two years. However, this trend is becoming increasingly
difficult to keep due to the high cost associated with semiconductor scaling.
Accordingly, the semiconductor industry has started to look for alternative
technologies that offer a path beyond the limits of device scaling. Among all
the possible alternatives, the three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) is
generally considered to be the most promising one, at least in the next decade,
for its full compatibility with current technologies. Instead of making
transistors smaller, it stacks multiple chips vertically for higher integration
density, shorter wirelength, smaller footprint, higher speed, and lower power
consumption. As such, 3D IC has become a very hot topic in academic research and
industry practice in recent years. The students will work on projects related to
the yield enhancement of 3D ICs and the novel design flows for two promising 3D
technologies - interposer-based 3D ICs and monolithic 3D ICs. The research can
significantly increase the yield of 3D ICs without involving area penalty. It is
anticipated that the breakthroughs from this IRES project at NTHU can have a
direct impact on the 3D IC industry.