* 1559745
* REU Site: Mathematics with Applications to Medical Sciences, Biophysics, and Inverse Problems at IUPUI
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Yaroslav Molkov, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Cesar Silva
* 04/30/2020
* USD 249,994.00

This program of Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) at Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) will provide eight
undergraduate students from across the United States with the opportunity to
conduct applied mathematics research in the medical sciences, biophysics, and
inverse problems. The students will spend eight weeks during the summer working
with faculty mentors from the IUPUI Department of Mathematical Sciences on one
of four main projects: (i) modeling the redistribution of blood flow and
pressure in the leg following a major arterial occlusion, (ii) investigating the
influence of abused drugs on the human brain, (iii) analyzing the diffusion
dynamics of biomolecules, and (iv) uncovering methods to solve inverse problems
for phase retrieval, gravitational fields, and acoustic waves. Research in
mathematics provides students with important skills that they can use to analyze
and solve problems in all disciplines and environments. The projects in this
program will also train students to answer specific questions in vascular
surgery, emergency medicine, biophysics, and astronomy. As the world continues
to make technological advances at an incredibly rapid pace, there is an
increased need for scientists and engineers. Exposing the students to applied
mathematics research will encourage many of these students to pursue careers in
STEM-related fields, and will ultimately provide the United States with
individuals who possess a deep knowledge of modern science and who are well-
equipped to have an impact on science and technology in the public and private
sectors. The award is supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences
(BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU projects address new and open problems in
applied mathematics, and the progress that the students make on the summer
projects will advance these research areas. Students participating in the first
REU project will work closely with a mathematician and vascular physiologist to
develop a model, based on experiments conducted in the mouse hind limb, to
simulate the effects of increased vascular number or diameter on blood flow
following a major arterial occlusion to determine whether angiogenic or
arteriogenic therapies provide the maximum benefit. The second project involves
the development of a mathematical model for the response of the human brain to
drugs. The model will be based on electrophysiological experiments, and the
inputs, intrinsic properties, and release of dopamine will be modeled. In the
third project, students will explore a framework for diffusion dynamics
motivated by the observations that the heat released from a catalytic reaction
enhances an enzyme's diffusion coefficient by causing a sudden center of mass
translation of the enzyme, and that particles and biomolecules of various types
and sizes diffuse faster inside cells with an active metabolism. The students
will explore a novel framework based on the regular Fokker-Planck equation
(which describes diffusion driven by forces and random Brownian motion) to
determine the importance of inertial effects for a protein. Students working on
the fourth project will be studying a variety of inverse problems and solutions
based on algebraic and analytic algorithms. The students will tackle problems of
phase retrieval that arise in the experimental use of diffraction to determine
internal structure, as well as inverse problems for gravitational fields and
acoustical waves.