* 1559380
* IRES: Maternal Effects on Ecology, Sociality, and Fitness in a Long-Lived Mammal
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Eric Patterson, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2019
* USD 249,387.00

Maternal Effects on Ecology, Sociality, and Fitness in a Long-Lived
Mammal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides students with an outstanding research experience in which they can ask
and answer significant questions concerning how genetic, social, and ecological
factors interact to shape evolutionary processes and fitness. Through data
collection on wild Indian Ocean bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops aduncus) at a
UNESCO World Heritage Site in Shark Bay, Australia and genetic sample processing
and analysis at the University of the Sunshine Coast's GenEcology Research
Centre in Queensland, Australia, students will gain hands on experience
performing research as part of an international, long-term collaboration. Each
student will be involved through 1 of 3 cohorts and focus on a specific theme
centered around the overall topic of maternal influence on behavior and fitness.
Students in cohorts 1 and 2 will focus on ecological maternal inheritance and
its fitness consequences, and social maternal inheritance and its fitness
consequences, respectively, whereas those in cohort 3 will examine how these
maternal influences and their fitness consequences extend beyond a single
generation within the maternal genetic line. Through this project, students will
be contributing to one of the most comprehensive and detailed long-term studies
of a wild mammal in an exciting intellectual, cultural, and physical
environment. This IRES will directly support at least 4 graduate and 9
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Our
primary goal is to provide students with an outstanding research experience in
which they can ask and answer significant questions in biology. To do this,
students will examine the fitness consequences of inherited genetic, ecological
and social traits in wild bottlenose dolphins in collaboration with scientists
at the University of the Sunshine Coast GenEcology Research Centre in
Queensland, Australia and in the field at the UNESCO World Heritage Site, Shark
Bay, Australia. Students will contribute to one of the most comprehensive and
detailed long-term studies of a wild mammal in an exciting intellectual,
cultural, and physical environment. At the core of this work is trying to
understand how genetic, social and ecological factors shape evolutionary
processes and fitness. By focusing on well-known dolphins, students can broadly
investigate how genetic diversity maps onto variation in social and ecological
patterns. Such individual variation is increasingly recognized for its
importance in ecological and evolutionary dynamics. However, to date, data on
how such variations in social behavior and ecology are transmitted, and how they
interact with genetic background are limited. Understanding this relationship is
crucial, particularly for species that show high levels of variation like
bottlenose dolphins. Shark Bay bottlenose dolphins have well-documented social
and ecological variation; some individuals are highly social while others live
rather solitary lives; some use all habitats, while others specialize in one or
two, with similar variation in home range size and foraging tactics. Lifetime
fitness variation is substantial, where 24.3% of females do not produce
surviving calves. In this study, students will draw on our longitudinal data and
collect new data to empirically address their own research questions regarding
the relationship between sociality, ecology, and genetic
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded by the IRES program of
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).