* 1559369
* Uncertainty in Models of Authority and Models of Matching
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Andrew Postlewaite, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2020
* USD 440,000.00

The proposed work consists of two parts: The first part aims to enhance our
understanding of the implications of stability of matching outcomes under
incomplete information. There is a voluminous literature using matching models
to analyze two-sided markets, including problems of matching students to
schools, residents to hospitals and workers to firms. The commonly employed
solution concept when analyzing matching problems is the core. The use of the
core as a solution concept incorporates the stability of a proposed matching
between workers and firms: if the proposed outcome is not in the core, we would
expect the outcome to be upset by the pair that could jointly improve their
circumstances. Matching typically assumes complete information: all parties know
exactly what the consequences would be for any possible match. The assumption is
crucial because for the standard problems to which these models are applied,
participating agents care about the characteristics of their matched party. The
PIs propose to extend previous work that defines pairwise stability in
incomplete information environments. The main thrust of the proposed work in
this area is to investigate how the techniques used can be modified to
understand matching in many-to-one environments.

The research will provide a better understanding the conditions that assure that
there are stable matching of workers to firms and the efficiency properties of
such matching. Such an understanding will give insight about possible
interventions that will ameliorate inefficiencies in matching problems. The
complete information matching theory has had a significant impact on the design
of the mechanisms used to assign student to schools and residents to hospitals.
This research has the potential of improving the economic performance of these
mechanisms.

In the second part of the proposal the PIs propose to formally model the process
by which laws are, or are not, followed by the agents assumed to be subject to
those laws. They suggest that some laws continue to be followed for some time,
despite changes in the environment that affect agents' incentives to follow
those laws, but then collapse quickly even though there seems to be no dramatic
change in the environment. The PIs propose to formalize models of this process
of social change that are consistent with such behavior.