* 1559596
* Support for the Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) WIYN 3.5-meter Telescope Facility
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2023
* Lori Allen, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,878,319.00

Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) will operate and maintain the WIYN 3.5-m
telescope&lt;br/&gt;located near Tucson, Arizona, during the FY16 through FY18
period to enable the following three key activities: (a) approximately 270
nights for scientific research related to the study of planets orbiting other
stars (so-called exoplanets) and their host stars, within the framework of the
joint NASA-NSF Exoplanet Observational Research (NN-EXPLORE) program; (b) FY18
installation of the Extreme Precision Doppler Spectrometer (EPDS), to be used to
determine the masses of exoplanets discovered by NASA space missions such as
Kepler and the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS); and (c) essential
corrective and preventive technical maintenance as well as minor technology
upgrades as needed for the WIYN facility and its instrumentation. KPNO operates
and maintains WIYN on behalf of the WIYN partnership, whose equity members are
the U. of Wisconsin, Indiana U., and the National Optical Astronomy Observatory
(NOAO), joined by operational partner U. of Missouri-Columbia. KPNO is a unit of
NOAO, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in
Astronomy, Inc. (AURA) under cooperative agreement with the National Science
Foundation (NSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It is now well
established that many stellar systems in our Milky Way host one or more
exoplanets. The mix of host stellar system properties (single vs. multiple
stars, stellar chemical composition and temperature, etc.) and exoplanet system
properties (e.g., number of exoplanets per star, relative arrangements within
each system, exoplanet composition) is astonishing and largely unanticipated.
Before the origins of that mix can be understood, the nature of the exoplanets
and their host stars must be understood. The current observational goal is to
classify exoplanets as gas-dominated (like Neptune), ice-dominated, or rock-
dominated (like Earth) and then compare those classifications to measured
stellar properties. Surely, they must be tightly connected since the stellar and
exoplanet systems formed from the same cloud of atomic and molecular gas. During
the period of this program, WIYN will be used primarily to study the properties
of exoplanet host stars. After EPDS is installed, WIYN will be used to measure
exoplanet mass, which is required to determine if an exoplanet is primarily
gaseous, icy, or rocky. Research enabled by this program will strengthen the
foundations for identifying and characterizing Earth-like exoplanets in the
nearby cosmos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Open access for enquiry-
based research via peer review and open data for all will allow scientists and
citizens to engage in the NOAO/WIYN research enterprise no matter who they are
or where they work. The EPDS story, its technology as well as its measures of
exoplanet mass and what we learn from that, will be a central public engagement
opportunity at the Kitt Peak Visitor Center, which receives more than 40,000
visitors per year. The EPDS project brings together two federal agencies, three
US federal research centers, and several US universities as well as highly
specialized industrial partners. Many participants are early career scientists,
some as early as undergraduate. In turn, the EPDS project will transform the
WIYN into one of the premier radial velocity survey facilities in the world.