* 1559708
* REU Site: Bio-inspired Materials and Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* LaShanda Korley, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 358,444.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nature provides innumerable lessons for scientists
and engineers to inspire the design of next-generation materials and integrated
systems, which have outstanding performance properties along with improved
energy efficiency during manufacturing coupled with minimal environmental
impact. Bio-inspired design is a rapidly-growing global trend, and it is
imperative for young scientists and engineers to be exposed to its principles
and viewpoints. This ten-week summer research experience offers a unique
opportunity to train undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research,
technical communication, community engagement, and career development. This bio-
inspired framework connects to the life sciences and has implications for
positive societal impact, including health care, homeland security, and
infrastructure. This project will emphasize not only cutting-edge research, but
also a holistic educational experience that will encourage students and faculty
to consider pathways for translation of research discoveries to applications
with societal benefits via a bio-inspired approach. Strategic recruitment
activities are planned to involve students from primarily undergraduate
institutions and both women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Bridging the 7 academic
departments within the Case School of Engineering, the project's intellectual
focus is to utilize biological systems to inspire the development of new
synthetic materials and systems. One example activity is the design of sea
cucumber dermis-inspired adaptive composites for long-term stability of
electrode interfaces for neural implants. These cutting-edge thrusts showcase
the connection between discovery science, applied engineering, and translational
opportunities to address global science and engineering challenges. Key themes
of these projects include maximization of mechanical strength and toughness,
autonomous mobility, and novel sensing systems. This project's primary goals
are: 1) advancement of the number of American students who will be leaders in
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce with
strategic recruitment of women and underrepresented minorities and those from
primarily undergraduate institutions, 2) development of undergraduate students'
understanding of STEM pathways through exposure to cutting-edge research in Bio-
inspired Materials and Systems, education/career opportunities, and professional
development/networking activities, and 3) tracking and reporting long-term REU
outcomes. Project evaluation and assessment will be conducted using three
learning objectives: 1) increasing student interest, understanding, and
expertise in all functions and components of the STEM research enterprise,
including ethics, safety, team science, intellectual property and innovation; 2)
transitioning students to ibe ndependent, critical thinkers with confidence and
aptitude in approaching STEM-related problem solving and knowledge creation; and
3) enabling students to effectively communicate scientific concepts and their
societal impact. This REU site has the potential to not only enhance the
undergraduate experience via an interdisciplinary research experience, but also
catalyze internal research activities among faculty researchers. Supplemental
mentoring and community engagement activities are also planned to complement the
research portfolio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.