* 1559245
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Long-Term Impacts of Industrial Chemistry Innovation in the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Alison Feser, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,935.00

Innovations in industrial chemistry contributed significantly to American
economic growth through much of the twentieth century. Cities such as Rochester,
New York, were bolstered by the success of companies like Eastman-Kodak. While
these industries no longer employ tens of thousands of workers as film has been
obsolesced by digital imaging, their impact on these communities remains
palpable and enduring. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to
conduct rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, explores how the
chemical photography industry transformed these regions socially, economically,
and environmentally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ali Feser, under the supervision of
Dr. Joseph Masco of the University of Chicago, will investigate how chemical
photography has endured in social life, in the memories of workers, and in
regional ecology. First, this project will examine how displaced workers discuss
Kodak's impact on social life and the local landscape, and how they understand
the changes in imaging technology and the global economy that contributed to
Kodak's decline. Second, through engagement with workers, public health experts,
and environmentalists, this project will explore the practices of industrial
chemistry and waste management that transformed the regional ecology. The
researcher will undertake twenty-four months of field research in Rochester,
employing a variety of social science methodologies, including participant-
observation, interviews, oral histories, genealogies, archival research, and
collaborations with local scientists and other experts. This research engages
with long-standing and emergent concerns in anthropology, such as large-scale
economic transformations, the relationship between humans and their
environments, and the study of media. The results of this research will
contribute to qualitative understandings of deindustrialization in the U.S. By
framing accounts of lower-level employees in detailed biographical and political
histories, this study will highlight the consequences of market transformation
for those individuals most vulnerable to such shifts. By presenting its
scientific findings to the public in accessible visual and narrative form, this
research will provide tools and data to engage environmental issues.