* 1559087
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the role of exogenous polyphosphate in the precipitation of calcium phosphate minerals in the marine environment
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2019
* USD 359,721.00

Phosphorous is an important nutrient sustaining all forms of life. In
particular, in the ocean, phosphorous is a key limiting nutrient, controlling
levels of primary productivity across large swaths of the ocean. Removal of
phosphorous occurs largely via formation of stable apatite minerals in ocean
sediments. However, average ocean conditions generally inhibit the formation of
apatite, thus the abundance of apatite minerals in marine sediments is a
mystery. This research aims to determine the mechanisms of apatite formation in
the ocean to answer this century-old question. Evaluating these mechanisms will
greatly advance current understanding of phosphorous cycling in the ocean. A
more detailed understanding of phosphorous cycling can be applied across the
disciplines of ocean science, and because of the importance of phosphorous as a
nutrient and an element with a variety of interactions with other elements, it
will be applicable to a variety of other research questions. The researchers are
dedicated to promoting diversity in ocean science and plan to include
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in the study. They will also
mentor a postdoc and communicate their science to the public and K-12 teachers
via a blog entitled ?Britannica Blog?, the Atlanta Science Festival, a rock
show, and educational material, the latter two to be developed as part of this
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine phosphorous burial via authigenic stable
apatite formation in sediments is a major pathway for phosphorous removal in the
ocean. However, in most marine environments, under natural conditions, this
process is kinetically inhibited. It has been a mystery for more than a century
as to how it is therefore possible for apatite to be oversaturated in large
areas of marine sediments. A possible mechanism that could explain 95% of the
apatite burial flux is that apatite minerals are precipitated as fine-grained
particles from exogenous polyphosphate intermediates. Exogenous polyphosphates
have been understudied, despite this possible importance as a mechanism for
phosphorous removal. As a consequence this research could revolutionize current
understanding of phosphorous cycling in the ocean for the major aim is to make a
thorough and detailed study of the mechanisms behind marine apatite formation,
focusing on the role of exogenous polyphosphate particles. Phosphorous is an
element with widespread importance in ocean sciences, and more clearly
understanding its burial will have applications across the disciplines.