* 1559042
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Drivers of Chemoautotrophic Carbon Production at Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents - Comparative Roles of Oxygen and Nitrate
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Jeremy Rich, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2020
* USD 207,423.00

Deep-sea hydrothermal vents, first discovered in 1977, are exemplary ecosystems
where microbial chemosynthesis rather than photosynthesis is the primary source
of organic carbon. Chemosynthetic microorganisms use the energy generated by
oxidizing reduced inorganic chemicals contained in the vent fluids, like
hydrogen sulfide or hydrogen gas, to convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into cell
material. By doing so, they effectively transfer the energy from a geothermal
source to higher trophic levels, in the process supporting the unique and
fascinating ecosystems that are characterized by high productivity - oases in
the otherwise barren deep ocean landscape. While the general view of the
functioning of these ecosystems is established, there are still major gaps in
our understanding of the microbiology and biogeochemistry of these systems.
Particularly lacking are studies measuring rates of microbial activity in situ,
which is ultimately needed to understand production of these ecosystems and to
assess their impact on global biogeochemical cycles. This project makes use of
the Vent-Submersible Incubation Device (Vent-SID), a robotic micro-laboratory
that was recently developed and tested in the field. This instrument makes it
possible for the first time to determine rates of carbon fixation at both in
situ pressures and temperatures, revolutionizing the way we conduct microbial
biogeochemical investigations at deep-sea hydrothermal vents. This is an
interdisciplinary and collaborative effort between two US and foreign
institutions, creating unique opportunities for networking and to foster
international collaborations. This will also benefit two graduate students
working in the project, who will get exposed to a wide range of instrumentation
and scientific fields, facilitating their interdisciplinary education. In
collaboration with Dr. Nitzan Resnick, academic dean of The Sage School, an
elementary school outreach program will be developed and a long-term partnership
with the school established. Further, a cruise blog site to disseminate the
research to schools and the broader public will be set up. The results will be
the topic of media coverage as well as be integrated into coursework and
webpages existing either in the PI's labs or at the institution.

This project is using a recently developed robotic micro-laboratory, the Vent-
SID, to measure rates of chemoautotrophic production and to determine the
relative importance of oxygen and nitrate in driving chemosynthesis at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents at in situ pressures and temperatures and to tackle the
following currently unresolved science objectives: 1) obtain in situ rates of
chemoautotrophic carbon fixation, 2) obtain in situ nitrate reduction rate
measurements, and 3) directly correlate the measurement of these processes with
the expression of key genes involved in carbon and energy metabolism. Although
recent data suggests that nitrate reduction either to N2 (denitrification) or to
NH4+ (dissimilatory reduction of nitrate to ammonium) might be responsible for a
significant fraction of chemoautotrophic production, NO3-reduction rates have
never been measured in situ at hydrothermal vents. The researchers hypothesize
that chemoautrophic growth is strongly coupled to nitrate respiration in vent
microbial communities. During a cruise that will take place approximately 12
months into the project (~Feb 2017), the researchers will carry out a total of 4
deployments of the Vent-SID as well as ancillary sampling collection at the
9째46N to 9째53N segment of the East Pacific Rise. They will focus efforts on two
diffuse-flow vent sites, "Crab Spa" and "Teddy Bear". "Crab Spa" is a diffuse
flow vent site (T: 25째C) that has been used as a model system to gain insights
into chemoautotrophic processes and has been frequently sampled over the last
several years. This vent site has been very well characterized, both
geochemically and microbiologically, providing excellent background data for the
proposed process oriented studies. "Teddy Bear" is a diffuse-flow site that was
discovered in Jan 2014, and it has a lower temperature (T: 12째C), making it a
good comparative site. The researchers will perform a number of short duration
time-course incubations to assess the role of different environmental parameters
that have been identified as likely key variables (e.g., O2, temperature, NO3-),
and to link these process rate measurements to the expression of functional
genes using metatranscriptomic analyses. This study will be the first attempt to
measure critical metabolic processes of hydrothermal vent microbial assemblages
under critical in situ conditions and to assess the quantitative importance of
electron donor and acceptor pathways in situ. In the future, it is envisioned
that the Vent-SID will become a routine application by the oceanographic
community for measuring time series rates of relevant metabolic processes at
hydrothermal vents under in situ pressures and vent fluid temperatures.