* 1559978
* REU Site: High Performance Computing in STEM Disciplines at South Dakota State University
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Stephen Gent, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 356,290.00

Part 1: The health of our nation's economy depends on the continued growth of a
STEM workforce. The effective application of high performance computing (HPC) is
a skill increasingly demanded in a widening variety of fields including
engineering, biology, plant science, biochemistry, and many others. This REU
program will equip underrepresented students to pursue STEM careers by training
them to use HPC in mathematics and statistics, engineering, and biological
sciences. Participating undergraduate students will engage in cutting-edge
research to learn how high fidelity models represent physical phenomena; how
these models are implemented within HPC; and how results are analyzed,
interpreted, and used to resolve theoretical and applied problems. In addition,
a variety of personal, interpersonal, and leadership skills (including technical
communication, time management, networking, and continuous improvement) will be
cultivated through complementary hands-on/minds-on activities. This project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science by engaging undergraduate students in state-of-the art
research in engineering applications and computation; and to advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare by strengthening the STEM workforce and
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups and veterans returning
from active duty.

Part 2: The goals of this REU program are to enhance student capacity to: 1)
conduct innovative and meaningful research using HPC, 2) learn and think
independently within an interdisciplinary collaborative environment, 3) conduct
research with the utmost integrity, 4) prepare for professional careers, and 5)
pursue graduate degrees in STEM programs. This program will recruit ten students
per year from a diverse pool of first- and second-year students from smaller
colleges, tribal colleges, and community colleges, with an emphasis on both
minority and traditionally underrepresented students, as well as returning
veterans. These students will participate in an intensive ten-week summer
program and will work closely with faculty mentors on research projects that
involve 1) simulation tools in the context of engineering design and analysis;
2) state-of-the-art research tools in engineering applications and computation;
3) statistical analysis based on real datasets and simulations; and 4) advanced
numerical methods including parallel algorithms in HPC. The tangible outcomes
will include student-authored journal articles, conference proceedings, and
technical presentations. Program success will be assessed by an external
evaluator through formative and summative evaluations, daily student
reflections, student interviews, and student enrollment in STEM graduate
programs.