* 1559899
* REU Sites: Social-Behavioral Research Training in American Indian Community-Based Projects
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2019
* DenYelle Kenyon, Sanford Research/USD
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2019
* USD 337,054.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. The Social-
Behavioral Research Training in American Indian Community-Based Projects REU
will provide a 10-week hands-on research experience and training activities
including weekly training seminars/journal club. Underrepresented students
(women, racial and ethnic minorities, rural, first-generation college students)
will be recruited utilizing recruitment methods and contacts previously
established with a successful summer internship for American Indian
undergraduates. The undergraduates benefiting from this program will be able to
contribute to projects which are advancing knowledge of American Indian infants,
children, adolescents, and communities in the social- behavioral research
context. The results of these innovative studies fill a gap in the research
literature, because there is little published on American Indian populations.
The proposed program fits well with several aspects of the NSF mission and
impacting society. For example, it increases diversity in the social science
workforce, particularly among women, American Indian, rural, and first
generation undergraduates. Undergraduate research training for underrepresented
students has the potential to reduce educational disparities for these groups by
increasing the number of underrepresented students matriculating from 4-year
universities with degrees in the social-behavioral sciences, which in turn will
increase the diversity in the regional and national scientific community.

This investment in building Rosebud Sioux Tribe and Oglala Sioux Tribe's
research infrastructure is critical, and the proposed REU expands networks and
partnerships, enhancing the social capital of the trainees, mentors, and broader
American Indian communities. Some of the projects the students work on involve
quantitative and qualitative methods to explore the role of adolescent self-
efficacy, empowerment, historical trauma, family and peer norms in decision-
making in risky behaviors; Risk Models for infant death (vulnerable infant,
critical developmental period, & exogenous stressor) to establish the risk
profile that combines genetic, environmental, biochemical, and physiologic
information; community-based participatory research, with a needs assessment of
the obesity epidemic and associated factors; and other projects in the general
areas related to American Indian community. The objectives are to a) increase
students' research skills and knowledge of the research process and b) assist
students in short- and long-term goal setting to help increase their future
educational and research-related career success. The long-term intended impact
is to increase the diversity of the social-behavioral science workforce with
graduate degrees. This REU will benefit society through its results which will
inform new areas for research, interventions, and ultimately public policy. This
research has great potential for transformative outcomes for population health
and wellness, through informing best practices in interventions for American
Indian communities. The ultimate focus of the evaluation will determine the
degree to which the REU achieves its objectives and works towards the overall
mission of increasing the diversity of the social-behavioral science research
workforce with graduate degrees through increasing the number of
underrepresented undergraduates completing hands-on, independent research
internships in the social-behavioral sciences. Our program is guided by the
Circle of Courage model, which emphasizes the importance of fostering a sense of
belonging, mastery, independence, and generosity among the trainees. This
project is co-funded by the NSF EPSCoR program.