* 1559895
* REU Site: Atmospheric Science in the Gulf Coast Region at Texas A&M University
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Korty, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2020
* USD 356,693.00

The Department of Atmospheric Sciences at Texas A&M University will host thirty
undergraduate students over a period of three summers to conduct research with
faculty mentors and their research groups in a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site. The Texas A&M Department of Atmospheric Sciences
faculty and students conduct research across a broad range of atmospheric
disciplines. The experience provides career enrichment and opportunities for
students to explore research topics in the atmospheric sciences. The site offers
an opportunity to study meteorology and atmospheric science topics especially
relevant to the Gulf Coast states, including severe weather, numerical
prediction, atmospheric chemistry, and climate.

The primary objectives of this REU site are (1) to provide a high-quality
scientific research experience and (2) to increase diversity in the population
of students interested in and preparing for research careers. The program is
designed to parallel the graduate research experience as closely as possible by
embedding participants in research groups with graduate students and a faculty
mentor. Weekly activities and meetings on individual and group research are
supplemented with professional development and seminars on communicating,
graduate and career opportunities, and on campus events with REUs in other
fields. Special attention will be given to furthering students' quantitative
skills via individual mentoring, group tutorials, and small group workshops
based on specific needs. Students will have opportunities to report their
results in presentations on campus and at national conferences. This program
makes a specific effort to recruit and include participants from smaller
colleges and minority-serving institutions, partnering with institutions
throughout the Gulf Coast region that serve historically underrepresented
populations to help recruit a diverse pool of applicants.