* 1559117
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnohistorical and Geographical Analysis of Livelihood and Institutional Drivers of Landscape Change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Andrew Mathews, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 03/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

In the research supported by this award, University of California, Santa Cruz,
doctoral student, Robert Davenport, with direction from anthropologist Dr.
Andrew Mathews, will investigate social factors that may drive variation in
forest land use and management in a context of social change and livelihood
development. For most of human history, anthropogenic effects on forest
ecosystems unfolded slowly over long periods of time. But now scientists are
observing changes in forest cover that occur over mere decades, dramatically
accelerated by such human activities as large-scale agriculture and road
construction. With growing concern over the loss of biodiversity worldwide,
scientific research on global land use change has emphasized the environmentally
destructive impacts of human colonization and settlement, especially in the
tropics where recent human arrivals often lack the institutions and techniques
to counter the effects of commercial agriculture and logging and keep forests
standing. However, while some scientists have modeled deforestation as the
direct result of the expansion of agriculture, others have argued that not all
farming is the same and that small-scale agroecological farming methods can
actually reduce deforestation and enhance biodiversity while still using the
forests productively. A critical question for forest ecosystems is how the
social organization of livelihoods and institutions can encourage new
relationships to emerge between agriculture and biodiversity. To date, research
on socio-ecological systems has tended to focus on traditional environmental
management, paying less attention to shifts between types of land use as a
function of evolving social organization on market peripheries. But better
knowledge of these latter dynamics is critically needed: U.S. and state policies
for mitigating climate change involve international incentives to reduce
tropical deforestation but lack necessary understanding of social and livelihood
development processes for the populations that inhabit the forests.

To further these understandings, this project will analyze an observed change in
tropical forest cover that counters conventional wisdom: unusually, it involves
a transition from deforestation to reforestation, rather than the other way
around, despite having been subject to colonization since 1970. Davenport will
assess how livelihoods, institutional arrangements, and cultivation decisions
have variously impacted land use changes in time and space. The site of the
research is the municipality of Medicilândia on the TransAmazon highway in
Brazil, which has seen many of its small farmer majority population develop
manual labor intensive and species diverse agroforestry systems with cacao trees
(Theobroma cacao) and açai palms (Euterpe oleracea). While deforestation has
continued apace in other areas of Medicilândia located farther from the highway,
most land inside a ten kilometer range, deforested a quarter-century ago, is
today either a forest farm or a regrowth secondary forest. The researcher will
compare socio-ecological interactions on farms with distinct land use change
trajectories. Three questions will be used to guide the analysis. First, how
have the rural poor adapted distinct livelihood strategies over time, and
involving what labor, logistical, subsistence and commercial arrangements?
Second, how have institutions, colonist outlooks and attitudes shaped rules and
norms concerning the land? The latter involves land tenure rights, local social
organization and the evolving relationship of the locality with state agencies
and regulatory systems, including the national Brazilian forest code. Third, how
have agroecological techniques and species cultivation decisions varied in
relation to livelihood and institutional factors, and what land use change has
resulted? Quantitative and qualitative datasets will be constructed using
survey, ethnographic and ethnobotanical methods; these will be integrated with
remote sensing analysis of 30 years of satellite images and aerial photography
to map and model human shaping of the environment over time.