* 1559980
* REU Site: Disturbance Ecology in Central Appalachia
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Stephen Richter, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 337,074.00

This REU Site award to Eastern Kentucky University, located in Richmond, KY,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2017- 2019. Students will be based in Richmond, and will conduct ecological
research at remote field stations in a region of high biodiversity but impacted
by mountaintop coal mining, logging, and other disturbances. Students will work
directly with faculty mentors and collaborators, including agency professionals,
and will participate in all aspects of research including study design, data
collection, analyses, and presentation of results. A weekly workshop will
provide additional learning opportunities on topics such as ethics and the
responsible conduct research, leadership, and career development. Participants
will engage with their community and develop communication skills with
scientists, land managers, and the public, while exploring the implications of
their own research in a setting rife with controversy related to the economic
and cultural tradeoffs of resource extraction and environmental conservation.
Research findings could help shape resource management in a way that brings
socioeconomic benefits to the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. Student participants will include
individuals from the study region, and from other parts of the nation, often
from very different socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic backgrounds. First
generations college students, students with disabilities, and veterans will also
be recruited. Students will learn how research is conducted and communicated,
and many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://biology.eku.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. David Brown at
david.brown@eku.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Stephen Richter at
stephen.richter@eku.edu).