* 1559718
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Situational Awareness during Fire and Emergency (SAFE)
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Manish Kumar, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 11/30/2016
* USD 146,454.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) technology to fill the need of generating real-time,
accurate situational awareness during emergency situations, such as wildfires
and structural fires. The project will result in the development of a prototype
system consisting of a UAV and a ground station with associated software that
can provide the firefighting "Incident Management Teams" with advanced
situational awareness capabilities during wildfire and structural fire
scenarios. This UAV based system has the following unique features: i) ease-of-
use by firefighting professionals in managing UAV operations; ii) quick
deployment; and iii) real-time acquisition and processing of information
gathered by UAV in order to provide not only a current situational picture but
also predictive ability in case of wildfires. These features provide advantages
including reduced cost of operation and improved safety of lives and properties
as compared with current methodologies such as manned aircraft based
surveillance, satellite imageries, and manual lookout practices.

This project addresses a number of technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. For example, the conversion of
data gathered from UAVs in the form of telemetry and streaming video into an
intuitive form easily understandable by firefighters requires innovations in
real-time video processing, spatio-temporal estimation, systematic combination
of information from multiple sources, and information presentation and
visualization. Similarly, intended use by firefighting professionals, who are
not trained pilots, and other practical constraints require the UAV operations
to be autonomous and algorithms to be computationally efficient.

The project engages partners from the University of Toledo Technology Transfer
Office, Kayos Enterprise, Inc., West Virginia Division of Forestry, and the
Cincinnati Fire Department to guide the commercialization process, augment the
research capability, provide a testing environment, and offer an understanding
of users' needs and perspectives in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.

The proposed UAV based technology is important because it puts tools in hands of
wildfire and structural fire incident commanders so they can obtain improved
situational awareness for making timely and informed decisions. This is expected
to result in substantial cost savings, improved levels of safety, lower loss of
life and property, and augmented preservation of the environment. With the
imminent inclusion of UAVs in the national airspace, the technologies developed
in this research have wide potential in a number of other civilian applications
such as law enforcement, border patrol, and perimeter surveillance. This project
provides training to future engineers, incident commanders, UAV operators and
entrepreneurs who would lead this field of technology in years to come. In
addition, the project will contribute to the U.S. competitiveness in the area of
civilian UAV applications with potential economic impact within five to ten
years.