* 1559792
* RUI: Developing a regression model predicting the toxicity of metal nanoparticles against soil microbial community
* ENG,CBET
* 07/07/2015,09/30/2016
* Vishal Shah, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2016
* USD 146,925.00

Active and diverse microorganism communities are essential for soil; and hence
for agriculture, food security, and ecosystem health. Changes in these
communities can significantly influence soil quality, health, and productivity.
This research uses experimental and statistical/modeling approaches to
investigate and predict the impact of common metal nanoparticles (iron, copper,
and silver), which are reported to have anti-microbial properties, on soil
microbial communities. The main research goal is to develop models that can help
assess the ecotoxicity of common metal nanoparticles without having to resort to
carrying out large numbers of experiments for each sample to be tested. This
work accomplishes that goal with a combined experimental/modeling approach.
Experiments involving the study of the toxicity of ten important soil parameters
(pH, temperature, nanoparticle concentration, organic carbon content, soil
moisture, and the concentration of various cations and anions like Na, Ca, Mg,
nitrates, and phosphates) on the interaction between selected commercially
purchased nanoparticles and two model soils, each with their unique microbial
community, will be carried out in microcosms. The toxicity of the nanoparticles
to microbial communities will be evaluated using three different indicators of
microbial health and metabolic activity: PCR-DGGE, Biolog Ecoplates, and total
soil FAME analyses from which a single ecotoxicity value can be determined.
Results of the experimental matrix will be used to develop a linear regression
model that will identify environmental parameters that increase, decrease, or
have no influence on toxicity on the soil microbes. A quadratic regression will
be developed that build off the results of the linear model to predict the toxic
potential of each parameter and identify and assess interactions among the
various environmental parameters. Broader impacts of the research include the
strong integration of research and education, engaging large numbers of
undergraduate students in environmental biology research, and using the research
to augment undergraduate course curriculum. Through a summer research
experience, the project will also engage students from Southern University, a
historically black college that is still recovering from the effects of
Hurricane Katrina. Participation of under-represented groups in the sciences
will also be increased by recruiting students from the Dowling College Center
for Minority Teacher Development and Training Program to participate in the
research. Free public lectures tailored for the general public to increase their
awareness of their impacts on the environment will also be presented.