* 1559829
* REU Site: Bioinformatics Research and Interdisciplinary Training Experience in Analysis and Interpretation of Information-Rich Biological Data Sets (REU-BRITE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Gary Benson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 292,295.00

This REU Site award to Boston University (BU), located in Boston, MA, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-2019.
The program will focus on computational and mathematical analysis of
bioinformatics data. Research projects will include studying gene regulatory
networks, the microbiome, and the linkage between genetic variation and
phenotypes. Students will learn to analyze high-throughput sequencing data, gain
experience in statistical and machine learning methods, and learn dynamic
systems modeling. Full-time research with a Bioinformatics faculty mentor will
be supplemented by workshops covering 1) bioinformatics programming, 2) parallel
and cloud computing, 3) creating a scientific poster, 4) applying to graduate
school, and 5) scientific ethics and responsible conduct of research. Additional
activities will include tours of local science facilities, and participation in
BU Bioinformatics symposia. A stipend, housing, meal, and travel allowances will
be provided. Students will be selected based on relevant coursework in biology,
mathematics, and computing, a good academic record, enthusiasm for
bioinformatics research, and evidence of involvement in community activities and
community service.

It is anticipated that a total of 24 students will be trained in the program
with an emphasis on recruiting women, members of groups underrepresented in the
sciences, and students from schools with limited research opportunities.
Students will learn how research is conducted and many will present posters at
national, regional, or BU sponsored undergraduate research conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. A Research
Experience Wiki will be used for weekly recording of skills learned. Students
will be tracked after the program to determine career paths using BU
Bioinformatics LinkedIn and Facebook pages. Students will be asked to respond to
an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available at http://www.bu.edu/bioinformatics/research/undergraduate-research,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gary Benson at gbenson@bu.edu) or the program
coordinator (Ms. Caroline Lyman at clyman@bu.edu).