* 1559890
* REU Site: Biomaterials Research Initiative Dedicated to Gateway Experiences
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2023
* Kevin Parker, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2023
* USD 674,370.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU Site will introduce students and teachers to
research in biomaterials research. The development of personalized health and
assistive care technologies relies on understanding the interplay of materials
and biology. Students will work on projects in bio-inspired engineering, wound
healing and tissue engineering, medical diagnostic and drug delivery
technologies, and soft robotics and prosthetic devices. The BRIDGE Program at
Harvard has a strong emphasis on gateway students, especially those students
with little or no previous research experience. Student recruitment focuses on
students from underrepresented groups, students at non-research intensive
institutions, and non-traditional students who have re-entered college, in
particular veterans of the armed forces. Students and teachers who are deaf/hard
of hearing will also be recruited. Therefore, research projects are designed to
be relevant and accessible for military veterans and students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU Site,
Biomaterials Research Initiative Dedicated to Gateway Experiences, focuses on
the interplay of materials science and bioengineering via 3 themes: (1)
Understanding and exploiting bio-inspired nano- and microscale structures; (2)
Tunable materials and devices for diagnostics, tissue engineering and drug
delivery; and (3) Materials and strategies for soft and adaptive robotics. The
research activities include studies that combine experiment with theory and/or
simulation in the study and design of interfaces between cells and surfaces;
tunable structures, gels and networks; drug delivery systems; tissue culture
scaffolds; and multi-functional biomaterials such as photonic and electronic
biomaterials. Importantly, the topics are chosen to appeal to a wide population
of students who are at early stages of their academic development, and who have
limited awareness of career paths. Research projects are also designed to be
relevant and accessible for military veterans and students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.