* 1559962
* REU Site: Botany and Conservation Biology Research at the Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Peter Hoch, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 306,507.00

This REU Site award to Missouri Botanical Garden, located in St. Louis, MO, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2016-2018. Major themes of the program are plant diversity, evolution, and
conservation. Projects emphasizing lab, herbarium, field, and statistical work
are available to students, with subject areas including plant systematics and
taxonomy, conservation of endangered species, ecological restoration, invasive
species biology, biodiversity assessment, pollination biology, new crop
development, and ethnobotany. Students will complete individual research
projects and participate in group educational sessions on research design,
resources and methods, scientific writing, preparation of posters and talks,
graduate school success, and scientific ethics and responsible conduct of
research. Recruitment will target students nationwide, with emphasis on
institutions with limited research infrastructure, as well as regional HBCU and
TCU institutions. Current sophomores and juniors are encouraged to apply.
Students submit applications on-line. Student selection and pairing with mentors
are made by the PIs, in consultation with mentors and other colleagues, based on
applicant's academic record, prior experience, and expressed
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Students will learn how research is conducted and will be
encouraged to present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
Enrichment activities will include seminars by local or visiting scientists,
field trips to natural and cultural attractions, and interactions with faculty
and students from other local REU and internship
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/plant-
science/plant-science/resources/opportunities/undergraduate-studies.aspx or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Wendy Applequist at wendy.applequist@mobot.org) or the
co-PI (Dr. Peter Hoch at peter.hoch@mobot.org).