* 1559784
* I-Corps: Low Cost Carbon Fiber Prosthetic Foot
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Roger Gonzalez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

High-end prosthetic feet have been developed to improve the mobility and
function of lower-limb amputees, but a majority of amputees in the Developing
World lack access to this technology. Most current Developing World prosthetic
solutions do not adequately address the needs of active amputees and were not
designed to pass international standard tests. Current assistive devices
available range from the ultra-low cost Red Cross system to high-end systems
produced by the big European manufacturers. With the focus on customers at the
extreme ends of the economic spectrum there remains a niche in the market for a
mid-range, trans-femoral prosthetic leg that is both affordable and high-
quality. The current gap in this market will be magnified in the future by
projected population growth, an increasingly aging global population, and the
growing prevalence of vascular disease, leaving leading to an estimated 35
million amputees in the target market needing a prosthetic foot within 3 years.
The World Health Organization has issued the call for projects and organizations
that are focused on providing assistive health technologies that are both
affordable and high-quality. This project seeks to answer that call by
developing a low-cost, repairable, adjustable, highly functional prosthetic foot
to close the technological gap and improve the outcomes for the world?s neediest
amputees.

Students at the University of Texas at El Paso have created an energy storage
and return prosthetic foot that is low cost, adaptable to a wide range of
patient needs and repairable. The foot's toe section consists of several
interchangeable layers. The purpose of these layers is to create a foot whose
stiffness is variable and can be customized to match the weight, stride and
activity level of the amputee wearing the foot. Layers are constructed by hand
laying carbon fiber and epoxy into compression molds in a process that can be
replicated in virtually any lab or manufacturing space. Three different layer
stiffnesses, created by varying the fiber orientations in the layers of carbon
fiber, offer the ability to customize the stiffness of the foot through a
variety of layer combinations. A prosthetist using this technology would have a
selection of standard layers in each of those three stiffnesses that can be
combined to match the needs of his patient without having to order a custom
foot. The stiffness of the foot can also be easily modified after it is in use
if the patient finds it to be uncomfortable. The foot currently exists as a
prototype with preliminary lab and patient testing done. Future work must
include some small design changes and additional testing for further validation
by ISO standards. Further customer discovery is also needed to ensure the value
propositions of the project resonate with real customers from the program
coordinator level to technicians who fit the device to the amputees themselves.