* 1559997
* REU Site: EURECA: Extensible Undergraduate Research Experience in Communications and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Sriram Vishwanath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 01/31/2019
* USD 314,560.00

This award renews an exemplary Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site
focused on wireless networking and communications at the University of Texas -
Austin. The REU Site engages undergraduate students from institutions across the
nation in a wide range of projects in wireless networking lead by a large team
of faculty mentors in the Wireless Networking and Communications Group. The
projects are in current research areas that are of interest to the community at
large and that have clear practical applications. A key component of every
research project is its extensibility providing students with the capacity to
build on knowledge provided to them by their mentor and to generate independent
results, and to sustain this effort after returning to their parent
institutions. This award is co-funded by the Networking Technology and Systems
(NeTS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies
in strong research basis and the expertise of the faculty. The research projects
are created as a focused plan to guide the students from a passive learning
state to the state of being active self-sustaining researchers. A nationwide
recruitment process is used to select cohorts of undergraduate students to
participate in a nine-week summer research program at the host institution.
Particular emphasis is placed on recruitment of students from under-represented
populations. The project includes technical seminars and workshops, student
presentations, and field trips and other professional development opportunities.
The goal is to generate sustained research interest among undergraduates so that
they become tomorrow's leaders in industry and academia.