* 1559058
* Non-Standard Issues in Regression Discontinuity Designs
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Christoph Rothe, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 235,773.00

This project aims to develop new statistical methods for analyzing economic
data. The goal is to expand the scope of the popular regression discontinuity
(RD) design, which uses the presence of fixed eligibility cutoffs (e.g. Medicare
eligibility at age 65) for estimating the effect of public and private policies
on some outcome of interest (e.g. health care utilization, mortality) among
individuals who are close to the cutoff. In particular, the research provides
new methodological tools for dealing with two important and frequent practical
challenges for RD designs: (i) how to deal with situations in which some
individuals can manipulate their program eligibility, and (ii) how to infer the
effect of the program on individuals who are far away from the cutoff. Because
RD designs have become a popular method to evaluate many government policies, it
is important to address these two challenges. This research, therefore, will
improve the statistical methods we use to assess the effects of public policy,
and it will allow economists and other social scientists to provide better
information to policymakers.

This research project consists of two parts that each addresses an important
limitation of standard RD designs. The first part of the project is motivated by
the limitation that some units (i.e., individuals or families) may be able to
manipulate their value of the so-called running variable used to determine
eligibility (e.g., income, which could be misreported). Manipulation is
problematic if it leads to units just to the left and right of the cutoff being
no longer comparable due to self-selection, in which case treatment effects are
no longer point-identified. The investigators show that interesting causal
parameters can still be partially identified in RD designs when the running
variable is manipulated. This research derives sharp bounds on treatment effects
for the (unobserved) subgroups of units not engaging in a manipulation, and also
derives new econometric methods to estimate these bounds and to conduct
inference. The second part is motivated by the limitation that RD designs only
allow for the identification of treatment effects for marginal units at the
cutoff and are generally not informative about treatment effects for units away
from the cutoff. This lack of external validity limits the usefulness of RD
estimates in guiding policies that would change assignments of units away from
the cutoff. The investigators develop a latent factor-based approach to the
identification and estimation of treatment effects away from the cutoff. To the
extent that the source of omitted variables bias in a RD design can be modeled
using latent factors, the running variable is one of a number of noisy measures
of these factors. Assuming other noisy measures are available, causal effects
for all values of the running variable can be non-parametrically identified and
estimated.