* 1559050
* I-CORPS:  A Tooolset for Lifetime Evaluation of Circuits and Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/29/2016
* Linda Milor, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 02/29/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Electronic circuits degrade during operation. Eventually, the degradation is so
large that it causes the circuits to no longer function properly. Customers of
electronic devices expect a 10 year lifetime. Manufacturers currently check
lifetime using manufactured samples of prototype circuits. Failures of lifetime
tests are very costly and entail additional re-design engineering costs and the
cost of re-fabrication (hundreds of thousands of dollars). This project will
develop software to estimate the lifetime of electronic devices. The toolset
that will be developed will check if a design can meet lifetime requirements
prior to the manufacturing of prototypes and will provide guidance on the
components of a design that need to be fixed so as to improve the lifetime of
the full system.

The project will develop software to enable semiconductor design companies to
improve the lifetime of their products and to detect the components of a design
that can limit the products' lifetime. This will be done with simulation tools
that estimate the lifetime distributions of circuits while taking into account a
wide variety of wearout mechanisms and operating conditions. The software will
compute activity and temperature profiles of full systems. These are linked to
the physical layout and transistor models to compute feature/transistor-level
wearout statistics. The feature/transistor-level wearout statistics are combined
to identify vulnerable blocks/components and to estimate the lifetime
distribution of the full electronic system. The team will conduct customer
dicovery to gain further insights further insights into the problem and to
validate the proposed hypotheses.