* 1559922
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Esta Sancar, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2019
* USD 338,994.00

This REU Site award to The University of North Carolina located in Chapel Hill,
NC, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2016 - 2018. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The REU Program in Molecular Biosciences at
UNC-Chapel Hill provides students the opportunity to carry out independent
research projects under the guidance of faculty mentors in biochemistry,
microbiology, cell biology, genetics, and structural biology. Students work
side-by-side with graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty who serve
as role models and mentors. Participants discover how modern biological research
is formulated, carried out, and reported in an environment that stresses
collaboration and interdisciplinary approaches to problem solving. Students
acquire skills critical to success in research and teaching careers and to gain
entry to competitive graduate programs. Making informed career choices is a
major theme of the Program; participants hear about careers and lifestyles in
forums with scientists inside and outside of academia and with current graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows at UNC. The journal club and seminar program
expose students to emerging areas of research and provide insight into the
scientific method. The program culminates with all students presenting their
work at an annual Summer Research Symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Preference is given to
students with little prior independent research experience, however all talented
undergraduates with a genuine desire to pursue a career in biological research
and teaching are encouraged to apply. First generation college students and
students from groups under-represented in the sciences are strongly encouraged
to apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. Program information and
application instructions are available at http://www.med.unc.edu/oge/stad/sure .
For questions contact the PI (Dr. Tom Kawula at kawula@med.unc.edu).