* 1559075
* Collaborative Research: Response of marine copepods to warming temperature and ocean acidification
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Melissa Pespeni, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 377,233.00

Over time, our oceans are becoming both warmer and higher dissolved carbon
dioxide. The latter condition is called ocean acidification. The consequences of
these simultaneous changes for populations of marine organisms are not well
understood. For this project, the investigators will conduct a series of
laboratory experiments to determine how two closely-related, common species of
Acartia copepods will respond to the interactive effects of warming and
acidification and also how well these species can adapt over multiple
generations to changing ocean conditions. Since these copepods are key species
in coastal food webs, results will have important implications for understanding
and predicting how marine ecosystems may respond to future climate change. The
investigators will share results from the research through traditional print
media, case studies, and video mini lectures. The goal will be for educators of
all levels to easily access material on climate change and ocean acidification
to include in teaching curricula, in alignment with recommendations for
universal design for learning. The project is a collaborative effort between an
established professor at the University of Connecticut and an early-career
female scientist at the University of Vermont. It will provide training and
opportunities for collaborative, interdisciplinary research for two postdoctoral
investigators, two graduate students and an undergraduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main goals are: 1) to test the
simultaneous effects of temperature and carbon dioxide under current and future
conditions on life history traits throughout the life cycle for two key copepod
species, warm-adapted Acartia tonsa and cold-adapted Acartia hudsonica; 2) to
test for adaptive capacity of both copepod species to a warmer and carbon-
dioxide-enriched ocean; 3) to measure the genetic and maternally-induced changes
across multiple generations of experimental selection in future conditions in
both copepod species, and to identify the genes and pathways responding to
selection. The investigators will use experiments encompassing current and
projected temperature and carbon-dioxide conditions, will determine the roles of
each variable and their interaction on traits that affect the fitness of both
copepod species. They will also determine which life stages are most sensitive
to individual or simultaneous stress conditions. Through multigenerational
selection experiments, the investigators will identify and characterize the
mechanisms of copepod evolutionary adaptation. Finally, they will measure
genomic changes across the generations under all four experimental conditions to
quantify the relative contributions of genetic and maternally-induced change in
the physiological and life history traits of copepods in response to near-future
climate conditions.