* 1559559
* CAMPARE and Cal-Bridge:  Promoting Participation of Women and Underrepresented Students in Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Christopher Impey, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 01/31/2020
* USD 670,926.00

CAMPARE (California-Arizona Minority Partnership for Astronomy Research and
Education) is a program established to advance undergraduate astronomy research
and education among groups that are traditionally underrepresented in astronomy.
It has been supported by the Partnerships in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research
and Education (PAARE) program. This renewal proposal includes plans to expand
CAMPARE and to integrate it with the Cal-Bridge program, which helps
undergraduate students from California State University campuses make the
transition to one of the University of California graduate programs. In addition
to recruiting and placement of underrepresented minorities, they provide
mentoring, professional development, and administrative services to assist and
track students making their way through these programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program does this by actively recruiting
undergraduates from among the California State University campuses, promoting
their participation in astronomical research at University of California
campuses and at Research Experiences for Undergraduates programs across the
country. The proposal team has established close connections with many minority-
serving, primarily undergraduate institutions located in a region of explosive
growth in Hispanic population, and with twelve research institutions that have
strong track records of involving undergraduates in research. The goal is to
increase the numbers of students from underrepresented minorities that enter and
complete PhD programs in astronomy and related fields.