* 1559987
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nanohybrid Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Natale Ianno, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 306,032.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The REU site, Research Experience for Undergraduates
in Nanohybrid Functional Materials at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, will
bring together students within multidisciplinary teams from electrical and
environmental engineering, chemistry, and cell biology. These teams will perform
research on fabricated surfaces/structures whose feature size is on the order of
tens of nanometers (nm). It is expected that these activities will achieve
several key outcomes, including: (1) increased interest in research and
development careers in fields such as engineering, physics, biology, and
chemistry; (2) increased understanding of the role of interdisciplinary teams in
solving complex problems and unique preparation for pursuing graduate studies
within an interdisciplinary research environment; (3) increased understanding of
the role of research and development in the commercial sector and its relation
to national interests; (4) publications with the REU participant as the lead or
co-author; and (5) the presentation of REU participants' research results at
conferences. The overall objective of the site activities is to develop a
pipeline, to train a diverse cadre of future researchers and faculty to continue
innovative research ,and to address predicted shortages in the appropriate
engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
Underpinning the REU site is the Center for Nanohybrid Functional Materials
(CNFM) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). Research within the CNFM is
organized around three complementary and mutually supporting research themes, as
well as the development of research infrastructure through acquisition of
specialized instrumentation within a core facility. The first research theme,
Nanohybrid Fabrication, focuses on the preparation of highly ordered and
spatially coherent 3D nanostructures, their hybridization with chemical or
biological sensing elements, and their immobilization or inclusion within
polymer matrices. In addition, this theme is also expanding to include
preparation of 1- and 2-dimensional semiconductor materials decorated with
organic materials. The second research theme, Nanohybrid Characterization and
New Sensing Principles, focuses on new characterization and sensing principles
based on unique properties of the nanohybrids, including techniques based upon
Terahertz to UV ellipsometry. The third research theme, Nanohybrid-based
Devices, focuses on potential sensing and separation applications based on
molecular interactions within nanohybrid-based devices and 1-D and 2-D
semiconductor/organic electronic devices. Students will be introduced into this
environment with the primary goal to help the participants develop into
effective, independent researchers in an interdisciplinary environment. The
research activities are designed not only to develop skills germane to the
student's field of study, but also to demonstrate how one project fits into a
larger, more complex system. The REU participant will not simply be a "lab
helper" who assists graduate students or postdoctoral researchers with
laboratory chores, but will have significant and independent responsibilities in
the research project.