* 1559941
* REU Site: Ocean Coastal Zone Sustainability through University of Southern California Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Karla Heidelberg, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2019
* USD 313,786.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of
Southern California (USC) will focus on coastal oceans sustainability and will
provide 8 students with a 10-week active learning experience each summer for 3
years. Participants spend their first two weeks on the USC University Park
Campus in orientation, training and project development and then move to the USC
Wrigley Marine Science Center (WMSC) on Catalina Island for project
implementation/completion over the following eight weeks. Support includes
student housing and meals, student stipends and travel associated with
participation in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will conduct
independent research on coastal ocean science topics that are related to
sustainability. In the past student research topics included: nutrient
biogeochemistry, marine organismal biology, the effectiveness of marine
protected areas, applications of geographic information systems, marine
microbial ecology, biology of invasive species, fisheries population ecology,
trace element chemistry, land use impacts, predator/prey studies, population
genetics, and environmental contamination and organism toxicity. The designed
research opportunities, where students work individually and in teams with
graduate students and their mentors, will help undergraduates gain confidence
and see themselves as future STEM professionals. The USC REU students also will
receive focused training in professional development activities that promote
STEM readiness, i.e., science communication, research ethics, approaches for
graduate school and professional application processes, networking, and non-
academic career paths in marine and coastal science.