* 1559889
* REU Site: Computational Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Reynold Bailey, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 359,866.00

The goal of this new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site is to
give students experience with fundamental research in acquisition and fusion of
multisource sensing data related to human beings. Students will be challenged to
make sense of human behaviors and cognitive processes with hardware, software,
and complex thinking, exploring the nexus of computational science, scientific
practice, and the human experience. Traditionally, sensors have been understood
narrowly, often as physiological measurements. This project envisions sensing in
broader, new ways, as time-evolving measurable data directly linked to
individuals and, by extension, to their communities. With this understanding,
sensing data may involve language, social network and environment signals, or
emotional-creative reactions. This REU site will: (1) advance fundamental
research in computational sensing; (2) expose students to a research environment
that innovatively blends computer and information science and computational
liberal arts, infused with career-enhancing learning elements, and (3) ensure
that transformative research experiences reach an unusually diverse student
group of underrepresented subpopulations in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects link in applications that students
can directly relate to and that enable them to make concrete, real-world
contributions. Further, the increasing demand for collaborative team science
requires a new generation of scientists who approach research questions
differently, exploring complementary perspectives and integrating methodologies
and analysis tools in creative ways. Fundamental research in multisource data
acquisition and fusion has valuable implications for many fields including
human-computer interaction, accessibility, health and well-being, and gaming.
This REU program is designed to build essential life-long capabilities in
students for continued research careers, and to yield positive outcomes at the
institutional and research community levels.