* 1559348
* The role of in-channel aquatic vegetation on hyporheic exchange
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Daniele Tonina, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2024
* USD 616,351.00

In-channel vegetation, IAV, is ubiquitous in watercourse as plants or algae. It
provides many vital ecological and hydromorphological functions and is becoming
a major tool in river restoration. Research on IAV has chiefly focused on
sediment transport and flow resistance, while its role in inducing hyporheic
exchange has been neglected. Hyporheic exchange is the main process connecting
streams with streambeds by moving in-stream water in and out of the streambed
sediment through the hyporheic zone, HZ, which serves as an interface between
surface and ground waters. The HZ promotes important biological and chemical
processes, which affect the quality of both stream and streambed waters.
Consequently, modeling hyporheic fluxes due to IAV will provide key information
for river restoration practices in which planting has been advocated, a $1B per
year industry. Additionally, predictions of hyporheic exchange and processes are
essential to quantify solute transport and transformation along streams and
rivers. Thus the goal of this research is to model hyporheic flow due to IAV.
This will provide a fundamental and predictive understanding of the processes
that control hyporheic exchange due to flow and IAV interaction. It will advance
knowledge on hyporheic flow field near the rhizosphere, the region of sediment
directly influenced by root secretions and associated soil microorganisms and
the ability to model solute, nutrient, contaminant, and pathogen transport along
stream networks by including the effect of IAV. The models developed in this
project will be used to predict hyporheic processes in streams with vegetation
and will be incorporated into basin-scale transport models of solute and
nutrients. A new transformative after school program will be developed to
introduce 5th-6th grade students to STEM disciplines through hands-on activities
and lessons with a mobile educational flume. In addition undergraduate and
graduate Civil Engineering students will be trained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this project is to mechanistically understand, quantify, and
model the effects of IAV on hyporheic exchange as a function of IAV density,
patch size, and patch distribution under different flow conditions. IAVs will be
considered with three schematizations: 1) interaction between flow and an
individual emergent and submerged vegetation stem, 2) interaction between flow
and one single submerged vegetation patch, and 3) interaction between flow and
multiple submerged vegetation patches. This will be addressed with novel tracer
test flume experiments, coupling Matching Index Reflectometry, Particle Image
Velocimetry, and analytical and numerical modeling, and by testing three
specific hypotheses: hyporheic exchange has an inverse U-shaped (increases to a
maximum and then decreases with increasing value of the independent variable)
relationship with: (1) IAV density; (2) IAV patch size; and (3) the percent of
streambed covered by multiple dense IAV patches. &lt;br/&gt;