* 1559172
* Collaborative Research: Inference Methods for Machine Learning and High-Dimensional Data in Policy Evaluation and Structural Economic Models
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Victor Chernozhukov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 246,218.00

Much of empirical economics focuses on estimating and drawing credible
inferences about the causal effects of economic policies or about parameters of
underlying economic models. The type of data that researchers use for this task
becomes increasingly rich and complex. While these increased data resources open
up many new opportunities, they also pose additional challenges, and na√Øve
application of such techniques may render conclusions drawn about economic
effects invalid. This research project will establish a general, formal
framework to provide guidance about construction of estimation and inference
devices coupled with appropriate use of tools from "big data" or data-mining
that will deliver reliable conclusions about economic objects of interest. The
proposed research will present the methods and corresponding theoretic
guarantees to cover a variety of situations encountered in empirical research in
economics and the social sciences, offer empirical applications, and provide
usable software in statistical packages popular within the social sciences. The
theoretical and empirical work will thus help bridge the gap between social
science practice and "big data", and will provide methods that will enhance the
credibility of the drawn scientific conclusions.

The proposed research will provide bridges between high-dimensional statistical
modeling and applied social science research. Integrating high-dimensional
methods with economically relevant modeling frameworks and targets is important
in providing researchers tools which can be used to analyze modern, complex data
and provide reliable inferential statements about the objects of interest. The
proposed research will advance the theory of inference following regularization
which is a key element to inference in modern, large data sets. The main goal of
this research project is to generalize available results about inference for a
low-dimensional target parameter of interest by providing an encompassing
framework that will include interesting nonlinear models and estimation
procedures such as maximum likelihood and generalized method of moments. The
investigators will also provide an extension to cover cases where the target of
interest is function valued, such as when interest is in a set quantile
treatment effects across a range of quantile indices. This advancement will
expand the frontier for applications of high-dimensional methods in applications
where inference about sets of model parameters is the goal. This expansion is
useful even in low-dimensional models and is likely to become crucial as large,
complicated data sets become more readily available. In addition to providing
theoretical results, the research aims to provide illustrative empirical
examples and software in both R and Stata for application of these methods.