* 1559394
* Collaborative Research: IRES: Life Cycle Management and Ecosystem Services Applied to Urban Agriculture
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Defne Apul, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2022
* USD 179,614.00

Comparing environmental benefits to environmental impacts in urban and
conventional agriculture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing percentage of people
are moving into cities, getting farther away from places where crops are
traditionally cultivated. If we could farm in the cities, food transportation
distances and associated environmental impact would be reduced; the freshness of
the food and self-reliance and resilience of cities would increase. With an
increasing number of backyard and community gardens, our society is already
gradually transitioning to producing food within the city. But can urban
agriculture be more efficient and environmentally friendly than conventional
farming? Are environmental impacts always greater than environmental benefits in
agriculture? How can we use existing environmental impact and environmental
benefit modeling approaches to estimate ?net and absolute sustainability? of
agriculture? In this project, we will answer these types of questions in a
collaborative effort from University of Toledo (UT), University of Utah (UU),
and Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB). Current local food movement will
further strengthen and be guided by scientific understanding if our results show
that urban agriculture has net environmental benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to have impact in both research and global engagement. Students
from all three institutions will train and collaborate virtually for two
semesters prior to UT and UU students traveling to UAB for two months. Students
will use videoconferencing, wiki, blogs, and online discussion forums to improve
their entrepreneurship and research skills and cultural competencies. Students
and principal investigators will model tomato production in rooftop greenhouses
and community gardens in three cities: Toledo, Salt Lake City, and Barcelona.
Life cycle assessment will be used to estimate environmental impacts. Ecosystem
services models will be used to estimate environmental benefits. The impacts and
benefits will be added to estimate ?absolute environmental sustainability? for
agricultural systems. Multiple scales will be analyzed as we compare results at
individual versus city wide implementation to derive conclusions for facility
managers, utility managers, design engineers, and urban planners. Project
methods and results will help our society in designing more sustainable food-
energy-water (FEW) systems.