* 1559723
* REU Site: BIGDatA - Big Data Analytics for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Huiping Cao, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 359,151.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU)
site will support NSF's mission to promote progress of science by introducing
big data analytics in Cyber-physical Systems (CPS) to undergraduate students,
helping advance the state of art, and preparing them for the future scientific
workforce. The site's objectives include (i) motivating and solidifying
students' interest in Computer Science (CS) in general, and big data analytics
in particular; (ii) providing students with problem solving skills for
conducting research in big data analytics and for presenting scientific findings
verbally and in writing; (iii) equipping students with working knowledge of
applying data management and data analytics techniques, by involving students in
research projects related to different aspects of CPS; (iv) enhancing self-
confidence and self-efficacy of participants, by creating a sense of belonging
to a diverse community; and (v) broadening participation in computing, and
contributing to diversify the computing workforce. The research outcome will
advance the state of the art of big data analytics and push the research agenda
of utilizing big data techniques for CPS. The REU site will reach undergraduate
students beyond the New Mexico State University (NMSU) campus and train
workforce for big data analytics in CPS. Special emphasis will be placed on
recruiting underrepresented students nationwide. The participating students will
be mentored by the site researchers to disseminate their research projects'
findings via professional conferences and through the REU site website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU site
initiative is to inspire and prepare undergraduate students to pursue careers in
STEM with a focus on big data analytics for Cyber-physical Systems (CPS). PI's
propose research projects to explore big data analytics for CPS in three
intertwined layers: (L1) systems and architecture, (L2) models and algorithms,
and (L3) visualization, spanning across four CPS application areas including
smart grids, wireless sensor networks, smart homes for elderly and disabled, and
disaster response. The planned student activities include: (i) team-based
research activities on focused research projects, (ii) creation of cohorts,
which will engage in training workshops, to develop research skills and to
prepare for graduate schools, (iii) field trips to companies, and local and
national labs to broaden students' research horizon, (iv) workshop and
conference participation to present research findings, and (v) mentoring by
faculty members and interaction with other student researchers. The proposed
research outcome has the potential to advance the operation, protection, and
utility of CPS. The research activities in the projects will equip student
participants with skills and knowledge related to both big data analytics and
CPS. The training workshops will help students develop research skills and their
career paths. The field trips will broaden participants' understanding about
data analytics research for CPS.