* 1559940
* REU Site: Field and Laboratory Studies of Coastal Marine Processes at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Brian Bingham, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2019
* USD 252,217.00

The Division of Ocean Sciences provides renewed funding for a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the Shannon Point Marine
Center, Western Washington University (WWU), located in Bellingham, WA. The
program will support 8 students for a nine-week internship over three years
(2016-2018). Each student will work with an individual adviser to develop a
research project that is independent and appropriately focused. The general
theme focuses on living resources and processes of the local coastal marine
environment, including primary and secondary productivity, biogeochemistry,
microbial ecology and chemical ecology. With his/her adviser, each student
develops and presents a project plan in a colloquium setting during the second
week, conducts the research under the appropriate level of faculty supervision,
and presents oral and written reports at the conclusion of the program.
Publication of results and presentation at scientific meetings is strongly
encouraged and supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the SPMC REU is to
introduce promising students to research at a point in their undergraduate
programs that will permit informed decisions regarding pursuit of graduate
education and scientific professions while preparing them to do so. Early in the
program, students are introduced to the broad array of field and laboratory
research techniques and are encouraged to use these in their own work. Group
workshops are held on selecting and applying to graduate school, addressing
issues of ethics in science, mastering data analysis and presentation methods,
and effectively sharing science. Formal assessments provide both a feedback
mechanism used to improve the program and an evaluation that documents outcomes
and the longer-term value of the program. The program recruits applicants from
around the United States, with special attention to underprivileged, underserved
and underrepresented students, to those attending institutions with limited
opportunities for undergraduate research, and to those whose current locations
or previous experiences have not permitted ready access to marine environments.