* 1559112
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Corporate Social Responsibility and the Transformation of Humanitarian Aid
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Clare Cameron, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2017
* USD 22,638.00

Funding for global health programs experienced a period of rapid growth from
2001-2010. Since 2010, the annual rate of funding growth has plateaued as
humanitarian aid from development banks and governmental donors stagnates. In
this financial landscape, the private (for-profit) sector has become
increasingly involved in funding and implementing programs designed to improve
global health. In some cases, multinational companies are stepping in to fill
local governmental funding needs through their corporate social responsibility
programs. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, explores what role the
private sector's increasing involvement in humanitarian and development projects
has had in shaping public health programs and the relationship that citizens
have to corporations and governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clare Cameron, under
the supervision of Dr. Ian Whitmarsh of the University of California, San
Francisco, examines the current trend toward 'public-private partnerships',
collaborations between government and the private sector, as the new model for
global health interventions. While the private sector's history of contributing
to international development projects can be traced back to the early twentieth
century, its current role and influence in shaping global health programs has
gone largely unanalyzed. This research explores the implications of this move
toward the privatization of public health projects in the context of a mining
community in West Papua, Indonesia to ask: How does the increasing role of the
private sector in providing public services influence how citizens newly relate
to government? What new expectations of the private sector arise when a company,
rather than government, is principally responsible for funding public services?
As the multinational mining company in West Papua funds the overwhelming
majority of health services for the local community, this site is uniquely
situated to answer these questions. The researcher will use anthropological
methods of participant-observation to join the public health team of a non-
governmental organization that coordinates with local government to implement
comprehensive community health services funded by the mining company. The
researcher will also conduct interviews in two indigenous land-owning
communities that are stakeholders in corporate social responsibility efforts.
This project will have broader impacts as health policies, both global and
domestic, increasingly rely on public-private partnerships, and the potential
long-term effects of these collaborations are not well understood. Results from
this project are, thus, expected to influence how philanthropists, multinational
corporations, and health professionals understand the impacts of contemporary
practices of global humanitarianism and international development.