* 1559795
* A New Era for Discrete and Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Pankaj Agarwal, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 06/30/2017
* USD 26,000.00

Computational Geometry is a branch of the theory of computer science that
studies algorithms for problems best stated in geometric form. The problems
arise from applications in Geographic Information Systems, robotics, computer-
aided design &amp; manufacturing, computer graphics, data analytics and
visualization, molecular modeling, engineering simulation, etc. Computational
Geometry was a young field in 1986 when Goodmann and Pollack (NYU) launched what
would become the flagship journal, "Discrete &amp; Computational Geometry," with
a scientific conference in Santa Cruz. It, and follow-up conferences at Mt.
Holyoke (1996), Monte Verita (1999), and Snowbird (2006), had a huge impact in
defining and directing the field. This project supports US participants, mainly
young researchers, in a scientific conference, "A New Era of Discrete and
Computational Geometry," at the ETH Zurich seminar center Monte Verita, in
Ascona, Switzerland. It is fitting to revisit Monte Verita in 2016 to review
this field's history and look to its future; junior researchers especially will
benefit -- learning context from the review, and becoming equipped to create the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joint support from NSF's office of International
Science and Engineering and from Computer and Information Science and
Engineering broadens the opportunity for US-based participants.