* 1559544
* RAPID: The Response-Recovery Transition Phase and its Implications for Long-term Recovery: Case Study, Katmandu.
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Himanshu Grover, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 09/30/2016
* USD 48,901.00

Following a major disaster such as the Nepal earthquake, national agencies,
local non-governmental actors, and international aid agencies converge onto the
impacted region to provide assistance for emergency response and relief efforts.
Ideally, these relief activities should over time seamlessly transform into long
term recovery plans and actions. However, there is an evident lack of
coordination, and inefficient resource allocation during this transitional
period. Consequently, there are inordinate delays in planning and implementation
of critical recovery projects that are necessary for return to normalcy for the
impacted community. The findings of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) study
are expected to contribute towards understanding these obstacles and challenges
faced by local government agencies, non-governmental actors, and international
aid agencies in transitioning from emergency response to community recovery
actions. The outcomes of this research will help in development of priorities
for facilitating effective and efficient transition from emergency response to
recovery. Thus, this study has the transformative potential to streamline future
disaster recovery efforts and improve the efficacy of resources committed by the
various agencies (local and international) towards community recovery both at
home and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This data collection effort seeks to
explore a number of critical issues that influence long-term recovery. The
specific research questions that this study seeks to address include: 1) How do
the external aid agencies influence emergence of local recovery policy and
organizational framework during response-recovery transition; 2) How can the
external aid agencies ensure meaningful national ownership of recovery planning
frameworks during the period of response-recovery transition; 3) To what extent
does pre-disaster planning and organizational frameworks influence policy
formulation during response-recovery transition; 4) What are the challenges that
local governments face to ensure that response aid is transitioned into
development-focused assistance with local policy support while funding and
international attention is sustained; and, 5) How can we ensure that local
voices are heard in formulation of a recovery agenda during this transitional
phase? Data gathering at this critical stage of disaster response will enable us
to map the ongoing process of recovery policy formulation during the response-
recovery transition, and help identify specific obstacles, and challenges that
influence subsequent community recovery actions.