* 1559062
* The Behavioral Repertoire of Dinoflagellates:  High-Speed, High-Resolution Imaging of Ecologically Important Species-Species Interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Michael Brosnahan, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 665,600.00

Dinoflagellates are abundant and ecologically important species in marine
ecosystems, and they play diverse roles in marine food webs. They may be best
known to the general public as the organisms associated with periodic harmful
algal blooms, or situations when toxins produced by fast-growing populations
affect fish, shellfish, and marine mammals, as well as human use of coastal
resources. These single-celled organisms have evolved a range of behaviors for
obtaining nutrients from the environment, capturing prey, and evading predators.
In this project, the investigators will use a newly developed high-speed
microscale imaging system (HSMIS) in the lab and field to characterize
dinoflagellate behaviors in unprecedented detail in space and time to understand
ecologically important species-species interactions. The goal is to understand
the relationships among behavior, morphology, and ecological function for
dinoflagellates. More broadly, results will help explain processes that regulate
the biomass of, distribution of, and chemical cycling by marine plankton. In
addition, the investigators will develop and use a novel technology, provide
research training for undergraduate students, and give demonstrations and
lectures to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dinoflagellates are one of the most
abundant and ecologically important groups in marine ecosystems, playing diverse
roles in marine food webs. These single-celled organisms have evolved an
impressive repertoire of sensory, allelochemical, and behavioral capabilities
for obtaining nutrients, capturing prey, evading predators, and competing
against other organisms. This repertoire remains largely unexplored, however, in
part because traditional microscopy limits observations at the relevant scales
for the natural behavior of dinoflagellates. The investigators will conduct a
laboratory and field project to use a high-speed microscale imaging system
(HSMIS) to characterize dinoflagellate behavior in unprecedented spatial and
temporal detail across a range of ecologically important species-species
interactions. HSMIS overcomes several limitations inherent to traditional
microscopy, such as wall effects due to small sample volumes, confinement to a
horizontal field-of-view, and strong convection caused by using strong light.
The goal is to achieve a mechanistic understanding of interspecies detection,
avoidance, and capture. Observations will span a range of size scales and
trophic levels and will include examples of different flagellar propulsive
systems. Differences in swimming and flow will be used to understand trade-offs
in body form and kinematics for nutrient uptake, resource competition, selective
feeding, and predator/parasite avoidance.