* 1559460
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Reference Dependence and Option Adjustable Rate Mortgages
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Bernard Salanie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,000.00

This awards funds data expenses for dissertation research. The project focuses
on how homeowners who hold 'Option ARM' mortgages make financial decisions. The
goal is to determine whether or not these homeowners are using so-called
reference points in making their decisions about how to pay down credit card
debt while also making mortgage payments. The results of this project are
relevant to many issues surrounding financial regulation, and will illuminate
debates about whether or not the government should restrict complexity in
mortgage products, require certain kinds of disclosure information from lenders,
or even ban 'non-standard' mortgages all together. The work will also help
educators who work to promote financial literacy; the design of consumer
education programs will benefit from better information about the reasons why
consumers make certain kinds of financial mistakes.

The coPI plans to determine whether borrowers who hold Option ARMs make
financial mistakes (a) statically, by holding credit card debt at the same time
they make larger-than-necessary mortgage payments, and (b) over time, by failing
to allocate payments over time in response to plausibly exogenous shocks to
interest rates. He hypothesizes that these mistakes are due to reference
dependent preferences over debts. A natural reference point exists for an Option
ARM because the monthly statement includes a non-binding suggestion of
'interest-only' payment. The analysis will first provide descriptive evidence on
the importance of the interest only payments by examining the distribution of
mortgage payments relative to the reference point. The PI will then explicitly
test a model of reference dependence against a standard dynamic model.