* 1559870
* Physics Research Experience for Undergraduates Site at AAMU
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Tianxi Zhang, Alabama A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2021
* USD 275,000.00

The Physics REU Site at AAMU is a 10-week summer program that provides research
opportunities to 24 talented undergraduate students from institutions with
limited or no access to basic research in science and engineering. The project
broadens the participation of members of groups that are underrepresented in
STEM disciplines, especially women. The program attracts physics undergraduates
from minority serving institutions with limited opportunities to be involved in
active research. The participants will gain experience in technical writing and
presenting their research work to a variety of audiences, including
dissemination of their results in local, regional, and national scientific
conferences focused on undergraduate research and publishing in refereed
journals. By training undergraduates in research, the goal is to produce
skillful professionals who will contribute to the technological advancement and
economic development of the nation. Through this program participants will be
able to enhance their professional and personal portfolio by making unique
advancements in experimental design, instrumentation, data acquisition and
analysis, as well as engaging in a hands-on research experience with state-of-
the-art equipment. Participating students will be actively engaged in cutting-
edge research under the direct supervision of dedicated faculty mentors
throughout the completion of self-contained ten-week projects in a collaborative
research environment. Each participant will have an individual research project
funded by an external funding agency with one-on-one mentoring from a faculty
member through individual guidance as well as ample interactions with graduate
students. The projects will include frontier research in Materials Science,
Optics, Bio-photonics, Space Science, and Nanotechnology. The primary goal of
the program is to increase the students' knowledge, skills, and communication
capabilities in different areas of physics; inspiring them to pursue graduate
work in STEM fields, where the underrepresentation of women and minorities is
particularly acute. Exposure to a dynamic and diverse research in physics
enhances the REU participants' understanding of scientific research and broadens
their perspective on related professional careers in STEM.