* 1559716
* REU Site: UTEP-ROCCS (University of Texas at El Paso - Research Opportunities for Community College Students)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Diane Doser, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 330,532.00

This project will provide field and laboratory based research opportunities for
2-year college (2YC) students focusing on a variety of geologic problems in the
El Paso region. The 2YC students will be mentored by University of Texas at El
Paso (UTEP) and El Paso Community College (EPCC) faculty and undergraduate
students who have had research experiences and will be trained as student
mentors. The summer experience will involve 4 weeks in El Paso followed by 4
weeks at their home institutions with intensive virtual mentoring. The research
projects will focus on how the geology and morphology of the El Paso region
influence local soil development, surface and groundwater hydrology, and
landscape evolution, as well as evolution of the southern Rio Grande Rift. The
project will use a model for cognitive change related to social interactions to
determine which on-site activities were the most successful at increasing
collaboration and the knowledge/skills base of the 2YC students. The model will
also assess the quality and degree of interaction between the 2YC participants
and their faculty or student mentors. Few REU programs in geosciences
specifically target 2YC students to conduct research outside of their community.
Thus this REU will serve as a model for other institutions to involve 2YC
students in REU projects and the training materials developed will be helpful to
other institutions wishing to recruit and retain 2YC students.