* 1559839
* REU Site: Frontiers in the Chemistry of Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Jennifer Brodbelt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 265,753.00

Professor Jennifer Brodbelt and colleagues at the University of Texas at Austin
host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site supported by the REU
Sites Program of the Chemistry Division. This is an undergraduate research
program aimed at interdisciplinary training of future scientific leaders. The
projects focus on advanced research in the chemistry of materials, including
biomaterials, materials for energy conversion, and the characterization of
chemicals and materials. Eight undergraduates from universities around the
United States participate in a ten-week summer program that couples intensive
training and research-focused mentoring in a way that enhances retention of
students in science and engineering. The special emphasis on scientific
communication and inclusion of a multi-faceted safety program prepares
undergraduates for graduate school or jobs in science, technology and
engineering fields. The broader impact of this work is the exposure and
involvement of undergraduates, including those from underrepresented groups, to
the overarching theme of chemistry of materials and its impact on the world via
hands-on training with state-of-the-art spectroscopic, synthetic, and processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program joins chemists and chemical
engineers to encompass the discovery, design, development and characterization
of new materials. Research efforts in the area of biomaterials draws on
integration of concepts related to evaluation of biocompatibility and
toxicology, mechanical and structural properties, and ultimately biofunction.
The discovery of alternative energy materials represents a critical objectives
to alleviate the consequences of relying on carbon-based fuels. One focus is on
discovery of more efficient photovoltaic materials, development of catalytic
methods for hydrogen production, storage and delivery, and the development of
new devices for solar energy capture and conversion. The development of new
analytical/physical methods, application of those methods for characterization
of biomaterials and energy materials, and assessment of performance metrics are
key goals. Some of the undergraduates co-author papers from the emerging
research, and faculty engage in mentoring scientists at the earliest stages of
their technical development.