* 1559067
* Organizational Boundary Spanning in Large Collaborative Science
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2017
* John Hollenbeck, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 199,999.00

Increasingly, the pursuit of scientific discovery is being fulfilled not by
individuals working in isolation, but rather by teams of individuals, or even
networks of teams, working together to achieve a common objective. One major
reason for this shift toward larger social networks as solvers of scientific
problems is that problems are becoming increasingly complex and require
different areas of expertise, making them too difficult for individuals to solve
alone. Although there is great potential for the use of networks of individuals
and teams in the pursuit of science, they require individuals to navigate
through the interpersonal complexities of those networks. Such complexities are
especially evident when one considers that individuals, in order to accomplish
their work, may be connected or tied not only to others working in the same
organization, but also to others working in different organizations. With this
in mind, the purpose of this research is to understand how the quantity,
quality, and composition of individuals' internal and external ties influence
performance in a scientific context, with a particular emphasis on the ways in
which external ties facilitate or hinder the effects of internal ties on
performance. Understanding the joint influence of internal and external social
network ties not only has the potential to promote the progress of science, but
it also has implications for contexts outside of science collaboration. For
example, the knowledge generated by this research will have implications for
medical care, which is increasingly provided by networks of individuals and
teams, business organizations, which are utilizing teams that transcend the
boundaries of a single organization, and the military, with its use of Joint
Forces and Combined Operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Via survey methodology,
this research will generate data from a sample of scientists on their internal
ties and external ties to other scientists working in particle physics
facilities throughout the U.S. system of federally funded laboratories. To avoid
limitations associated with self-report, the investigators will attempt to
corroborate external ties reported by focal individuals with reports from
internal ties. By identifying the quantity and quality of external, boundary
spanning ties within the larger scientific ecosystem, the investigators will be
able to examine issues such as the predictive validity of external ties relative
to internal ties, whether external ties moderate the effects of internal ties on
measures of performance, and whether the composition of external ties results in
differential effects on performance, even when taking internal ties into
account. In all, the initial identification of external ties, in conjunction
with data on internal ties, represents an important extension because external
ties may operate in a different manner relative to internal ties given that they
may be characterized by (a) greater geographic dispersion, (b) higher levels of
goal misalignment between teams, (c) less diversity because of the voluntary
nature of external ties, and (d) less face-to-face interaction, depending upon
the level of communication technology.