* 1559152
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical significance of the abundant, uncultivated symbiotic cyanobacteria UCYN-A
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Kevin Arrigo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2019
* USD 499,439.00

Nitrogen is a nutrient whose availability limits growth and productivity of
ecosystems. Nitrogen is extremely abundant in the atmosphere in the inert form
of gaseous N2, but most organisms cannot reduce N2 into a biologically available
form. In all environments, including agricultural soils, there are
microorganisms that can make available the N from gaseous N2 by reducing it to
the biologically available form, ammonium. In the vast expanses of the open
ocean, few organisms are known to have this ability, and recently a unique
symbiosis between a single-celled cyanobacterium and a single-celled algae was
discovered, which appears to be very widely distributed and likely of global
biogeochemical significance. The cyanobacterium in this symbiotic partnership
has very unusual metabolism and genomic streamlining. Little is known of the
symbiosis because it is not detectable except by modern molecular biological
techniques. Recent work has shown this symbiosis to be very widely spread
through the oceans, and that there is previously unrecognized diversity in both
the cyanobacterial and algal hosts. This research will examine the environmental
distributions and the biogeochemical significance of this diversity in coastal
US waters. The investigators will engage the public in ocean sciences through
internship programs at local high schools and for undergraduate students at
Stanford, and by documenting their field research in a 'virtual cruise'
blog.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the marine environment, the contribution of N2
fixation to the fixed nitrogen (N) pool is poorly quantified, in part due to an
incomplete understanding on the abundance, activity, and physiology of
diazotrophs. The symbiotic unicellular cyanobacteria (UCYN-A) is a poorly
characterized, yet globally important, group of marine diazotrophs. UCYN-A is
widely distributed in the marine environment, and lives symbiotically with a
picoeukaryotic prymnesiophyte alga. We now know that there are multiple ecotypes
of UCYN-A, which may be adapted to specific locations in the water-column and
different oceanic provinces. Typically N2 fixation was considered unimportant in
coastally influenced and non-tropical waters, however recent data shows that
multiple subclades of UCYN-A are present. The distribution and rate of N2
fixation by UCYN-A subclades in coastal/nearshore environments is a major
unknown in the oceanic N cycle. Its presence in nearshore waters may change the
paradigm of the balance between basin N sources (N2 fixation) and sinks
(denitrification). Likewise, significant N2 fixation by UCYN-A will need to be
considered when determining estimates of new production in coastally influenced
waters. This project aims to quantify the significance of different UCYN-A
subclades to coastal/nearshore N budgets. It tackles the issue of determining N2
fixation rates by different UCYN-A subclades in coastal waters through rigorous
fieldwork off the west coast of North America. The temporal and spatial
distribution of UCYN-A subclades, as well as the rates of N2 fixation, will be
determined by coupling N2 fixation measurements of bulk communities and
individual cells (nanoSIMS) with molecular assays to study these widespread, but
dilute, diazotrophic symbionts and their hosts. Additionally the investigators
will conduct experiments aimed at constraining the effects of light and nutrient
ratios (N/P) on UCYN-A N2 fixation rates, and the prymnesiophyte host's rate of
carbon fixation. They will conduct this work through seasonal sampling of a
coastal site in the Southern California Bight (Scripps Pier) and on two process
cruises in the coastal waters between central California and the Baja Peninsula.
The cruise work will provide an opportunity to understand the temporal dynamics
of the UCYN-A/prymnesiophyte associations over larger spatial scales. Finally,
evidence suggests that unidentified UCYN-A subclades and hosts exist and the
investigators have developed a strategy to identify and quantify their temporal
and spatial distributions as well as their N2 fixation activities. Data on the
coastal distribution, ecology and activity of UCYN-A is critical for obtaining a
better understanding of their contribution to fixed N to the marine environment.
The group-specific and bulk rates of N2 fixation measured in this study of
coastally influenced waters, will provide data for future modeling efforts,
which will make an important contribution to constraining oceanic N2 fixation
inputs.