* 1559913
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Effects Of Colonial Interaction In A Traditional Society Context
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Stuart Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

UC Santa Barbara doctoral candidate Jessika Akmenkalns, supervised by Dr. Stuart
Tyson Smith, will conduct research on how cross-cultural interactions and
colonialism transformed cultural identities in hinterland communities in ancient
Nubia (northern Sudan) between 2500 and 1000 BC. Archaeology provides a unique
window through which researchers and the general public alike can come to
understand how colonialism and long-term struggles for political and economic
power affect the daily lives of individuals and groups, both locally and on a
broad regional scale. This research is particularly relevant in today's global
political climate, in which ethnic, religious, and national identities bear
significant impact on access to land, resources, and opportunities. This project
will contribute to a better understanding of these issues on a broad scale
because investigations of colonialism crosscut the social sciences, including
anthropology, sociology, history, geography, economics, and political science.
In addition, the project will provide university students with educational
opportunities and scientific training, and the field and laboratory experience
gained on the project will fulfill students' degree requirements. The data
collected as part of this research will form the basis of Ms. Akmenkalns'
doctoral dissertation.

Previous research on cross-cultural interactions has focused on large, urban
populations, or it has focused on the strategies of colonizing powers. While it
is certainly important to examine how such interactions impact major centers and
powerful political entities, it is also essential to investigate how rural
communities experience changing power structures and how they construct their
community identities in opposition to those of foreign cultural groups. The
following research questions guide this project: 1) What was the extent of
Egyptian presence or influence in rural Nubia before and during Egyptian
conquest of the region? 2) What was the importance of local and foreign cultural
traditions in expressing cultural identity before and during the Egyptian
conquest? 3) What differences, if any, were present in elite vs. non-elite and
urban vs. rural expressions of cultural identity in the region? To answer these
questions, this project will employ archaeological excavations at the sites of
Hannek and Abu Fatima, which are located in the hinterlands of the ancient
kingdom of Kerma in northern Sudan. Researchers will investigate the remains of
houses, public buildings, and tombs to examine ancient diet and health, as well
as the production and use of pottery, tools, jewelry, and architecture. These
artifact types are useful in understanding cultural identities because they are
integral to daily life and the routine behaviors that structure those
identities. Archaeologists will perform preliminary analysis on artifacts and
samples during the excavation season, followed by additional in-depth analyses
that will be performed in US laboratories, to include radiocarbon dating,
ceramic and stone tool classification, and the analysis of dietary samples such
as animal and plant remains.