* 1559849
* REU Site: Research in Radio/Radar Astronomy and Atmospheric Sciences at Arecibo Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Robert Minchin, Universidad Metropolitana
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 04/30/2022
* USD 535,100.00

Arecibo Observatory (AO) will host a summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site in Puerto Rico. Undergraduates from across the country
will be guided by AO staff as they complete research projects in radio
astronomy, planetary science, atmospheric science, and in the supporting
engineering and computing applications. They will also participate in scientific
seminars and professional development programs. Students from the mainland will
be exposed to the Puerto Rican culture and natural history through field trips
and social activities. A special effort will be made to recruit qualified Puerto
Rican students, who are underrepresented within STEM fields. The program
includes local science teachers through a Research Experiences for Teachers
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main activity for all summer interns is to
work on an original research project closely supervised by a staff member. Each
participating mentor designs one or more well-defined projects that a student
should be able to complete over a ten-week period. Projects may be either self-
contained or form a part of a larger endeavor. Observatory staff give an
introductory Summer Student Lecture series designed to introduce the students to
the fundamental concepts of the science pursued at Arecibo and to the underlying
methods employed in their research areas. Throughout the program, science
seminars by staff and visiting scientists are also provided to broaden the
scientific horizons of the students. As part of their program, students are
strongly encouraged to attend a relevant scientific or technical meeting.