* 1559530
* IRES Water Quality and Household Energy in Post-Earthquake Nepal: Long Term Protection of Community Health
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Benito Marinas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

IRES Water Quality and Household Energy in Post-Earthquake Nepal: Long Term
Protection of Community Health&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES award brings together a diverse
community of researchers and students from the United States and Nepal. In
addition to working directly with local and international scientists, U.S.
students will communicate to other undergraduate and graduate students through
blogging about international research experience. Participants will also develop
education materials, with help from local collaborators, to help inform
community members in host countries. Upon return to their home institution,
students will present their results through professional seminars and scientific
publications. The students trained by this proposed program will be the future
leaders of an elite international development workforce diminishing the impact
of infectious disease on human health by nurturing the interaction of persons of
different disciplines and skill sets to meet water, sanitation, and household
energy needs worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S. - Nepal international research
experience for students (IRES) project supports partnership between researchers
from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), the Environment and
Public Health Organization, Nepal (ENPHO), the Center for Rural Technology Nepal
(CRT-N), the Institute of Engineering, Nepal (IOE) and the Nepal Department of
Health Services. Over a three-year period, this program will engage three U.S.
undergraduate and three U.S. graduate students annually, for a total of eighteen
participants, at multiple research sites in Nepal to study the aftermath of
natural disaster like earthquake on microbial water quality compounded with
sanitation practices. Following training and research preparation at UIUC,
students will travel to Nepal, where they will be co-mentored by professors and
researchers from the partner institutes. Each student's research training will
include experience with planning and implementation of field strategies for
drinking water sampling in the affected areas; interviewing local people to
understand the sanitation practices and the sustainability of relief efforts;
and data collection on waterborne illnesses. Following each portion of fieldwork
and sample processing in Kathmandu, participants return to UIUC to prepare
collected samples for metagenomics, 16S and 18S sequencing, qPCR and
bioinformatics analysis. These will be studied to identify opportunistic
pathogens in collected water sample, and patterns of presence with different
sanitation practices. Results will provide new insights on the risks of outbreak
of diarrheal diseases after extreme natural events in developing world, and how
human practices may increase or decrease these risks.