* 1559833
* REU Site: University of Minnesota MRSEC in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* David Blank, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 428,400.00

Title: REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in
Nanomaterials Science and Engineering with Research Experiences for Teachers
(RET)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Sustainable
plastics; high efficiency photovoltaics; therapeutic nanoparticles; spintronic
devices; plastic electronics - these are all exciting, emerging technologies
that depend on nanomaterials development, and that can inspire undergraduate
researchers. For ten weeks each summer, ten undergraduate students and six pre-
college teachers will participate in a broad array of activities that will
prepare them to tackle these and other challenging problems in science and
engineering. Students will gain exposure to a broad range of topics centered
around the area of nanomaterials while being prepared for graduate school and
future careers in science and engineering. Teachers will gain hands-on
laboratory experiences to help them better understand the practice of science
and engineering and subsequently communicate it to their students. Students and
teachers will work with faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students
with distinguished track records in research and education, emphasizing a rich
array of interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate students
from diverse backgrounds. The experience will train the next generation of
science and engineering professionals while increasing participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: The UMN MRSEC comprises three Interdisciplinary Research Groups
(IRGs) addressing pressing problems over a wide range of 'hard' to 'soft'
materials: IRG-1, Electrostatic Control of Materials; IRG-2, Sustainable
Nanocrystal Materials; and IRG-3, Hierarchical Multifunctional Macromolecular
Materials. Each IRG integrates the six basic elements of materials science and
engineering - synthesis, theory, structural characterization, property
evaluation, processing and applications - required for effective innovation in
materials research and development. To enable talented and ambitious students to
tackle these and other frontier nanomaterials challenges, the University of
Minnesota Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (UMN MRSEC) will
couple cutting-edge research practiced in the Center with a multi-tiered
mentoring program and an extensive program in professional development and skill
building. For ten weeks each summer, ten undergraduate students will participate
in a comprehensive collection of activities designed to offer in-depth,
stimulating research experiences, foster mentoring relationships with faculty,
graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, and enhance student skills in
preparation for graduate school. The programing is designed to promote and
assure inclusion of females and underrepresented minorities in the preparation
of the next generation of scientists and engineers.