* 1559476
* Collaborative Research: An Observational and Modeling Study of the Physical Processes Driving Exchanges between the Shelf and the Deep Ocean At Cape Hatteras
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Dana Savidge, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,218,152.00

Recent unusual conditions along the U.S. East Coast have dramatically
demonstrated the importance of understanding the dynamics controlling shelf-deep
ocean exchange at the confluence of the North Atlantic gyres near Cape Hatteras.
Atypical Gulf Stream position, air-sea heat flux, extremes in ocean temperature,
and sea level rise are potential harbingers of larger shifts in atmospheric and
oceanic forcing. Effects on shelf-deep ocean exchange are unknown due to
incomplete dynamical understanding of the present. Development of predictive
capacity is particularly relevant at this time, as oil and gas exploration is
being planned. The understanding of shelf-deep ocean exchange gained through
this project will be applicable to other regions where shelf and basin-scale
currents converge and could improve our capacity to anticipate the response of
the coastal ocean to climate change in the coming decades. In addition to the
physical interactions between scales and oceanic regions, the relevance of
exported shelf waters at Cape Hatteras to global carbon budgets may be large,
and is difficult to quantify due to carbon budget mediation by biological
ecosystems that vary with season and water mass. Both ecosystems and export
processes may change under predicted climatic shifts, so understanding export
processes has broad biogeochemical importance. Collaborations with
biogeochemists and ecologists will be pursued to utilize the data to study
ecosystems in this area of high biological diversity that is home to many
commercially important species. Insights gained through the project will also
improve mitigation of pollutant spills. The outreach and educational efforts
include a public exhibit and talks, opportunities for joining science cruises
and participation in the Society of Women Engineers "Girls Engineer It! Day", a
daylong event for girls in grades 6-12, and the Wood Hole Oceanographic
Institution's summer program for undergraduates from underrepresented groups.
The project will support two early career scientists, train one postdoctoral
researcher and four graduate students, and give undergraduate students hands-on
experience in the operation of the autonomous
gliders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subtropical and subpolar oceanic gyre boundaries
are characterized by confluent western boundary currents and convergence in the
adjacent shelf and slope waters. Together, they lead to large net export of
shelf waters to the deep ocean, and complex, bidirectional shelf-deep ocean
exchange, in response to strong forcing typical of mid-latitude western ocean
margins. Shelf-deep ocean exchange processes at such dynamic sites remain poorly
understood, due in part to the technical challenge of resolving broad ranges of
relevant spatial and temporal scales. The understanding gained by investigating
the wide seasonal range of parameter space will facilitate exploration of how
shelf circulation and shelf-open ocean exchange may evolve due to observed and
projected long-term shifts in regional and basin-scale circulation, hydrography,
and atmospheric forcing. This project will deploy fixed, mobile, and remote
observational platforms in combination with idealized and realistic numerical
simulations to investigate exchange processes near Cape Hatteras. The sampling
array will provide an observational data set with unprecedented temporal and
spatial resolution in a region of large episodic export and exchange. These
observations will be used to identify dominant exchange processes; correlate
them with observed forcing; define ranges of forcing and shelf response; verify
parallel developments within the realistic model framework; and establish
causation through detailed assessment of momentum and vorticity balances,
integrating observational and validated model products. In addition to physical
data, the autonomous gliders will also collect chlorophyll fluorescence, oxygen
saturation, and acoustic backscatter data that are of direct relevance to
biogeochemical properties exported from the shelf to the deep ocean. These non-
physical data will be used as water mass tracers and to portray the structure of
the chlorophyll-a and dissolved oxygen at unprecedented resolution.