* 1559319
* RUI:  Epoxides from Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds:  Gas Phase Formation and Aerosol Phase Reactions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Matthew Elrod, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2019
* USD 177,987.00

Biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs) are non-methane hydrocarbons
globally emitted by plants in large quantities (~1150 teragrams of carbon per
year: c.f. ~ 140 teragrams of anthropogenic carbon per year) and which are
important precursors for photo-chemical smog formation, along with production of
secondary organic aerosols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work seeks in continuance
of the Principal Investigator's interest in the potential involvement of
isoprenoid epoxide intermediates in the oxidation of biogenic volatile organic
compounds (e.g. a-pinene, b-pinene, limonene, 2-me-3-buten-2-ol, 3-Z-Hexenal)
along with assessment of their subsequent gas phase and particle phase
reactivity. Not all of these compounds are readily available, and thus some may
need to be synthesized. The central mechanistic activity is then to study the
epoxide formation, and their NOx and pressure dependence yields via reactions of
BVOCs with OH, O3 and NO3, the common atmospheric oxidants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The previous RUI grant, and the PI's other support, has
made possible the extensive participation of undergraduate students in aspects
of atmospheric chemistry research. Over the past 17 years of NSF support through
the PI's CAREER and RUI programs, some 46 undergraduate students have been
involved in ongoing projects. During this same period, 33 of these students were
coauthors on 30 of the 36 papers published by the Oberlin College PI.