* 1559911
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Mathematics at Missouri State University
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Leslie Reid, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2019
* USD 293,661.00

The REU program at the Department of Mathematics, Missouri State University will
consist of three eight week long research training projects in the summers of
2016, 2017, and 2018. Each year, it will provide research opportunities in
mathematics for twelve undergraduate students from across the nation, especially
targeting students from Missouri and neighboring states. Missouri State
University believes a rich diversity of people and points of view enhances the
quality of learning; as in our previous REUs, special consideration will be
given to students coming from traditionally underrepresented groups. The target
population consists of talented students from institutions where opportunities
for undergraduate research in mathematics are limited. The main goals of this
program are to help the students develop their full potential to do research in
mathematics, to expose them to the intellectual excitement involved in research,
to enable them to be creative and to think independently, and to encourage them
to pursue graduate studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topics will
include higher codimension bifurcations in models of neuronal systems, dynamics
of networked connectivity models of waterborne disease epidemics, properties of
graphs associated to groups, finite point configurations, additive
combinatorics, convergence of polygons and polyhedrons, and image processing on
hexagonal and triangular domains. Students will work in small groups, and will
meet daily with their mentor. Regular progress reports and a final presentation
will be given to the entire body of participants. Support will be provided for
students to present their results at regional and national conferences. It is
expected that some of the research will result in publications in peer-reviewed
journals. Students will leave the program with a deeper understanding of
mathematics and mathematical research, improved oral and written skills, and a
new network of friends and colleagues.