* 1560881
* Exploring response properties of molecules and extended systems using theoretical methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jochen Autschbach, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jochen Autschbach of the
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, and his research team are
developing and applying theoretical models to describe how molecules interact
with light. Professor Autschbach is investigating how molecules interact
simultaneously with magnetic fields and electromagnetic radiation. This
phenomenon occurs in a chemical measurement technique called nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), which is related to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) used in
modern medicine. He is also studying how molecules and their mirror-image
counterparts interact with light and how the environment around a molecule
influences its interaction with light. Such properties are frequently measured
in order to deduce information about the structures and functions of molecules,
and theoretical support is needed to help establish these relationships.
Professor Autschbach is making available the theoretical methods and software
developed during this investigation to the larger community of scientists. This
research project provides an in-depth training of graduate and undergraduate
students as well as an opportunity for high school students to experience a
summer internship. The graduate and undergraduate student experience is being
enhanced by the collaborative nature of the project, because the project is
being carried out in collaboration with experimentalists from a variety of
fields, including materials science and catalysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum-
theoretical methods are being developed to understand how molecular structure
and dynamics influence a variety of molecular optical and spectroscopic
properties. Such properties are frequently measured in order to deduce
information about the structures and functions of molecules, and theoretical
support is needed to help establish these relationships. Specifically, the
parameters being addressed in this project include determining the NMR response
and the optical activity of molecules. The calculations focus on NMR relaxation
phenomena and on the structural and electronic origins of natural electronic and
vibrational optical activity. In addition, the influence of the chemical and
physical environment on these molecular properties is being explored.