* 1560465
* REU Site: Upper Gila Preservation Archaeology Field School, Southwest New Mexico
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2019
* USD 263,695.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education.

The Upper Gila Preservation Archaeology Field School, located in rural
southwestern New Mexico, provides hands-on training in ethically responsible and
scientifically rigorous archaeological methods in the context of a long-term
research project. Training is conducted within a Preservation Archaeology ethos,
a philosophy integrating big-picture research, use of existing collections,
focused fieldwork, site preservation, and local community outreach. Under the
close supervision of a team of experienced instructors, this program offers
undergraduate students an immersive environment in which to learn the
fundamentals of archaeological field and laboratory work, the tenets and
practices of Preservation Archaeology, and how to link their work to broader
anthropological issues that have contemporary relevance. Specifically, students
are trained in excavation and survey techniques, experimental archaeology,
artifact processing and analysis, report-writing, and public presentation. Based
on the premise that sites are non-renewable resources, the Preservation
Archaeology Field School is training the next generation of academic, private
sector, and government agency archaeologists. Student recruiting targets
underrepresented groups, including Native American, Hispanic, and
community/small college undergraduates with limited STEM opportunities, as well
as exemplary students from major academic institutions to increase the diversity
of views represented in the discipline.

Student efforts contribute directly to Archaeology Southwest's long term
research program focused on the Salado Phenomenon in the southern U.S. Southwest
during the late pre-contact period (A.D. 1200-1450). This research studies the
processes of migration and social integration of culturally diverse groups
during this time of upheaval and crisis across much of the Southwest. Students
think critically about the values of archaeology and history to different
communities and explore different ways to communicate the results of scientific
research. Students present their work to various audiences through participation
in outreach events for the local community, writing research reports, and
presentations at professional meetings. Even for students who do not go on to
pursue careers in archaeology, it is excellent training to learn valuable skills
in collaboration and collegiality, critical thinking, engaging the public, and
the importance of cultural resources, in an active research setting.