* 1560627
* Intraseasonal Extratropical Precursors to the Indian Ocean Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Proximate to Africa
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul Roundy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 486,419.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a large envelope of clouds and
precipitation that forms over the Indian Ocean and slowly propagates eastward to
the middle of the equatorial Pacific. It affects weather conditions worldwide
including atmospheric rivers and flooding in California and hurricane formation
in the Gulf of Mexico. Some MJO events appear to form independently and are
designated as "primary" events. Other "secondary" events appear to be triggered
by wave disturbances in the upper troposphere which propagate into the Indian
Ocean from regions to the west, in the subtropical belts of the Northern and
Southern Hemispheres. The triggering of MJO events by upstream wave disturbances
has been well documented, but the processes through which the waves induce MJO
events are not well known, and this project seeks to better understand them.
Preliminary work by the PI suggests that the precursor waves are not fast moving
triggers that impulsively kick-start the MJO, but slowly propagating Rossby
waves with intraseasonal timescales. One possibility is that a secondary MJO
events can be promoted by an earlier MJO event, which generates Rossby waves in
the central equatorial Pacific which propagate eastward and toward higher
latitudes, later recurving back into the tropics where they arrive over the
equatorial Indian Ocean to induce the subsequent MJO. The project has a focus on
Africa because the precursor waves enter the Indian Ocean from the African
subtropics. A variety of statistical methods are used to detect and characterize
the precursor waves, which are identified in observational data from satellites
as well as reanalysis products. Moisture and momentum budgets are then used to
understand how the waves contribute to the formation of secondary MJO events.

The work has societal broader impacts due to the variety of weather impacts
associated with the MJO. There is some skill in forecasts of the propagation of
MJO events, but predictions of the initiation of MJO events would allow greater
lead times for prediction of MJO impacts. As the project focuses on precursor
meteorology over Africa, the project may also have benefit for understanding and
predicting African weather. In addition, the project provides support and
training to two graduate students, thereby building the future workforce in this
research area.