* 1560410
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Computational Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Juana Moreno, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 346,641.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Center for Computation and Technology (CCT) at
Louisiana State University (LSU). The recent, rapid development of high
performance computer platforms, together with a similar emergence of highly
accurate algorithms, allow the treatment and modeling of complex systems which
were intractable just a few years ago. However, Computational Science (CSci)
will only fulfill its full potential if early exposure of undergraduate students
to CSci accompany the advances in hardware. Currently, the majority of students
learn little CSci in the classroom and are not prepared for CSci research. This
REU site targets these issues and prepares the next generation of students for
CSci research. A multi-disciplinary team of Computational Science faculty from
several LSU departments will collaborate to provide participating students with
research-learning experiences in the computational aspects of multiple
scientific disciplines, including Chemistry, Computer Science, Digital Media,
Mathematics, Physics, Astronomy, Biological Sciences, and Civil, Environmental,
Petroleum, Electrical, and Computer Engineering. This project serves the
national interest and NSF's mission by promoting early engagement of
undergraduate students in research, exposing students to high-performance
computing and other scientific cyberinfrastructure resources, fostering active
learning through hands-on experiences in a collaborative research environment,
and inspiring students to pursue advanced STEM education and STEM research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are
to engage students in a set of carefully and extensively planned research
projects that pose a wide range of scientific and technological challenges. With
research groups working on problems such as gravitational waves, complex
emergent phenomena in material science, and computational arts, the participants
will be working on cutting edge research in CSci. An extensive training
component will remedy the weak preparation of most students in CSci, providing
knowledge on how to leverage state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure tools. The
program offers a variety of activities designed to improve students' computing,
reasoning, problem-solving, research, and communication skills. The 30
undergraduate students participating in this REU, as well as the 6 high school
students supported by IBM, will be engaged with authentic computational science
projects, learn how to use state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure tools,
experience activities that characterize research careers, and work in
interdisciplinary research teams. This participating faculty have found that the
combination of individual training with student immersion in a multidisciplinary
research group has been successful in engaging a diverse body of students to
explore CSci. Faculty mentors provide activities that help students appreciate
the nature of multidisciplinary research and the value of working as a team.
These skills have the potential to be transformative in both the students'
education as well as their future careers.