* 1560168
* REU Site: iCER ACRES: iCER Advanced Computational Research Experience for Students
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kenneth Merz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

This research experience for undergraduates (REU) project aims to engage
undergraduates in learning experiences that increase student's interest and
ability to conduct computational and data science research in a range of
scientific domains. The ability to effectively solve problems on high-
performance computational resources is an area of increasing national
importance. The educational process supported by iCER ACRES will enable students
to address a range of computational projects of significant benefit to the US.
In particular, computational science is now important in improving the health of
the country, advancing our common prosperity and welfare and advancing the
cyber-defense of the US. Projects provided through this site will advance the
overall national skillset in the computational and data sciences field through
hands-on educational activities. In addition to providing undergraduates with
research learning experiences, this project will broaden the participation of
underrepresented populations in STEM research, provide early HPC exposure to
students from institutions with limited access to HPC resources, especially
women and underrepresented groups and motivate students to pursue careers in
computational fields.

The overarching goal of the program is to increase students' technical skillset
to address in a broad range of computational fields. iCER ACRES achieves this
goal by: (i) engaging undergraduates in original interdisciplinary collaborative
research in data science and scientific computing domains; (ii) introducing
students to a broad set of "classical" programming algorithms and their
applications for problem-solving in data science and scientific computing; and
(iii) exposing undergraduates to high performance computing (HPC) resources used
to conduct research and software engineering practices applied to increase the
quality of scientific applications. These program elements are designed to: -
Allow students to experience and learn about the research process through
working on an unsolved, open-ended research problem; - Increase participants'
disciplinary knowledge and their understanding of how that knowledge may be
applied; - Assist students in defining and refining their research and career
interests; - Provide students with an introduction to the world of academia and
graduate school; and - Provide a forum for collegial interaction with a faculty
member. Research projects provided through this site focus on the development
and enhancement of algorithms, models, and software for applications in multiple
domains that require high performance resources. These domains include but are
not limited to: computational chemistry, biology, astrophysics, mathematics, big
data science, computational electromagnetics and cybersecurity. This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.