* 1560940
* Student Support for the 15th Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS 2016)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Serge Egelman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This project provides support for the 2016 Workshop on the Economics of
Information Security (WEIS). WEIS fosters cross-disciplinary, cross-sector
(i.e., academia, industry, nonprofit, and government), and cross-national
discussion on information security. The focus on the economics of information
security was chosen not only because of its intrinsic importance, but also
because of its basis for bringing together social, computer, and information
scientists and engineers to share knowledge, information and methods from their
respective domains. WEIS covers issues that are core to the NSF's Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, and spans both the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) and Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Directorates within the Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
WEIS conference draws a 50/50 split between US and European participants, with a
small number of participants from Asia. The venue rotates between US and
European locations, with two years in the US for every year in Europe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All funds from this grant will go towards supporting US
undergraduate and graduate student attendance at the WEIS conference, to be held
in June 2016 at the University of California, Berkeley. This project will thus
provide US students with valuable opportunities for students to meet and
interact with notable researchers, thereby furthering their own research
careers.