* 1560089
* REU Site: Computational Social Science at the University of Notre Dame
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Paul Brenner, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 374,685.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This award promotes
the progress of social science discoveries through the application of advanced
computational (computer) applications to solve problems of national interest
such as personality analysis (psychology), interpersonal networks (sociology),
family savings (economics) and digital introspection and archiving of
architectural landmarks (anthropology). Broader impacts will include the
critical advancement of education in computational social science as identified
in the Presidential Information Technology Advisory Committee report and
development of the nation's future social scientists. The program's engagement
of under-represented groups and the opportunities for interaction with high
school students and international research peers will have a broad impact in
their professional STEM development.

This award establishes an REU Site at the Center for Research Computing (CRC) at
the University of Notre Dame; an ideal setting for the REU student to become
familiar with interdisciplinary computational social science research. The CRC
provides access to research groups working across a diverse range of social
science problems including (a) Multivariate Data Mining for the Analysis of
Personality, (b) Explorations on the Effects of Pervasive Networking on Social
Relationships, (c) Developing Large Overlapping Generations Models of Household
Savings, and (d) Digital Anthropological and Archaeological Data Capture,
Archive, and Analysis. The social science students learn how to use the most
current cyberinfrastructure tools and receive training on fundamental scientific
computing skills and techniques. The program involves 10 students every summer,
and each student spends 10 weeks at the University of Notre Dame. Intellectual
merit of the project is grounded in four core areas of expertise: computational
psychology, computational sociology, computational economics, and
cyberinfrastructure development for the social sciences. The program gives
students and faculty participants a chance to carry out collaborative,
interdisciplinary research in the computational sciences. Students become part
of an interdisciplinary team and experience the rewards of scientific
collaboration. For faculty, the REU program offers an opportunity to explore
novel research areas and form new collaborations.