* 1560411
* Embedding Force-Free Flux Ropes in Potential Magnetic Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Viacheslav Titov, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 341,593.00

Solar eruptive phenomena, such as Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) and flares,
cause some of the most severe space-weather effects. They are believed to result
from an explosive release of magnetic energy in the solar corona, where the
magnetic field cannot at present be measured directly. This research project is
expected to lead to a better modeling and deeper understanding of the physical
drivers of space weather. A physics-based understanding of the underlying
cause(s) of CMEs can eventually lead to a better forecasting of space-weather
events, which may allow mitigating steps to be taken to protect human and
technological assets. To model solar eruptive phenomena, it is critical to have
an efficient method for numerically constructing pre-eruptive configurations
from photospheric magnetic data. The new method to be developed over the course
of this project is expected to be highly competitive compared to the existing
ones, such as the nonlinear force-free field reconstruction, or flux-rope
insertion, especially in terms of the efficiency and control of the resulting
flux-rope parameters. This investigation is timely, feasible, and directly
related to the NSF's Solar Terrestrial Research Program that "supports research
on the processes by which energy in diverse forms is generated by the Sun,
transported to the Earth, and ultimately deposited in the terrestrial
environment." Therefore, the project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, analytical or semi-analytical flux-rope models
are being used as the basis for the eruption in many of these models. This
3-year project aims to construct analytically approximate solutions of a force-
free flux rope of flexible shape embedded in an ambient potential field, with
photosphere flux distribution matching the observed fields. The near-equilibrium
analytic solution will be relaxed further with line-tied MHD simulations to
reach an approximate numerical stable equilibrium as the initial state for MHD
simulations (with further driving) of realistic CME events. The project will
improve upon the current Titov-Demoulin (TD) force-free flux rope model the PI
has developed to allow for the flexibility of complex shapes/paths of the flux
rope and preserve the flux distribution in the observed magnetograms. The
computation of pre-eruptive configurations based on this technique will be
simple, highly efficient, and the resulting model will be significantly more
accurate than those used in CME simulations so far. As part of this
investigation, the project team will provide formulas and a numerical code for
producing equilibrium flux ropes, so that other researchers from the solar-
heliospheric community will be able to experiment using these models in their
own codes.