* 1560103
* REU Site: Research Experiences at the Interface of Chemistry and Biological Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Marc Knecht, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 306,843.00

In this project, funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation,
Professor Marc Knecht at the University of Miami in Florida focuses on research
at the interface between chemistry and biological sciences. This site provides
16 undergraduates students per year with a 10-week multidisciplinary research
experience. This includes a dual mentoring program ensuring strong experiences
in both the chemistry and biological sciences aspects of the research, as well
as dissemination of results (e.g., publications and presentations). Samples of
projects include nanotoxicity, electrical wiring of cell signaling, fluorescent
probes for in vivo sensing. All projects provide students with exposure to the
chemical aspects of biological research. The program also provides each student
with career building exercises to encourage them to pursue graduate studies in
science and research careers. Underrepresented and female students are strongly
encouraged to participate, and a highly diverse cohort of participants are
assembled. Recruitment emphasis is placed on 2-year college students to ensure
that they have an opportunity to participate in an intensive research
experience, which typically is not available at their institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site provides summer research opportunities for
motivated students with a minimum of two years of chemistry coursework. The
students are offered a choice of research projects at the interface between
chemistry and biological sciences, with an emphasis on collaborative research.
In this research program, new avenues of research are realized when chemical
principles are applied to problems in the biological sciences. Research-active
faculty supervise the students, with each project being a joint effort between
at least two faculty members (one each in chemistry and biological sciences).
Weekly seminars are conducted to stimulate discussion and provide information on
career opportunities, current research issues, professional ethics, and
effective communication skills. In house "mini-symposia" provide the students
with a platform to present their research. The participants also are given the
opportunity to attend national or regional conferences. This spectrum of
activities contributes towards the scientific growth of the students, and also
encourage them to pursue careers in scientific research. The program focuses on
recruiting and engaging underrepresented minorities with research, an urgent
need in light of the projected future requirements in the scientific research
workforce. The participating students are predominantly recruited from South
Florida institutions of higher learning, which have very high populations of
underrepresented minority students.