* 1560648
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negative Campaigns, Priming Effects and Vote Choice
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Rebecca Lisi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2017
* USD 21,051.00

General Summary

This project studies the impact of negative campaign ads featuring Latinos on
voters' political opinions and vote choice. Recent decades have witnessed an
increase in television campaign ads that depict Latinos as "illegal aliens" and
employ gritty, menacing images of Latinos. This trend of targeting Latinos is
seemingly replacing an earlier period of negative campaign advertising that
focused on mobilizing voters by tapping into their fears of African Americans.
While much literature that explains the conditions under which these ads are
effective, the theories are nearly exclusively built upon campaign ads that
target African Americans. As the Latino community continues to grow in the
United States it is increasingly important to explore whether these existing
theoretical models hold true for negative campaign ads that target Latinos. This
research examines the effects of negative campaign ads and racial priming on
vote choice using a survey experiment that is conducted using the 2016
Cooperative Congressional Elections Survey.

Technical Summary

This project employs a survey experiment to study the impact that racial appeals
targeting Latinos have on voters' political opinions and vote choice. It aims to
test the theory of racial priming by assessing whether this theory similarly
predicts opinion and vote choice when the target of these political ads are
Latinos rather than African Americans. The survey experiment will utilize a
dual-wave panel administered through 2016 Cooperative Congressional Elections
Survey (CCES) with a nationally representative sample. This dual-wave feature
helps overcome contamination effects that may result from asking questions about
race before the experimental manipulations. In the survey experiment respondents
will be exposed to three campaign mailers for a fictitious congressional
candidate. Exposure to one of the randomly assigned treatments is then followed
up by a survey battery that asks respondents about their vote choice, candidate
favorability, and support for restrictive social policies.