* 1560302
* REU Site: Research Experiences in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Damla Turgut, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 359,912.00

This CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new
REU site focused on the Internet of Things (IoT) at the University of Central
Florida. The REU site will provide 10 undergraduates per summer the opportunity
to work with faculty mentors in state-of-the-art research labs on projects in
the rapidly emerging area of IoT. The Internet of Things is a new are of
research characterized by tight integration between the physical components,
software, wireless networking as well as the social context in which the devices
operate. The University of Central Florida has made significant investments in
two centers, one institute, and a research cluster to explore research
applications related to the IoT and cybersecurity. In addition to conducting
research the students will participate in other professional development
activities such as industry field trips, professional ethics seminars, speakers
and career guidance, and graduate school preparation. An external evaluator will
measure the success of the site and the impact on the students. The culminating
event of the summer will be a symposium where the students present their
research results in a professional setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The is project
is led by an outstanding team offering state-of-the art facilities and
professional mentors to guide undergraduates in explorations of problems related
to the Internet of Things. The goal of the site is to use the fast-moving IoT
field to excite undergraduates and to provide research experiences to students
who might not otherwise have opportunities for research experiences at their own
institutions. The IoT provides the basis for new consumer products such as smart
phones, health and fitness tracking devices, accident avoidance technologies for
vehicles, and home automation. These are all areas which should appeal to
students and actively engage them in projects that are meaningful to them and
relevant to all citizens. The students will participate in research and
professional development activities all designed to achieve the goals of
retaining and graduating undergraduate students in computer science and
engineering, recruiting students from groups traditionally under-represented in
computing fields, and increasing recruitment of students into graduate programs.