* 1560077
* REU Site: Physics and Astronomy Research at Rutgers
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Sunil Somalwar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,392.00

This award supports the continuation of the Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Rutgers,
the State University of New Jersey. Nine students per summer will be brought to
Rutgers for ten weeks each, during which they will engage in forefront research
in astronomy, high-energy and nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and
physics education. The students will also engage in a program of field trips and
professional development activities that educate them about the conduct of
research and arm them with the information and tools they need to define and
achieve their educational and professional goals. The award will promote the
progress of science in the multiple areas from which research projects are
drawn, and will support the education and training of 27 students-- many from
underrepresented backgrounds and/or institutions with limited research
opportunities-- thereby broadening participation in the physics and astronomy
communities and the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals,
the REU site will provide a mixture of formal and informal settings in which
participating students will interact with each other, with their faculty mentors
and assigned graduate student "near-peer" mentors, with Rutgers undergraduate
physics and astronomy majors, and with a diverse co-residential peer group from
outside Rutgers working in completely different STEM fields. Faculty mentors
include multiple APS Fellows and NSF CAREER award winners and are a vibrant,
collegial, intellectually diverse, and well-funded set of scientist-educators
with exciting research programs and excellent records of working with
undergraduates. Students will live and socialize with peers in the Rutgers
Research in Science and Engineering (RiSE) program, a key organizational
partner. Relative to the previous site award, the renewal award will innovate by
introducing mentorship training, flexible supervisory arrangements, physics
education research opportunities, and program assessment featuring national
benchmarking and external evaluation.