* 1560045
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Water Resources and Quality in the Riviera Maya, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Melissa Lenczewski, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This REU site will engage students in research related to water resource
management issues in the Yucat치n Peninsula in Mexico. Science and engineering
undergraduate students will work with faculty mentors from Northern Illinois
University, Northeastern Illinois University, and the Yucat치n Center of
Scientific Research on projects related to groundwater recharge, groundwater
contamination and public health, and groundwater geophysics. The goals of this
REU site include: develop scientific skills in the field and laboratory, install
in students a global perspective of water resource issues, develop communication
skills in the participants, and develop appreciation for international
scientific collaborations. The student projects will be interconnected to better
understand the water issues in Yucat치n within a cultural and historical context.
Because the research project is in Mexico and encompasses a cultural aspect, it
is expected that students interested in the region will be attracted to apply.
In addition to carrying out research, the participants will produce materials
for online platforms to share information with the public, make presentations in
Mexico to local officials about the research findings, and publish the results
in open access journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During an eight-week period, the
program will provide a high quality research environment and mentoring to a
diverse group of 8 undergraduate students that may not otherwise have the
opportunity to be engaged in scientific activities in an international context.
The summer experience will consist of: (1) two weeks at Northern Illinois
University where participants will define the research they will pursue in the
field, participate in ethics training, discuss the relationship between culture
and water issues in Yucat치n, receive safety and travel information, and
virtually meet the team members from Mexico; (2) the next four weeks will be
spent in Mexico sampling and collecting field data; the participants will stay
in local neighborhoods, away from the tourist areas to gain more in-depth
appreciation for the culture. During this period, participants will be working
side by side with Mexican scientists and students; and (3) the last two weeks
participants will return to Northern Illinois University to continue with data
analyses and synthesis.