* 1560033
* REU Site: Advanced Materials for Energy and Sensing Applications at the University of Tennessee
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Michael Best, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville entitled
"Advanced Materials for Energy and Sensing Applications at the University of
Tennessee" that is led by Professors Michael D. Best and Shawn R. Campagna. The
site offers an intensive introductory research experience for undergraduate
students which is designed to introduce and train participants in modern
research techniques and also mentor them in the development of complementary
professional skills that are critical for successful scientific careers. In this
way, the program strengthens the scientific enterprise in the United States by
recruiting students and developing them into skilled researchers at an early
point in their education. Further, the program emphasizes the inclusion of a
diverse group of participants to address the underrepresentation of various
demographic groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this program,
participating students have the opportunity to choose from a wide range of
research projects that revolve around the common theme of advanced materials for
energy and sensing applications. This allows students to contribute to important
cutting-edge research projects that have a positive impact on the general public
while simultaneously advancing their scientific training. The broader impacts of
this project include the development of a well-trained and diverse set of
talented students primed for future contributions to research as well as the
publicizing of the achievements of participating students through the efforts of
a journalist who is embedded within the program.