* 1560090
* REU in Applied Physics at University of South Florida
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Sarath Witanachchi, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 380,686.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Applied Physics is a diverse and interdisciplinary
area that is critical to technological and societal advances that affect our
national competitiveness on the global level and lead to improvements in the
quality of human life. This REU site in Applied Physics will strive to nurture
the next generation of scientists and engineers who will work in areas of
critical importance such as energy, environment, medicine, micro and
nanoelectronics, information technologies, and other key enabling technologies.
The primary goal of the NSF REU site is to provide high quality motivational
research experiences in Applied Physics for students from undergraduate
institutions to enter this important area of research, and continue their
careers in Science and Engineering as graduate students. Main objectives are:
(1) To provide research experience to students from predominantly undergraduate
institutions, including minority and female students; (2) To facilitate learning
of research methods, laboratory skills, critical thinking, organizational, oral
and written communication skills; (3) Involvement in cutting-edge research where
REU students can present their results at professional meetings and publish in
peer-reviewed journals; (4) Engage students in projects with innovative concepts
with potential to affect technology, to educate them on steps required to
transform research ideas to commercial products, and to kindle the
entrepreneurial spirit in some students that may help to propagate American
ingenuity; (5) Make the research experience available to Community Colleges
students who have not been engaged fully in higher education, but have the
potential for achieving higher academic goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: Students have the choice of working with one of 16 faculty mentors
in diverse areas of research in Applied Physics that include: (1) materials for
renewable energy, (2) magnetic and ferroelectric materials for sensors, (3)
metamaterials, (4) nanocomposites, (5) bio-biomedical physics, (6) computational
physics, and (7) atomic-molecular-optical physics. In addition, research
experiences will be enriched by several special professional development
programs such as weekly REU-wide seminar programs, a weekly lecture series in
"Advances in Applied Physics", and workshops to develop oral and communication
skills. At the end of the program students will present their work in a
university-wide REU symposium, and a selected group of students will present
their research results in national conferences. Students involved in
application-oriented projects will learn the steps involved in transforming
basic research into commercial products.