* 1560283
* REU Site:From the body to the grid:  Joint ERC REU explores energy from nano-scale harvesting to smart grid technology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Iqbal Husain, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 417,863.00

Two NSF-funded Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) at North Carolina State
University, NCSU, have partnered together to propose a joint REU Site program to
provide diverse and talented cohorts of undergraduates, from institutions with
limited or no research opportunities, the unique opportunity to explore the
spectrum of energy research from nano-scale harvesting to the larger scale smart
grid technologies. The Future Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management
(FREEDM) Systems ERC is focused on fundamental research (system theory, advanced
storage, and post-silicon power devices) and enabling technology development
(secured communication, distributed grid intelligence, high-frequency and high-
voltage power conversion, and distributed energy storage devices). The mission
of the Advanced Self-Powered Systems of Integrated Sensors and Technologies
(ASSIST) ERC is to use nanotechnology to improve global health by enabling a
correlation between personal health and personal environment, and by empowering
patients and doctors to manage wellness and improve quality of life. Unlike
traditional REUs that often focus on a singular topic this ERC collaboration
will provide research experiences and discussions on broader applications of
energy innovations. Given the limited exposure of undergraduates to the field of
energy research, this REU site will address a need in REU opportunities. The
opportunity that this REU Site presents will help move the nation to a more
informed society through both the encouragement of individuals to participate in
related research and careers, and their ability to become ambassadors of this
information to their peers, families, and communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this 10-week summer REU Site program is to increase and broaden
participation of underrepresented students in STEM fields through graduate
studies, with an emphasis on energy; from nano-scale harvesting all the way to
large-scale power management and distribution. The goal is met through four
objectives: 1) RECRUIT students from minority-serving institutions, women's
institutions, and community colleges without STEM research programs, 2) ENGAGE
students in the culture of research via projects that are relevant to students'
experiences and meaningful relationships with mentors, 3) PREPARE students for
success through activities in three skills areas: Independent Research, Systems,
Thinking, and Professional Skills, and 4) SUSTAIN student engagement beyond the
program through immersions with the NCSU ERC research community.