* 1560912
* Collaborative Research: Experimental determination of trace element diffusion rates in tooth enamel
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Richard Hervig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2019
* USD 38,494.00

This project will investigate the rate of uptake of trace elements like barium,
strontium, lead and the rare-earth elements (selected elements from lanthanum to
lutetium) into tooth enamel. This project requires a key analytical technique
"Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS)" because the spatial scale of
measurement is so small. This research is important for understanding how trace
elements are taken up in the human body and their fidelity in distinguishing
individuals on timescales ranging from years to millions of years. The work will
have implications for paleontology, archeology, toxicology and forensics,
including the litigation of fossil theft. This funding will support the research
and training of a PhD student. This research will be used to leverage
educational opportunities for non-scientists in the Boise region and connect
researchers unaware of how all areas of microchemical research can benefit from
SIMS, a tool that is most commonly applied to
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central focus of this project is to
critically evaluate rates of diffusion of numerous trace elements in natural
dental enamel. The research has been formulated to answer three main questions:
How do diffusivities (D's) of trace elements in enamel depend on 1) charge vs.
ionic radius and partitioning? 2) enamel orientation and enamel type? 3)
fossilization state? To address these questions, uptake experiments will be
conducted over a range of temperatures (4°, 20° and 37 °C) for a range of ions
and ionic radii. D's will be measured in different directions for the two main
enamel types in mammals - radial and decussate. Measurements in fossil enamel
will be compared with similar measurements we make in modern enamel. The data
will be inverted using standard diffusion equations, and natural datasets will
be evaluated for their consistency (or not) with diffusion-limited uptake. The
results will broadly constrain REE, uranium and alkaline element partition
coefficients, which will improve models of diffusion rate and uptake of these
geochemically- and toxicologically important elements. All data will be
published rapidly in accessible international journals and/or archived in on-
line geochemical databases. A PhD student will participate in a SIMS workshop,
helping develop a community of SIMS users and present her work on fossils and
fossilization to elementary school children and the public through established
outreach programs.