* 1560913
* I-Corps:  Commercialization of Seat Belt Retrofit
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* John Collura, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Each year an average of twenty passengers on intercity buses are killed in
crashes according to data in a report from National Highway Traffic and Safety
Administration (NHTSA). Several hundred serious injuries also occur annually in
these crashes. Intercity buses often travel at high speeds on highways late at
night. Since these buses are top heavy, they are prone to potentially rolling
over in the event of some collision. Studies by both NHTSA and National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) show that passenger use of seat belts could
prevent more than half of these fatalities as well as the severity of many
injuries by adequate restraint of passengers in such collisions. In spite of the
obvious need, recent census data shows that nearly 80% of the total fleet of
almost 30,000 intercity buses in the US is still not equipped with seatbelts for
passengers. NHTSA ruled two years ago to require seat belts on all new intercity
buses produced on or after 2016. However, all older buses are exempt from that
ruling due to the estimated cost of $40,000 per bus to add seatbelts to the
existing buses. The conventional approach requires replacement of all bus seats
with more expensive seats that have seatbelts built into them. The team at
University of Massachusetts at Amherst has a patent pending invention that can
retrofit seatbelts onto existing intercity buses without any need to replace the
existing seats. Thus, the cost will be lessened, and retrofits with seatbelts
may now be feasible.

The goal of this project is to validate a design version of this retrofit
invention that is compatible with the needs of the customer identified during a
customer discovery process. Achievement of this goal will involve a scope and
approach of: 1) verification that the design will meet the worst case load
magnitudes specified in the federal standard that represents head on collisions,
2) verification that dynamic simulation of a rollover crash proves adequate
restraint of passengers to prevent ejection of passengers from the seating area,
which NHTSA studies show is a leading cause of the fatalities, 3) design for
cost minimization and manufacturability given the need to meet these stated
requirements, 4) development of an executable business model canvas based on
customer discovery by contact of at least 100 potential customers. These
customers are primarily the intercity bus owners and operators. To maximize the
market penetration, the customer base could extend throughout the supply chain
to bus manufacturers, bus seat suppliers, and motorcoach rebuilding facilities.
Customer discovery will also involve discussions with regulators and insurers,
and surveys of passengers. Here, the team can network from established contacts
at the American Bus Association (ABA), Sarah's Wish Foundation, NHTSA, NTSB,
American Seating, Peter Pan Bus Lines, Stage Arrow Lines, Lancer Insurance, and
vehicular kinetics specialists to identify ideal product configurations,
potential business models, customers, value propositions, cost structures, and
revenue streams. If successful, the potential contribution should include both
acceleration of the pace of retrofitting the existing total fleet with seat
belts and an increase in revenues throughout the supply chain by the
introduction of an innovative and more affordable product.