* 1560414
* REU Site: Nanoscale Materials Science and Engineering at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Clare McCabe, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 358,534.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscale Science and
Engineering (VINSE) summer REU site will offer STEM undergraduate students the
opportunity to work closely with faculty on forefront research projects in the
field of nanoscale science and engineering. VINSE faculty will provide REU
students with a true interdisciplinary research experience in an environment
where physicists, chemists, biologists, and all engineers collaboratively solve
problems and create new scientific understanding. The overarching theme of the
research projects will be nano-materials innovation and fabrication. The VINSE
faculty are personally committed to directing the REU student research and
mentoring. They will formally educate involved graduate students, postdoctoral
associates, and faculty on how to mentor the REU students, to design an
appropriate research project, and to form a mutually supportive group identity.
The project is designed to build a sense of community among the students and the
participating faculty, as well as expose the students broadly to research at the
leading edge of nanoscale science and engineering. The project will put strong
emphasis on recruiting students from underrepresented minority groups and
schools with limited STEM research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The promise of
nanoscience and nanotechnology to revolutionize our lives in multiple ways
(including unprecedentedly small and highly functional medical and computational
devices) has captured the imagination of scientists, the attention of the media,
and the support of funding agencies, with the result that the U.S. annual
federal investment in nanoscience has reached $1.5B/yr, with a cumulative
investment since 2001 of $23B. Nanoscience and nanotechnology are based on the
ability to synthesize, organize, characterize, and manipulate matter
systematically at the nanoscale, creating uniquely functional materials that can
be inorganic, organic or biological, or a hybrid of any two or more of these.
Consequently, nanoscience and nanotechnology pose formidable challenges that cut
across traditionally distinct disciplines. Clearly, to meet these demands, the
training of future scientists and engineers in the broad field of nanotechnology
is of paramount importance. The interdisciplinary nature of nanoscale science
and engineering means it inherently involves all of the sciences and
engineering, including medicine, resulting in the need to train students at all
levels in an interdisciplinary manner. To achieve this goal the Vanderbilt
Institute for Nanoscale Science and Engineering (VINSE) summer REU site will
offer STEM undergraduate students the opportunity to work closely with faculty
on forefront research projects in the field of nanoscale science and
engineering. VINSE faculty will provide REU students with a true
interdisciplinary research experience in an environment where physicists,
chemists, biologists, and all engineers collaboratively solve problems and
create new scientific understanding.