* 1560050
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Satellite and Ground-Based Remote Sensing at NOAA-CREST: Expanded Opportunities
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Janet Liou-Mark, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 05/31/2020
* USD 642,400.00

Promising undergraduate students from two- and four-year institutions within the
City University of New York (CUNY) system will have the opportunity to work with
scientists and engineers while they conduct research in the area of Satellite
and Ground-Based Remote Sensing. Remote Sensing is a critically important,
unique, and young area of science, and it is relatively unknown to many of the
undergraduate students in the CUNY system. The activities combine year-long
(Summer/Fall/Spring) research experiences with multidimensional mentoring,
academic support systems, and a robust learning community that will produce
holistic and engaging stimuli for the scientific and academic growth and
development of the student participants. This REU site will allow the students
to transfer learning from sciences and mathematics to technology, computer
systems and engineering applications where fundamental principles learned in
particular natural sciences and mathematics courses are applied to real-world
problems. The targeted student population of this REU site is primarily
underrepresented minorities in STEM, and thus these activities have the
potential to broaden participation and create a more diverse remote sensing
community. The activities will also allow the undergraduate researchers the
opportunity to hone their acquired skills and knowledge by presenting to high
school students in the New York City Public school system.

This REU site has the following primary objectives: 1) To engage a diverse
cohort of undergraduates in collaborative, state-of-the-art satellite and ground
based remote sensing research, 2) to create and sustain a community and pipeline
of scholars in STEM, 3) to enable students with the tools and confidence to
succeed in an authentic research environment, and 4) to train students in the
ethical and responsible conduct of research. Students will participate in mini
courses in GIS, remote sensing, and MATLAB. Of particular merit for this REU
site is the inclusion of 3 students from community college, who receive
additional mentoring and support through a multi-tiered mentoring structure. REU
participants will receive professional development on a host of topics including
ethics, communication, applying to graduate school and resume development.