* 1560335
* REU Site: Chemistry Function, Application, Structure and Theory (FAST): Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry and Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Stefan France, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the REU Sites Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation Professor Stefan A. France recruits undergraduates
to participate in a diverse array of projects spanning five interdisciplinary
thematic research areas under the programmatic title "Chemistry FAST", or
Chemistry Function, Application, Structure, and Theory. In keeping with the
nation's interests in creating a highly trained workforce that reflects the
growing diversity of the U.S. population, a primary focus of the Georgia Tech
FAST Program targets the enrollment of substantial numbers of undergraduate
women and students from underrepresented groups to provide them with skills and
motivation to embark on careers in the sciences. Undergraduates participate in a
diverse array of projects spanning five interdisciplinary thematic research
areas. These themes encompass the breadth of research in the chemical sciences
that contribute to the well-being (health, wealth, and security) of the nation.

Each participant works with an individual faculty member who has an active
research group in a thematic area of interest to the student. The Chemistry FAST
Program encompasses five interdisciplinary themes: (i) Biological Systems and
Medicinal Application (BSMA); (ii) Catalysis, Energy and Sustainability (CES);
(iii) Materials Design and Application (MDA); (iv) Nano- and Quantum- Scale
Technologies (NQST); and (v) Sensing, Imaging and Diagnostics (SID). Each theme
is specifically grouped to encompass faculty, science and technologies that
represent function, application, structure and theory (FAST). Other components
of the program include team-building activities, regular group meetings, a
seminar/workshop series (ethics, presentation skills, graduate opportunities,
and research frontiers), research symposia, and field trips to industrial and/or
government laboratories. These activities serve to acquaint participants with a
broad array of projects, provide them with the opportunity to enhance their
presentation skills, and provide a perspective of chemical research in a
scholarly, entrepreneurial, economic, and ethical framework. The program
includes extensive joint activities with other summer research programs on
campus.