* 1560020
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Research Experiences in Mobile Cloud Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Feng Li, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2022
* USD 395,000.00

This CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds the
renewal of an outstanding REU site at Indiana University - Purdue University
Indianapolis. The site will recruit undergraduates from across the nation to
participate in research topics related to mobile cloud security, which focuses
on issues related to the use of mobile devices such as smart phones and the
secure use of mobile clouds to access, manage, store, and secure digital assets.
Mobile cloud security is an area of current interest that is well-suited to
undergraduate research productivity. The students will use controlled and
competitive test environments to experiment with cyber attack and defense
techniques needed to secure the mobile devices that are pervasive in our
society. This site should help develop a group of computing professionals who
can develop the systems of the future that impact society and enhance our
quality of life. The REU experience provides students with the foundations and
inspiration to pursue computing careers and research in areas that are rapidly
evolving and impacting all of our citizens. This site is co-funded by the Secure
and Trustworthy Cyberspace program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The is project is led
by an outstanding team offering state-of-the art facilities and professional
mentors to guide undergraduates in explorations of problems related to mobile
cloud security. Students will learn how to use current tools and techniques to
solve those problems that have direct impact on people. The team will use proven
strategies to recruit undergraduate students from groups traditionally under-
represented in computer science including African American, Hispanic and female
students. The students will participate in research and professional development
activities all designed to achieve the goals of retaining and graduating
undergraduate students in computer science and engineering, recruiting students
from groups traditionally under-represented in computing fields, and increasing
recruitment of students into graduate programs.