* 1560372
* REU Site: Understanding Arctic as a System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Vladimir Alexeev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 620,511.00

This project will contribute toward building research capacity of future arctic
science through teaching and training of undergraduate students in collaboration
with an interdisciplinary team actively involved in Arctic system research.
Students will bring the acquired experience back to their communities and spread
the message about the exciting science that is done in the Arctic. Focusing on
under-represented minorities will help broaden the base of the future arctic
science workforce. Interdisciplinary educational materials that&amp;#8232;result
from the summer experiences will be made available to a broad scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic climate is changing and an
integrated cross-disciplinary approach&amp;#8232;is needed to understand and
explain changes in the Arctic and their implications. Researchers at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks will establish a new REU site to attract
undergraduates, including students from minority groups, to arctic sciences. The
overarching goal of the project is to disseminate new knowledge and discoveries
at the&amp;#8232;frontiers of polar science and ignite the enthusiasm of the
undergraduates about the Arctic,&amp;#8232;thus contributing to the development
of a diverse and environmentally educated U.S. science&amp;#8232;and engineering
workforce. The science focus of this program will be on understanding Arctic as
a system with emphasis on its physical components. The goals will be achieved by
organizing summer research experience for undergraduates during which students
will be involved in research and educational projects with their mentors and
take advantage of collaboration with the proposing team. Pre- and post- summer
experience surveys will provide metrics of success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this effort lies in focusing on the interdisciplinarity
and the systems approach&amp;#8232;to understanding the Arctic environment. The
proposed program of summer experience will provide the participating students
with the current state of knowledge about the Arctic. The
students&amp;#8232;will benefit from close interaction with their mentors who
are actively involved in ongoing&amp;#8232;research and fieldwork in their
disciplines. While each student (or group of students) will&amp;#8232;be
involved in a separate project, they will be also provided with a broad context
of Arctic&amp;#8232;system science. In addition to regular classroom teaching
students will be involved in field&amp;#8232;trips and hands-on activities
linked to research projects of their mentors. Each of the
summer&amp;#8232;visits to Fairbanks will culminate in a workshop and a
discussion between students and instructors, in which the students will present
their results and will have an opportunity to synthesize&amp;#8232;about current
problems of Arctic climate.