* 1560023
* REU Site: Physics/JILA
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2020
* USD 358,838.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Colorado/JILA. The intellectual focus of this
REU program is physics, and undergraduate students are paired up with preeminent
faculty to do cutting-edge research in many fields of physics, including atomic,
molecular, and optical physics, biophysics, condensed matter physics, high
energy physics, nuclear physics, plasma physics, and physics education research.
Examples of potential REU projects include: Development of an ultrafast optical
pulse train for resonant pumping of phonons in correlated matter; Studies of
dust particles immersed in plasmas and UV radiation; Setting up saturated
absorption spectroscopy and diode laser frequency stabilization; Synthesis of
materials and the basic electrical and thermodynamic characterizations; Studies
of collisions and reactions of simple cold molecules, Development of new laser-
based methods to actuate or measure AFM cantilevers with light for studies of
biomolecular problems; Techniques for fabricating, actuating, and sensing micro
and nanomechanical oscillators; Theoretical studies of internal rotational
degrees of freedom of polar molecules interacting via dipolar interactions;
Designing, building, and testing novel optical cavity geometries for
continuously loading, measuring, and manipulating laser-cooled atoms.

While the main emphasis of the summer is centered on each student's individual
research lab, where the students are expected to master at least a part of a
large task, a variety of other activities take place during the program. These
include ethics, electronics, and machining classes, a program on "Getting Into
Grad School," as well as lab tours and a weekly science seminar series aimed at
the students. The program culminates with a day of presentations given by each
of the REU students. Special efforts are made to include significant
participation levels from women and minorities, as well as from students coming
from smaller institutions that do not have as many research opportunities. This
program fits in with the NSF goal of developing a diverse and internationally
competitive scientific and engineering workforce. Active research experience is
one of the most effective ways to attract talented undergraduates and retain
them in careers in science and engineering. This award is supported by the
Division of Physics and the Division of Materials Research within the National
Science Foundation.