* 1560828
* Mixed Integer Optimization: New Cut Generation Paradigms
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Egon Balas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2019
* USD 499,994.00

After having served for decades as an amazingly versatile modeling tool, but one
that could only solve practical problems of rather small sizes, mixed-integer
optimization has undergone a true revolution in the last twenty years, greatly
enhancing our ability to tackle practical problems in engineering,
transportation, telecommunications, manufacturing, energy generation, finance,
marketing and many other areas of economic activity. A key factor in this
revolution was the incorporation of general-purpose cutting planes into the
solvers, triggered by the lift-and-project cuts designed by the principal
investigators in the early nineties under a previous NSF project, and the
subsequent revival of Gomory's mixed integer cuts, also advocated by the
principal investigators with previous NSF support. The objective of this
research is to investigate new cutting plane paradigms meant to bring about
another phase in the transformation of mixed-integer optimization solvers. The
tools developed in this project are expected to have a broad impact and they
should contribute to strengthening US technological leadership. This project
will also contribute to the education and training of the PhD students involved
in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the cutting planes currently used
in mixed-integer optimization solvers are valid for the classical corner
relaxation, which can sometimes be rather weak. The principal investigators plan
to develop new paradigms that will enable the construction of much richer
families of cuts: generalized intersection cuts are produced in a non-recursive
fashion from a family of points generated in advance; a general theory of cut-
generating functions allows the generation of cuts through closed-form formulas.
These and other theoretical results, aimed at producing stronger cuts, will be
combined with computational investigations of their efficiency within the
overall process of solving mixed-integer optimization problems. The tools used
in this research will come from linear algebra such as projection and lifting,
from convex analysis such as support functions and polarity, from geometry such
as convex hull generation, from lattice theory such as maximal lattice-free
convex sets and basis reduction, along with algorithmic techniques for efficient
implementation. This project can be expected to advance the knowledge base in
combinatorial and mixed-integer optimization, and to expand the algorithmic tool
kit for mixed-integer optimization solvers. As in the past, software developed
by the principal investigators and their PhD students will be open source and
available on the web.