* 1560235
* Interdisciplinary Micro/nano-manufacturing Program Addressing Challenges Today (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Jacqueline McNeil, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 374,398.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Louisville, offers research experiences in the field of advanced micro/nano-
manufacturing to a diverse cohort of undergraduate students, over a three year
period. Students will participate in an intense training/research program
centered around exciting hands-on research projects which demonstrate how this
interdisciplinary miniaturization technology can be used to create a wide
variety of novel devices and systems capable of impacting the grand challenges
of today in energy, healthcare, advanced manufacturing, security and the
environment. The emphasis on mico/nano-manuafacturing is of economic importance
to the nation and developing the required workforce is vital to our nation
retaining its leadership role in this technology. Undergraduate programs such as
this are vitally needed to introduce students to the fascinating field of
micro/nano-manufacturing at an early stage in their academic careers so they can
leverage it in their graduate studies and throughout their professional careers.

The objectives of this 10 week summer research experience are to: 1) Provide
each student with a personalized research experience, with faculty and graduate
student mentors, related to micro/nano-manufacturing, 2) Have all students
obtain a core competence in the field of micro/nano-manufacturing through a
common classroom experience where they design, fabricate and test solar cells,
3) Develop each student's independence and confidence through participation in
research, in-house presentations, weekly scientific meetings and poster
presentations, 4) Provide complementary programs to enhance each student's
learning and skillset (i.e. seminars on writing, engineering design, critical
thinking, ethics) 5)Stimulate the students' interests in graduate careers in
related science and engineering disciplines, 6) Reach out to undergraduates
(especially underrepresented groups) in Kentucky to help improve the state's
national ranking in education, and 7) Make the 10-week REU experience rewarding
and potentially transformative for the students. This REU Site program will help
create greater awareness of micro/nano-manufacturing and the positive impact it
can have on society today and in the near future.