* 1560219
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Robotics for Assistive Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Cheng Liu, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 230,400.00

REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Robotics for Assistive
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site award funds a new REU site focused on Robotics in Assistive
Technology at the University of Wisconsin-Stout. Robotics has potential appeal
across a wide range of disciplines, especially as robots become increasingly
integrated into society, performing useful tasks in the home and elsewhere. The
REU site will provide 8-week interdisciplinary research experiences in robotics
targeting first generation, underrepresented students, and students from
institutions with limited research opportunities. Students and faculty will
participate in professional development, interdisciplinary data sharing, and
research activities designed to empower and prepare students for advanced
degrees and careers in engineering. This project will make a meaningful impact
in how we apply robots in enhancing our quality of life. It is imperative that
we provide a larger pool of individuals trained in the field of robotics to
address the increasing number of national needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
new REU proposal in the area of assistive robotics. The proposed research
projects for participants focus on several areas such as dynamic model design,
control, human-machine communication, teleoperation, and wireless control. The
proposed comprehensive three stage program touches all components of an REU site
from introductory workshops for the basic concepts to the preparation of their
final research report that could lead to a publication. The PI is an expert in
the area of assistive technologies and the other faculty members are experts in
the areas of rehabilitation, robotics, and bio-sensing. This REU site provides
modern facilities and professional mentors to guide undergraduates in
explorations of real-world problems related to robotics in assistive technology.
Students will learn how to use current tools and techniques to solve those
problems through exciting research projects across a wide range of research
topics. The goal of the site is to increase participation of first generation,
underrepresented minorities, women and persons with disabilities, and provide
opportunities for students from schools with limited research opportunities. The
students will participate in research and professional development activities
all designed to achieve the goals of retaining and graduating undergraduate
students in engineering and increasing recruitment of students into graduate
programs.