* 1560772
* CSBR: Living Stocks, Operation of a Culture Collection of Algae
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* David Nobles, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 415,287.00

CSBR: Living Stocks: Operation of a Culture Collection of Algae at the
University of Texas - Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to the
Culture Collection of Algae at the University of Texas at Austin (UTEX), one of
only a handful of very large and diverse public collections of living algae.
Many kinds of UTEX algae are unique and irreplaceable. Every year UTEX
distributes thousands of living algal cultures, at modest charge, to scientists,
educators, and students throughout the U.S. and the world. The investigator
plans to continue a tradition of service to the research and education
communities by providing them cultures of living algae, among other services.
The work proposed includes research on cryopreservation technology, biochemical
characterization, genomic sequencing and taxonomic identification services. The
great interest in microscopic algae as sources of transportation fuel, human
food, animal feed, pharmaceuticals, and many other uses makes UTEX algae and
services essential resources for hundreds of research projects. UTEX provides
hands-on workshops on managing algal cultures, an informative interactive web
site, species identification services, chemical composition analysis, and
extensive correspondence with students engaged in algal research. UTEX personnel
give presentations at public schools, conduct tours of UTEX facilities, assist
teachers and students in conducting high school science projects, and provide
presentations on the scientific importance of algae to hundreds of children
every year at local open house events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTEX currently
maintains more than 3,000 accessioned strains of living algae representing all
major taxa, including over 450 type specimens. The primary goal of UTEX is to
provide cultures of living algae to users at modest cost. The user community is
defined broadly to include anyone who requires living algae for research,
educational activities, or technology development. Expanded goals of UTEX
include serving as a permanent public repository of newly discovered and
recently described algal species of potential value representing a broad range
of genetic, morphological and biochemical diversity; serving as a source of
information regarding algae to practicing scientists, other professionals, and
the interested public; promoting and supporting local science teaching and
hands-on scientific activities by school children; and providing practical
training services, support services, and supplies that facilitate culturing of
algae at other sites. In order to fulfill these goals, UTEX offers a wide range
of goods and services to the user community. UTEX provides living algae starter
cultures, bulk cultures, growth media, photobioreactors, photometers, genomic
DNA and digital images. Services include identification of algae by
morphological and DNA-sequence methods, physiological and biochemical
characterization of algae, and cryogenetic storage of proprietary strains.
Recurring workshops serve more than 30 professionals and students per year. UTEX
maintains active research on cryopreservation technology, biochemical
characterization, genomic sequencing, and taxonomic identification of
accessioned strains. Algae-based research within the local institution is
actively supported through the provision of cultures and by consultation with
UTEX staff. Every year hundreds of published research articles reference the use
of UTEX strains. In addition, many UTEX strains are used in research leading to
the development of microalgae-based technologies for the production of biofuels
and many other products. A comprehensive web site (www.utex.org) facilitates a
secure means for ordering goods and services, provides links to resources
elsewhere pertaining to algae, and includes diverse algae-related information.