* 1560385
* REU SIte: Engineering Modeling and Computational Research
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Bala Ram, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 359,979.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project will offer a ten-week summer program
focused on computational models in engineering for ten undergraduate students in
each year of the project. Computer-based models or computational models are used
to understand and analyze natural and engineered systems, and are indispensable
in modern science and engineering. Computational models are now widely-accepted,
along with theory and experiment, as a crucial third mode of scientific research
and engineering design. The undergraduate research experience outlined in this
project provides the participants a skill set in contemporary engineering
research that is sought after. A significant part of the skills acquired will be
applicable to interdisciplinary research in academic, corporate, and federal
laboratories. This skills-transferability, along with the opportunity for the
participants to observe disparate research among their cohort will be a unique
aspect of this REU. A large proportion of the students will be drawn from
universities without graduate programs in engineering. Due to the broad
applicability of computational modeling, the research experience gained,
computing skills developed, and professional development provided during this
research experience will prepare the students for a variety of paths to graduate
education. This project will serve the mission of the National Science
Foundation by training a diverse scientific workforce in the vital area of
computational modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The College
of Engineering at North Carolina A&amp;T State University houses a Department of
Computation Science and Engineering that offers only graduate programs and has
affiliate faculty from several departments in the campus including engineering,
math, and sciences. The department has extensive computational facilities that
will be available to this REU program. This summer REU program will begin with a
comprehensive exposure in engineering modeling methods, MATLAB computing
software, and computational environments including visualization tools.
Following the introductory short course, students will work on a chosen project
with one of seven mentors. The research experience will involve modeling and
computational tools and techniques applied to architectural, bio-, civil,
industrial, and mechanical engineering problem domains. Examples of research
topics are: shock motion in supersonic vehicles, hydrologic simulation,
biomechanics, humanitarian logistics, analysis of soft gels, energy efficiency
of buildings, and non-destructive testing. The program will offer career
development workshops, visits to corporate and federal computational
laboratories, and humanitarian outreach events that will provide key enriching
experiences to the participants. The key broader impact of the project will be
the mentored training of students in regional institutions without graduate
programs in computational modeling.