* 1560805
* Enhancement of Research Capabilities for Students and Faculty through Development of a Master of Science Degree Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Koreen Ressler, Sitting Bull College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,992,450.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge
in the field of environmental science in regions that directly impact quality of
life in Indian country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sitting Bull College (SBC) has
begun the process of developing a Master of Science Degree (MS)in the
Environmental Science (ENS) Program. Goal 1 of this project is to increase
recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students by enhancing the
quality of ENS student experiences in research at all academic levels through
the development of a Master of Science Degree. This will be done by improving
the research experience for all ENS students from the development of an MS
degree. Goal 2 is to train a diversified work force in STEM fields for the
Standing Rock community that has leadership skills and is trained in the use of
state-of-the-art technology in diverse areas, such as water quality, pollution
science, ecology, and climate change. A cohort model will be used for academic
and research activities. Different cohorts will address different research
topics. The result will be an educated work force trained in the latest
technology in diverse areas of ENS. Goal 3 is to expand interest in STEM fields
to a wider spectrum of students through innovative recruitment and retention
programs, international research programs and culturally appropriate curricula.
This will be accomplished by Middle School Science Academy programs, a research
program in Costa Rica, and development of culturally relevant course and other
materials.