* 1560708
* Second Look: Increasing STEM Workforce by Improving STEM Perception
* EHR,DUE
* 08/24/2015,08/31/2017
* Brian Sparks, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2017
* USD 199,964.00

The Public Perception Index, published annually since 2009, states that the U.S.
public greatly supports the manufacturing industry and would choose to have a
manufacturing plant open in their region over other types of employers and yet
is unwilling to encourage their children to pursue careers in manufacturing.
Because many jobs in the 10 county service area of the college are going
unfilled due to lack of knowledge of the high-skill, high-demand careers
available and the preconceived negative views of advanced manufacturing (AM)
employment and careers, Southcentral Kentucky Community and Technical College
(SKYCTC). and regional AM employers are collaborating to increase the number of
students, including women and underrepresented populations, who are
knowledgeable of and pursue education and careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), particularly AM. Additional partners
include Barren River Area Development District (BRADD) officials, Workforce
Investment Board members, and Chambers of Commerce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has the potential to substantively change the public perception of the
career opportunities available in STEM and the manufacturing sector throughout
south central Kentucky, and ultimately, by replication, to other regions facing
STEM deficits in the workforce pipeline. By targeting high school students and
their career influencers (parents, teachers, and counselors) and exposing them
to the true nature of advanced manufacturing, the college and its partners in
industry and education are producing and sustaining a new pipeline of students
who pursue STEM/AM disciplines by encouraging them to engage in rewarding
careers in advanced manufacturing in south central Kentucky, and thus addressing
the workforce needs in this high-wage, high-demand career sector. An extensive
evaluation is being conducted to determine the effect of the project on
increased participation in STEM/AM secondary pathways and postsecondary programs
at the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to offer a series
of summer STEM camps, in-class workshops in STEM/AM during the school year, and
complementary materials and activities suitable for dissemination and
replication. All endeavors are designed to change the negative perceptions of
career influencers such as parents, teachers and counselors and to increase the
number of students pursuing STEM and AM careers. This project is based on the
findings of the Mass-TEC (Massachusetts Technician Education Collaborative)
project and is adapting activities of that project. Mass-TEC was a collaboration
of Quinsigamond Community College and industry partners that was created to
educate teachers, guidance counselors, career advisors, and families on career
pathways leading to advanced manufacturing opportunities in Central
Massachusetts. Integrating the proven resources of the Mass-TEC project, as well
as creating regionally-based information that targets students and their primary
career-influencers, this project is increasing the local STEM workforce pipeline
and strengthening the economic vitality of south central Kentucky. The 10-county
service area of the college is largely rural and the primary career
opportunities have traditionally been in agriculture and manufacturing. Because
manufacturing was historically a line job, the public continues to perceive
manufacturing as consisting of mindless, repetitive work in environments that
are dark, dirty, and dangerous. This public misperception is perpetuated by
career influencers who discourage students from STEM and advanced manufacturing
career options.