* 1560165
* REU Site: Broadening participation in undergraduate research in physics: A multi-institutional REU program
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 327,261.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The REU site in the School of Physics at
Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) enrolls undergraduate students in
an immersive summer research experience that provides participants with insights
into physics research and encouragement to embark on graduate study. In keeping
with the nation's interests in creating a highly-trained, diverse workforce in
the STEM disciplines, a partnership between Georgia Tech and the institutions in
the Atlanta University Center (AUC) provides an opportunity to recruit and train
a diverse group of participants from across the nation. Other components of the
site include team-building activities, regular group meetings, a research
seminar series, a workshop series (e.g., ethics, presentation skills, graduate
opportunities), undergraduate research symposia, and field trips to industrial
and/or government laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates will participate in an array of projects in
physics, ranging from atomic, molecular and optical physics to condensed matter
physics; from biophysics to astrophysics; and from condensed matter to
computational physics. The program seeks to enhance interactions between Georgia
Tech and the AUC and thereby enhance the capacity for research at predominantly
undergraduate minority-serving institutions. Undergraduate summer projects are
designed to give the participants maximum flexibility in their experimental
approach and to foster development of a beginning researcher into an independent
investigator.