* 1560787
* Conference: 2016 Bioinspired Materials Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Timothy Deming, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Biological systems have evolved means to create
polymeric and mineralized materials that are exquisitely designed for high
functionality in specific applications. In many cases, the materials of nature
display structure-function relationships that exceed our current ability to
reproduce in synthetic materials. Nevertheless, our understanding of these
designs and the means by which they are produced is now sufficient to encourage
efforts to harness or mimic these designs and the methods used in nature to
achieve them. This conference will bring together young scientists and experts
in the field of bioinspired materials to share recent advances and new
methodologies. It is anticipated that international interactions, including
student exchanges and research collaborations, will emerge from the conference
that will advance both research and education in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing young scientist
(graduate student, postdoc, junior faculty) participation in the worldwide
activities of bioinspired materials research, which leads to broadening of their
professional experiences, stimulating interactions and collaborations with the
international bioinspired materials community, and fostering the development of
a new generation of young scientists, is a primary goal of this conference. This
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will have
broad impacts through the promotion and cross-disciplinary fertilization of new
ideas in the emerging field of Bioinspired Materials and will stimulate
international exchanges and interactions between young scientists,
underrepresented minority scientists, junior faculty, and prominent senior
investigators. It will do so by bringing together a diverse group of researchers
at one venue who have common interests that span the field of Bioinspired
Materials. By doing so, the PIs hope to stimulate the growth of this area of
research, and professional development of researchers in this field, by
providing a single venue for the dissemination and exchange of results and
ideas. The ultimate, long-term goal for the Bioinspired Materials GRC is to be
the first choice for researchers in this field. If PIs succeed in building a
cohesive community of scholars through this GRC, as other GRCs have done for
many other interdisciplinary fields, PIs believe that this GRC will have had a
broad impact on the field of Bioinspired Materials. The broader impacts of the
GRC are enhanced in 2016 by incorporating an accompanying GRS on Bioinspired
Materials. The GRS will provide a unique venue where young researchers can
interact in a forum of their own design and develop professional networks,
discuss scientific advances, as well as receive career advice from a panel of
senior investigators. The organizers will endeavor to involve as many younger
scientists and scientist from groups underrepresented in the STEM workforce as
possible.