* 1560727
* Conferences: Advancing Movement and Mobility Science by Bridging Research on Human Mobility and Animal Movement Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Harvey Miller, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 04/30/2018
* USD 69,999.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support efforts to bring together scholars from around the world for two
mobility and movement-related conferences at the University of Texas-Austin and
Ohio State University. NSF support will facilitate the participation of up to 50
scholars and graduate students from the U.S. and other countries. The two
conferences are aimed at stimulating research that draws from research
communities that focus on human mobility and animal movement ecology. These two
communities previously have not interacted extensively, so the conferences are
expected to facilitate interactions across the research domains to enhance
understanding of frameworks, approaches, and methods that are useful in studying
varied complex, dynamic, spatiotemporal systems. The conferences will provide
opportunities to share latest research and advance knowledge about understanding
spatial behaviors and integrating research opportunities between the two
domains. The conferences will stimulate research that ranges across a broad
range of topics, including disease spread; social networks; information
diffusion and its impacts on privacy and identity; knowledge transfer, and
urban, social, and ecosystem dynamics. They also will facilitate scientific
collaboration among young, underrepresented researchers who may not ordinarily
have such networking opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These conferences will
bring together a unique blend of scholars from the human mobility community,
such as transportation, urban science, sociology, and public health and those
researchers associated with movement ecology, a nascent but growing research
area in the ecological sciences. The conferences will take place at a time when
scientific communities are just beginning to focus on movement and interactions
motivated by advances in location-aware technologies and high spatial resolution
global datasets. The first conference will focus on measuring and analyzing
interactions among mobile entities. The second conference will focus on
analyzing mobility data in the geographic context. The events will include a
balanced mix of keynote addresses from top scholars in the fields,
interdisciplinary research presentations to facilitate interactions amongst the
diverse set of scientists, and breakout group activities to delve deeper into
specific topical areas.