* 1560623
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Judicial Politics of Land Disputes
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Marcus Kurtz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2018
* USD 23,100.00

General Summary

The PI seeks to understand why citizens choose to utilize formal legal
institutions as a mechanism for dispute resolution in authoritarian regimes
through analysis of the emergence, litigation and resolution of land disputes.
The PI argues that the decision to utilize formal legal mechanisms for dispute
resolution is surprising given the authoritarian context in which personal ties
heavily influence how the law works in practice. The co-PI uses survey data and
court statistics to address three key questions: 1) what disputes exist; 2)
which ones make it to the courts (and why); and 3) how these disputes are
settled. The research addresses these questions by collecting, combining, and
analyzing two types of data: original surveys of landholders and attorneys, and
case statistics. Tracing these land disputes from their general incidence in the
population through court rulings helps to illuminate how citizens in non-
democracies mobilize law and courts in their interests. Given the large amount
of aid earmarked for improving rule of law and citizens' access to justice in
developing countries, developing a better understanding of this issue has broad
policy implications.

Technical Summary

This project addresses an ongoing puzzle in comparative judicial politics: in
authoritarian regimes with corrupt, dependent judiciaries, why do we see
widespread use of civil courts, particularly for disputes involving state
officials? In non-democracies, law is often applied selectively or subjectively.
Where cases are non-political, there is some expectation that courts will
fulfill their intended functions. However, if cases are political, informal
influence is assumed to prevail. The PI examines this puzzle through analysis of
the emergence, litigation and resolution of land disputes in Kazakhstan. The PI
argues that the decision to utilize formal legal mechanisms for dispute
resolution is surprising given the authoritarian context in which personal ties
heavily influence how the law works in practice. The co-PI uses survey data and
court statistics to address three key questions: 1) what disputes exist; 2)
which ones make it to the courts (and why); and 3) how these disputes are
settled. The research addresses these questions by collecting, combining, and
analyzing two types of data: original surveys of landholders and attorneys, and
case statistics. Tracing these land disputes from their general incidence in the
population through court rulings helps to illuminate how citizens in non-
democracies mobilize law and courts in their interests. Given the large amount
of aid earmarked for improving rule of law and citizens' access to justice in
developing countries, developing a better understanding of this issue has broad
policy implications.