* 1560222
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Statistics at Lafayette College
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Elizabeth McMahon, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2021
* USD 274,980.00

The Lafayette College REU Site will run for eight weeks in the summer and one
week in the academic year for three years. Each summer, three faculty mentors,
including one mentor a year from outside Lafayette, will work daily with ten
students from across the US on groundbreaking research projects in mathematics,
applied mathematics, and statistics. Students will develop strong research
skills as well as become effective communicators, both orally and in writing.
Summer activities will include renowned guest speakers and other programming on
a wide variety of topics to enhance students' professional development and
curiosity. The guidance provided by the faculty mentors will continue throughout
the following academic year, culminating in presentations at the Joint
Mathematics Meetings and the preparation of articles to submit to high-quality
journals. This program will put students in very strong positions to be
successful in the mathematical sciences after graduation. Further, the faculty
themselves will be mentored by previous REU advisors, with a particular focus on
the faculty who have limited experience in leading undergraduate research; this
mentoring will run year-round. Thus, both students and faculty will grow through
the REU, and they will return to their home institutions energized by the
experience and ready to continue conducting research.

A diverse selection of research projects will be offered, appropriate for a
combination of rising sophomores, juniors, and seniors each year and targeting a
wide range of prior mathematical and statistical training. Students early in
their mathematical education can engage in research on roughly half of the
projects, including those focusing on permutation patterns and statistics,
geometric network optimization, and block coloring problems. Other projects
include research on symmetries in affine geometry, infinite groups and cube
complexes, and the Kelly Criterion for investments. With close mentoring, the
advisors will lead their students to greater independence and a strong sense of
collegiality; this will provide an excellent foundation in the research process.
The students will actively contribute to new knowledge in mathematics, applied
mathematics, and statistics.