* 1560843
* SKAUST-NSF Research Conference on Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems for a Sustainable Future  March 2016 Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Santosh Kurinec, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2017
* USD 12,000.00

KAUST-NSF Research Conference on Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems
for&lt;br/&gt;a Sustainable
Future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronics has played
a big role in shaping our lives around the globe in the areas of communications,
healthcare, safety, energy and transportation. At present times, one of the
biggest priorities should be in refocusing our scientific research on a
sustainable future, finding technological fixes to environment degradation,
reduction of poverty, access to clean water, healthcare and energy for all.
Electronic materials and devices are finding increasing applications in systems
that pertain to a sustainable and interconnected world making a difference in
the world and improving people's everyday lives. It is important for scientists
and engineers all across the globe to share their research, discovery and
dissemination of practices and strategies in these areas and promote involvement
of young bright minds. This proposal intends to achieve these goals by
organizing a conference at the King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia on March 14-16, 2016. The invited
speakers will constitute an international body of luminaries in these fields.
The outcomes envisioned are: a) Establishing a culture of sustainability-focused
high-tech research; b) Attracting bright young minds from all over the world for
exchange of ideas; c) Promoting science-engineering education and research
through collaboration; d) Encouraging participation and contribution of women in
science and engineering; e) Promoting science, technology, engineering and math
among the K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to
support the participation of six excellent junior faculty members, researchers,
postdocs and graduating students to the KAUST-NSF Research Conference on
Electronic Materials, Devices and Systems for A Sustainable Future to be held in
March 2016 at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. The proposed symposium will gather world leading
researchers, mid-career and rising stars, and the KAUST research community to
exchange ideas and to foster a collaborative platform to pursue fundamental and
applied research in the area of electronic devices, materials and systems
focusing on sustainable future. The objective and goal of this conference is to
highlight and to bridge the gap between the complementary growth of electronics
and information technology and to explore what more can be done to use such
pervasive technologies for a sustainable future. Disciplines like (i) Chemical
and Biological Science and Engineering; (ii) Environmental Science and
Engineering; (iii) Marine Science; (iv) Electrical and Computer Engineering; and
(v) Material Science and Engineering will be covered. Sensors, smart devices,
energy harvesting, storage, and cyber-physical systems will be some of the
important topics that are planned to be discussed in the conference.