* 1560169
* REU Site: Utilizing Plants for Innovative Research (UPIR) - Cultivating the next generation of scientists and engineers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Lihua Wang, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 279,525.00

This REU Site award to Kettering University, located in Flint, MI, will support
the training of ten (10) students for eight (8) weeks during the summers of
2017-2019. The REU Site focuses on the use of plants and plant products in
innovative scientific and engineering research, and faculty from the biological,
chemical, and physical sciences as well as math and engineering will be involved
in mentoring and conducting directed research with participants. In addition to
undertaking research during the eight-week program, students will participate in
seminars and journal clubs, including training in ethics and responsible conduct
of research and field trips to other research institutions. Participants for the
REU site will be widely solicited, to include students enrolled in schools on
the quarter-system and those who are from groups traditionally underrepresented
in science and engineering. A committee of faculty members from Kettering
University will select REU participants based on academic performance, interest
in research, and phone interviews.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities will be trained in the program. The
interdisciplinary approaches employed in the REU research projects to tackle
real-world issues will help to foster the students' ability to collaborate with
people from across STEM fields, allowing participants to better engage with and
solve 21st century problems. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting http://TBD,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Lihua Wang at lwang@kettering.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. James Cohen at jcohen@kettering.edu).