* 1560479
* REU Site: UC Davis ChemEnergy Research Experience for Undergraduates in Energy and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Annaliese Franz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

In this project funded by the REU Sites Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation, Professors Annaliese Franz and Kirill Kovnir are
developing the University of California Davis ChemEnergy REU site to provide
diverse undergraduate students with a unique ten-week research experience with a
strong focus on chemistry at the interface of energy, materials and
biotechnology. The REU site has a defined research focus on sustainability with
projects ranging from biofuels to renewable energy that allows students to
appreciate how chemistry can provide solutions for major challenges facing
society. The broader impacts are to provide research opportunities to diverse
students who would not normally participate or would not have the opportunity to
participate at their current institution, including accommodations for blind
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU project focuses on providing a cohort
experience that is designed to cross barriers between chemistry disciplines with
a focus on the fundamentals and applications of energy, catalysis and enzymes.
The program provides seminars and workshops in energy and catalysis, training
with state-of-the art instrumentation, and interactive workshops for science
communication training, all of which set the stage for students to discuss and
understand the research. This REU program also has experience, resources, and
multi-level mentoring to accommodate blind or vision-impaired students in
research. In the ChemEnergy REU, students will gain: 1) skills in critical
thinking and science communication, 2) the ability to work as part of a research
team, and 3) an understanding of broader issues and how chemistry is connected.
The experience is designed to give students a strong start on their path towards
future careers in chemistry and energy sciences.