* 1560058
* REU: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Nanoscience and Microsystems Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Deborah Evans, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 355,563.00

This three year renewal of a successful Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site at the University of New Mexico, entitled REU in Nanoscience and
Microsystems Engineering, focuses on the application of nanomaterials to
biosystems and bioimaging as well as to energy conversion and storage,
representing areas of current national interest. The synthesis and processing of
materials in the 21st century requires a new paradigm where the physical
sciences, engineering and computational modeling come together. Solving some of
the most pressing challenges in the areas of health, energy and the environment
provides challenging research projects for this REU Site. The unique aspect of
this program is the interdisciplinary environment, which is an essential
component of materials research. The interdisciplinary team-based approach
reflects the environment these students will encounter as they transition to
their careers in industry, academe or in national labs. The Nanoscience and
Microsystems interdisciplinary program is based on the premise that to benefit
society the unique properties of nanoscale materials must be integrated into
micro- and macro-scale devices and then further into systems. Projects include
drug delivery, biocides, protein aggregation and sensing, nanoparticle dynamics,
catalysts, nano fluidics and energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
will be recruited from diverse ethnic, educational as well as cultural
backgrounds. This includes students from community colleges and primarily
undergraduate institutions across the country. Students work for 10 summer weeks
with a research advisor and a mentor (graduate student/post-doc). The aim is to
instill a spirit of inquiry by integrating research and education, and to
enhance student interest in pursuing careers in the sciences and engineering.
Students are guided through all aspects of research, preparing a proposal,
making a plan of research, executing this plan and analyzing and presenting the
significance of their work. In this manner, students transition from a
relatively dependent status to one where they start to ask questions and suggest
new experiments. Students also participate in a series of seminars that will
include faculty, national lab and industry speakers. Field trips to the National
Laboratories and to local industries enhance their exposure to career
opportunities and exciting research problems. The summer research program
provides students the excitement of participating in open-ended research, at the
same time connecting this research with their academic curriculum.