* 1560862
* RCN: Transformative Research in Geography Education
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Michael Solem, Association of American Geographers
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This project will build a research coordination network (RCN) that enables
transformative research in geography education, defined as pioneering research
activities with strong potential to inform broad-scale improvements in U.S.
geography education. The National Center for Research in Geography Education
will coordinate this research network. The project will strengthen geography
education research processes by creating the networks, opportunities for
interdisciplinary conversations, and publicly-available datasets and scientific
resources that ultimately result in sustainable lines of research. Through a
collaborative process involving dozens of universities and major geography
organizations, the project will create a self-sustaining RCN whose members
pursue multiple active lines of research that engender evidence-based practices,
new knowledge and theory, more robust curricula, better standards and
assessments, and expanded access to high-quality teacher training programs in
geography. In practical terms, the RCN will work to raise the profile of
geography education as a research field. Doing so will help the participating
universities recruit more diverse cohorts of graduate students, increase faculty
research productivity, and promote the use of research to improve the quality of
geography teaching and learning in local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
need for transformative research in geography education was given in-depth
consideration by The Road Map for 21st Century Geography Education project
funded by NSF from 2011-2013. The Road Map Project, which built on many prior
efforts to assess the state of research in geography education, issued a
landmark study and research agenda in 2013. The Road Map report considers many
substantive issues as to what research topics and questions are most critical
for ensuring long-term progress and improvements in student achievement. It also
draws attention to the important methodological issue of how geography education
research that aspires to be transformative should be designed. The Road Map
Project's research agenda offers a set of recommendations for building research
capacity and capability in geography education. It emphasizes scientific
approaches to research planning and design as a strategy for moving beyond the
descriptive, singular and anecdotal studies that at present characterize the
geography education literature. Enacting this vision will require considerable
coordination, collaboration and information sharing among geographers and
educational researchers in other disciplines. This RCN project will, for the
first time, provide the infrastructure needed to carry out this work.