* 1560784
* The Effect Of Climate On Long Term Human Dispersal
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Nicolas Zwyns, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 235,457.00

Dr. Nicolas Zwyns, of the University of California-Davis, along with an
international team, will investigate the impact of climate change on the
dispersal of early modern humans in Central and Northeast Asia. Previous studies
have underlined the potential of this region to document early dispersals of
modern humans, Neandertals and perhaps Denisovans along the Eurasian steppe
belt. It is assumed, however, that it was particularly challenging for incoming
human groups to adapt to the Late Pleistocene environmental setting. Starting
from about 120,000 years ago and until the end of the Ice Age, around 10,000
years ago, the climate became increasingly unstable with sharp changes in
temperature and moisture occurring at an accelerating pace. Hence some scholars
have suggested that the peopling of regions with continental climate, such as
Mongolia, would be highly dependent on the global variation in temperature and
moisture. Climate improvements would favor demographic increases among human
populations and trigger range expansions into territories that remained out of
reach during the coldest periods. Other scholars argued that humans have been
able to cope with challenging environments in most regions of Eurasia before the
Late Pleistocene and climate change would have only little effect on population
dynamics. These different views illustrate a lack of consensus regarding the
impact that climate change had on the peopling of regions such as Europe,
Central and Northeast Asia where human responses to such constraints are still
poorly understood. The research holds broad significance because it sets within
a deep chronological context the interaction between human behavior and climate
variability.

Dr. Zwyns and his research team will address this issue by building up a high-
resolution archeological and environmental sequence for North Mongolia. The
research includes targeted excavations and sample collection at Paleolithic
sites located along the tributaries of the Selenga River. The Selenga flows to
the Northeast and connects Mongolia with Lake Baikal. Its drainage system has
yielded the highest concentration of relevant archeological sites in Mongolia
and in Siberia and holds one of the richest records for Northeast Asia. Through
the analyses of sediments, fauna and using radiometric dating methods, an
international team of an archeologist, a geologist, a zooarcheologist, and two
geochronologists, along with other specialists will reconstruct the
environmental history in and around the Paleolithic sites to better understand
the environment in which humans first settled. The goal is to correlate several
archeological sites and to build a solid reference sequences for a region where
changes in material culture and in the environment can be observed throughout
the last 50,000 years. Because it exhibits an extreme continental climate, North
Mongolia is suited for studies of human response to sharp changes in climate.
Building up a high-resolution and high-quality environmental and archeological
sequence will create field and laboratory training opportunities for students
and young professionals from Mongolia and elsewhere.