* 1560313
* REU Site:   Solar Physics at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Katharine Reeves, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 04/30/2019
* USD 430,273.00

This grant will continue an ongoing Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Program at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics (CfA), in which
students will carry out individual research projects in solar physics under the
supervision of CfA senior staff scientists and engineers for ten weeks during
the summer. The student projects involve numerical modeling, data analysis from
space missions currently being supported at the CfA, such as Hinode, SDO, IRIS,
Wind, and DISCOVR, or engineering projects related to solar instrumentation
being built at the CfA, depending on the students' interests and abilities. The
target group of students consists of undergraduates in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math (STEM) disciplines, with a preference for underrepresented
groups in STEM fields and students from small colleges where there are few
research opportunities. The program will encourage minority student applications
through contacts with other minority-serving internship programs on campus,
recommendations from professional contacts at minority serving institutions, and
a broad advertising campaign targeted at minority colleges and universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the projects are designed to be part of cutting edge
solar physics research, student projects will frequently result in joint
professional publications or presentations with their CfA mentors, providing
undergraduates with valuable motivation and career development experiences.
Since Solar Physics is taught at relatively few colleges and universities, this
program provides an important service to the discipline. With its strong Space
Weather component it has the double benefit to society of adding to our
understanding of potential space hazards. Moreover, former participants of this
program have reported that the exposure to professional research in a university
environment has helped them to decide whether to continue their education in
graduate school, and whether or not to pursue research as a profession. This
site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.