* 1560629
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: A Cyber-Physical Infrastructure for the "Smart City"
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/31/2015,09/30/2016
* Robert Gao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2016
* USD 107,107.00

The project aims at making cities "smarter" by engineering processes such as
traffic control, efficient parking services, and new urban activities such as
recharging electric vehicles. To that end, the research will study the
components needed to establish a Cyber-Physical Infrastructure for urban
environments and address fundamental problems that involve data collection,
resource allocation, real-time decision making, safety, and security.
Accordingly, the research is organized along two main directions: (i) Sensing
and data acquisition using a new mobile sensor network paradigm designed for
urban environments; and (ii) Decision Support for the "Smart City" relying on
formal verification and certification methods coupled with innovative dynamic
optimization techniques used for decision making and resource allocation. The
work will bring together and build upon methodological advances in optimization
under uncertainty, computer simulation, discrete event and hybrid systems,
control and games, system security, and formal verification and safety. Target
applications include: a "Smart Parking" system where parking spaces are
optimally assigned and reserved, and vehicular traffic regulation.

The research has the potential of revolutionizing the way cities are viewed:
from a passive living and working environment to a highly dynamic one with new
ways to deal with transportation, energy, and safety. Teaming up with
stakeholders in the Boston Back Bay neighborhood, the City of Boston, and
private industry, the research team expects to establish new collaborative
models between universities and urban groups for cutting-edge research embedded
in the deployment of an exciting technological, economic, and sociological
development.