* 1560380
* REU SITE: Integrative approaches to studying recognition systems in cells, organisms, and populations
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Philip Starks, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2021
* USD 301,544.00

This REU Site award to Tufts University, located in Medford, MA, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016-2018. The
program, "Integrative approaches to studying recognition systems in cells,
organisms, and populations" will provide students the opportunity to work
closely on collaborative, interdisciplinary projects combining faculty expertise
in biochemistry, genetics, development, endocrinology, neurobiology, behavior,
ecology, and conservation. Students will work with two mentors to design and
conduct independent projects. In addition to research, the program includes
weekly discussions, seminars, field trips, and two student symposia. The goals
of this summer program are to increase students' proficiency in biological
research and collaborative skills, to educate and inspire students toward future
research careers, and to develop students' ability to effectively communicate
scientific results. Accordingly, seminars are focused on proficiency in
communication of scientific results, scientific ethics and the responsible
conduct of research, and career development. Participants are selected from a
broad undergraduate applicant pool, with special efforts to providing research
opportunities for students underrepresented in science and those who might not
have such opportunities at their home institutions (e.g., community college
students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. The Department of Biology has a long-standing commitment to
mentoring undergraduates in research, and a strong track record of highly
productive interdisciplinary research collaborations. Student-mentor
relationships typically extend beyond the research experience and are
facilitated via electronic networking tools. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences and/or in scientific papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://ase.tufts.edu/biology/undergraduate/research/reu.htm, or by contacting
Dr. Phil Starks at REU@tufts.edu.