* 1560182
* REU Site: Research Opportunities in Molecular Biology at Ohio State University
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Susan Cole, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 484,857.00

This REU Site award to the Ohio State University, located in Columbus, OH, will
support the training of 10 students for 9 weeks during each of the summers of
2016- 2019. This program provides research experience in the broad area of
Molecular Biology (including fields such as cell biology, genetics, biochemistry
and biophysics), with specific research opportunities chosen to match students'
own interest and experience. Scientific mentors from the departments of
Molecular Genetics, Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Microbiology are
internationally recognized scientists with strong interests in mentoring
research-oriented undergraduates and facilitating success in their future
research careers. The cornerstone of the program is the individual research
experience, with student participants engaging in individually mentored projects
that utilize model organisms to address fundamental scientific questions.
Students also take part in professional development activities designed to
enable future research success, including training in ethics, scientific
communication, and writing skills. Group social activities highlighting Columbus
attractions enhance the collegial and supportive atmosphere of the program.

It is anticipated that a total of 40 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will participate in the training program.
Participants are selected by the PI and co-PI, with a focus on inclusion of
students with limited research opportunities and students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences. The program has a demonstrated record of
success, with the majority of past participants continuing in science careers.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to ascertain student career paths and effects
of the REU program on their career progression. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program, including application materials, is available by
visiting https://molgen.osu.edu/research-experience-undergraduates, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Cole at cole.354@osu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jackman at
jackman.14@osu.edu).