* 1560575
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Legacy Institutions and Political Order in Weak States
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Tsering Youdon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 22,242.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates variation in the
ability of non-state institutions to produce political order in weak states. In
some places, chieftaincies, clans, sultanates, or kingdoms perform many of the
functions of a state: enforcing legal codes, collecting taxes, guaranteeing
property rights, and ensuring security. The leaders of some such institutions
demonstrate an impressive command over their followers. Yet in other places,
residents feel free to disobey their leaders with impunity. The PI examines why
leaders of some non-state institutions are able to command compliance from their
followers while others are not. To address this question, the project employs
both ethnographic techniques and a survey experiment in peripheral regions of
Chad, which ranked sixth on the 2014 Fragile States Index. This project
contributes to understanding about the mechanisms that relate to governance,
order, legitimacy, and compliance in poor and developing countries.
Understanding these mechanisms is particularly important to policy makers who
are interested in governmental stability and accountability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
conduct survey experiments to test for differences in degree to which legacy
institution leaders can induce compliance among their followers. The key
randomized manipulation will be whether a directive has the backing of a legacy
institution leader. The PI will test two outcomes. Contributions made in a
version of the "dictator game" is the first outcome that is measured. The
respondent decides whether and how much to contribute to an apolitical
development project for the region. The randomized treatment is an endorsement
from a legacy institution leader. Whether participants return to a development-
related information session is the second outcome measured. The PI hypothesizes
that "treated" respondents--those who hear an endorsement from a legacy
institution leader--will be more likely to contribute to the project and to
attend the meeting. The PI uses Chad as the country of interest. This project
contributes to understanding about the mechanisms that relate to governance,
order, and compliance in poor and developing countries.