* 1560834
* CAREER: Investigating Process-Structure-Property Correlations of Nitrides and Oxides for High Temperature Thermoelectric Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2015,07/31/2021
* Na (Luna) Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2021
* USD 518,076.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant provides funding to
investigate new processing mechanisms of nanostructuring bulk nitrides and
oxides with multiple length-scale structures for high temperature thermoelectric
power generation. The underlying hypothesis is that multiple length-scale
nanostructures can be controlled by process engineering and thus be used as an
effective method to tune thermoelectric properties by decoupling electrical and
thermal properties. To test this hypothesis, an integrated experimental and
theoretical study is used to examine the processing-related parameters including
atomic-scale, nanoscale, and micro-scale structures and their corresponding
effects on thermoelectric properties. Gallium nitride and zinc oxide are the
model systems for this work due to their promising thermoelectric properties and
mechanical and chemical stability at high temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this program will enable a new class of cost-effective, thermally
stable and nontoxic thermoelectric materials for wasted energy recovery at high
temperatures. A total of 1500 trillion BTU/year of waste heat is generated from
industrial processes where temperatures typically exceed 1000K. A new class of
thermoelectric materials that are robust up to 1000K will make a key
contribution to recover this wasted energy since the operational temperature of
current technology is limited to below 800K. The science gained from this
project can be transformed more broadly into the further development of
thermoelectric, photovoltaic, and laser devices. The educational contributions
of this CAREER project include creating interdisciplinary education and research
modules within energy-related curriculums, enhancing underrepresented students'
participation in science and engineering, and outreach to K-12 students to
pursue a career in science and engineering.