* 1560831
* CIFRAM: EAGER: Regulating Systemic Risk
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Philip Corbae, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,885.00

This project will develop tools to support financial policymaking. Two types of
policymaking will be considered: rules that are imposed on financial
intermediaries prior to a financial crisis and an intervention that takes place
during a crisis. A number of policies will be evaluated as part of this research
project: liquidity requirements, limits on interconnectedness, bailout
decisions, restrictions on combining risk-sharing and liquidity-sharing
activities within the same banking organization, and FDIC insurance. The
intellectual merit of this project comes from modeling interconnected banks as
providers of loans and insurance to firms and depositors in the same framework.
In the existing literature, financial intermediaries either provide loans or
insurance. Overall, the research will advance the understanding of the synergies
between different business functions of banks. The research is expected to help
regulators with understanding the costs and benefits of different regulatory
proposals to limit systemic risk. The project will address a number of policy
questions in the Dodd-Frank Financial Reform Act. In particular it will study
the costs and benefits of restrictions on large interconnected institutions
(Sections 123 and 622) and the effect of liquidity requirements on systemic risk
(Sections 115 and 165).

The PIs will develop a theoretical framework to provide a microfoundation for
banking networks in the presence of private information on the part of borrowers
and limited liability. This framework will characterize the conditions under
which risk-sharing and liquidity-sharing services should be provided by the same
bank. The framework will use a mechanism design approach to solve for optimal
allocations that satisfy resource feasibility constraints, incentive
compatibility constraints, and participation constraints of three types of
economic agents: risk-neutral bankers, risk-neutral firms, and risk-averse
depositors. The surplus from liquidity sharing using interbank trade emerges
because of differences in funding across banks. The surplus from risk sharing
using interbank trade emerges because of imperfect correlation in returns on
firms' projects. Bankers use costly state verification when they monitor firms.
These costs can be reduced if the same institution provides both loans and
insurance to firms. These complementarities between the risk sharing and the
liquidity sharing functions of intermediaries are absent from the existing
literature in which financial intermediaries either provide loans or insurance,
but not both. The comparison between the social planner's solution and the
decentralized solution will identify the effect of different organizational
designs on the efficiency of the allocation and a role for optimal government
policy. Government policies correspond in our framework to constraints on
bankers' feasible actions. Liquidity requirements are modeled as a minimum
allocation of bankers' funds to a risk-free technology; limits on
interconnectedness are modeled as constraints on interbank transfers; and a
restriction on commercial banks derivatives trading is modeled as banks'
inability to use state-contingent contracts. The costs and benefits of these
constraints will be assessed by comparing the decentralized solution under
constraints to the planner's solution. The PIs will use the theoretical
framework to quantify effects of financial regulation on systemic risk and to
derive the optimal financial regulation. The project web site
(http://www.regsystemicrisk.net) provides access to further information and
research results.

The EAGER is funded through a Memorandum of Understanding between the Department
of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research and NSF.