* 1560753
* SBIR Phase II:  High Performance Structural Composites with Cellulosic Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Elisa Teipel, Essentium Materials LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2018
* USD 865,244.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to
commercialize high-strength thermoplastic composites reinforced with cellulosic
nanoparticles (CNs) as a replacement for heavier glass&#8208;reinforced
composite materials for structural automotive components. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is to create sustainable,
high&#8208;performance nanocomposites. Expected weight savings is between 13 and
20% per component. Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations require
significant increases in fuel economy for vehicles, which has led carmakers to
look for innovative ways to shed vehicle weight. It has been shown that for
every 10% in weight savings, vehicle fuel consumption is reduced by 7%. The
target application is to replace heavy glass reinforcement in polymeric
composites with CNCs for car parts, providing lighter weight vehicles with
increased fuel efficiency. On&#8208;going research into CN materials has
resulted in significant reductions in cost (with more reductions expected),
making CNs an increasingly attractive functional natural nanofiller, the
processing of which will provide jobs in both the manufacturing and the
technology sector. Successful implementation of CNs into composites could not
only lighten vehicles and reduce environmental impact, but also transform a
waste stream into value-added materials, reducing the amount of waste produced
by these industries.

During the SBIR Phase I period, the company showed that lighter thermoplastic
composites reinforced with cellulosic nanoparticles could meet the tensile
strength values of glass-reinforced composites with much higher loadings,
thereby saving part weight. The Phase II grant will allow the company to scale
up the manufacturing processes necessary to produce these lighter, more
sustainable composites for the automotive industry. Furthermore, the company
will improve performance of these materials in order to attain performance
parity with higher&#8208;loaded glass&#8208;reinforced parts and potentially to
compete with ultra&#8208;high performance materials such as carbon fiber
composites and metals. This technology will be produced using efficient and
economical manufacturing processes, allowing this to become a true drop&#8208;in
technology for automotive part-makers.