* 1560587
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Economy of Extractive Industries Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Michael Gilligan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 18,894.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extractive industries conflicts are an
increasingly common and costly phenomenon in the world today, particularly in
developing countries. This project investigates why violent conflict continues
to occur in extractive industries, particularly in Latin America, and tests
several interventions designed to reduce the level of conflict around mining
through improved responsiveness to local communities and reduced capture by
government officials. The PI identifies three sub-national mechanisms that may
explain extractive industries conflict: (1) asymmetric information, (2)
commitment problems, and (3) capture by elected officials. The co-PI then test
each of these mechanisms through three randomized field experiments in Peru that
include private sector, NGO and government partners. The PI test whether
improved responsiveness by policymakers and the private sector can reduce
conflict in extractive sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous studies in the social sciences have
identified a relationship between natural resources and conflict at the macro
(cross-national) level, this project focuses on micro-level mechanisms in Latin
America. The PI identifies three sub-national mechanisms that explain why
conflicts occur around extractive industries: 1) Asymmetric information, 2)
Commitment problems and 3) Capture by elected officials. The PI tests each of
the mechanisms through three randomized field experiments in Peru that include
private sector, NGO and government partners. This project examines sub-national
mechanisms for resource conflicts other than civil war, such as labor conflicts,
environmental conflicts, and populist rural uprisings that are short of armed
insurrection. The use of the randomized field experimental techniques allows the
PI to be more confident that the effects found are indeed causal effects.