* 1560072
* REU Site: Engineering Entrepreneurship Education (E3) - A Multidisciplinary, Entrepreneurial Research Experience for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Daniel Burkey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 324,761.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Connecticut entitled, Engineering Entrepreneurship Education (E3)-A
Multidisciplinary, Entrepreneurial Research Experience for Undergraduates, will
create novel research experiences for a talented and diverse group of
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented populations, with
limited access to STEM research opportunities. The National Academy of
Engineering reports that entrepreneurship is one of the most critical skills to
be taught to engineering undergraduates. The proposed REU addresses this need by
giving students the opportunity to work on research projects with commercial
potential while simultaneously introducing them to challenges associated with
bringing new technologies to market. The program offers entrepreneurship,
communication, idea generation, salesmanship, and creativity opportunities to
encourage students to pursue their own creative and entrepreneurial endeavors in
the future. Students with this experience can serve as force multipliers,
encouraging and engaging other students or individuals to also engage in
creative and entrepreneurial enterprises developing the entrepreneurial mindset
necessary to support a vibrant, technology-based economy. To extend the benefits
of entrepreneurial engineering training to disadvantaged populations, the site
has established a recruitment partnership with Connecticut State Colleges and
Universities (CSCU) to meet ambitious goals for minority participation. Opening
avenues to minority students to achieve entrepreneurial competence will
translate to greater economic opportunities within their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this REU Site
program will engage undergraduate students in a 10-week intensive, summer
research experience focused on projects identified as having a high potential
for translation to commercial projects and which encourage cross-disciplinary
discussions and stimulate creativity. The research program will be complemented
by a formal engineering entrepreneurship program that will focus on the creative
process, idea generation, prototyping, and the realities of starting a business.
Students will develop communication skills through required presentations to the
REU cohort, their faculty mentors, and entrepreneurs. This REU program
translates the model used by a successful graduate course in entrepreneurship at
the University of Connecticut to a context appropriate for undergraduates.