* 1560070
* REU Site:  Solid-State Devices for Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetics Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Chad Sosolik, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 432,644.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program, Summer
Undergraduate Research Experience in Solid-State Devices for Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetics Technology (SURE), at Clemson University, offers state-
of-the-art, multi-disciplinary research experiences in the areas of electronic,
photonic, and magnetic devices, including material and device design,
processing, characterization and modeling, to diverse and talented cohorts of
undergraduates from institutions with limited or no research opportunities. The
program is intended for students who are rising juniors and seniors, majoring in
electrical engineering, computer engineering, materials engineering, or related
areas of mathematics, physics, and bioengineering. Micro and nanofabrication of
solid-state devices are critical components of modern economic development, and
diverse leadership in research on devices for electronics, photonics, and
magnetics is a key to sustained US economic competitiveness. Yet many
undergraduate students have limited exposure to advanced topics in solid-state
device and materials processing technology resulting in a lack of awareness and
understanding of the types of research problems that arise in the field. The
SURE program will be centered on the philosophy of developing tomorrow's leaders
in academic and industrial research on solid-state device technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the SURE program is to provide each
undergraduate participant with a ten-week scientifically rigorous,
intellectually demanding, research experience within a highly collegial
environment of collaboration with faculty and other students. The program
focuses on the development of the technical skills and critical-thinking
abilities of the participants and on their exposure to substantive,
representative research problems in device-related technology. It will also
emphasize development of the participants' technical communication abilities
through several professional-development seminars and workshops and enhance
their understanding of the ethical and societal context within which engineering
research is performed. The discoveries made during these collaborations will be
communicated to the broader scientific community via publications and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.