* 1560332
* REU Site: Diverse Undergraduate Research Experiences in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Mark Ward, American Statistical Association
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 380,340.00

The American Statistical Association (ASA) will invigorate the undergraduate
research community in statistics by implementing a distributed network of
research experiences for undergraduates sites. At each site, student teams will
work with complex data sets from varied scientific and engineering disciplines
in which statistics plays a key role for data analysis. Over a three year
period, the project will have nine sites with four students per site, allowing
36 students to have a research experience in statistics during the lifetime of
the grant. Recruitment will target women, minorities, and persons with
disabilities. Supported students must be U.S. citizens, nationals, or permanent
residents. Key metrics for success will be whether the students subsequently
pursue graduate studies, what kind of career choices they make, and how their
statistics training impacts their choice of careers and their success in such
careers. This initiative should spark and sustain a new excitement about
undergraduate research throughout the statistics discipline and has the
potential to impact fields that rely on statistics such as engineering,
atmospheric science, healthcare, and all kinds of public policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unifying theme of the funded proposals is that students
will engage in all stages of the data analysis cycle, including: data
verification, data cleaning, and data visualization, all the way to statistical
modeling, prediction, and data mining/machine learning/computational statistics,
as an integral part of their statistics research. One result of these REUs will
be a larger number of students who are immersed in the kind of data science
analysis that is emerging in every branch of science and engineering. At least 2
faculty mentors are necessary for each project. Priority will be given to
faculty who either (a) have a strong track record as a mentor with undergraduate
student researchers in the past, and/or (b) have a strong track record of
independent research and who are eager to begin working with undergraduate
students. The ASA views this new initiative as an opportunity to teach the
teachers, too, by coordinating faculty training sessions.