* 1560888
* Incorporating Residential Histories into Space-Time Models for Health Geographic Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Slobodan Vucetic, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will develop and test new spatial statistical methods for
health and disease mapping that incorporate residential history data. These
statistical methods will enable researchers to assess risk of chronic diseases,
such as cancer, and other health outcomes, such as pre-term births, as a
function of the geographic-specific exposures associated with residential
history. The new statistical methods will provide researchers with a robust and
powerful tool for using residential histories when they test hypotheses about
geographic exposures over time and space and their impacts on health and
disease. The project will increase basic understanding of the amount of
information bias introduced when residential histories are ignored. Project
results will provide empirical examples for geographers, public officials, and
other scientists that demonstrate why residential history data should be used in
health and disease surveillance systems, how these data can be incorporated, and
why this information should be included when conducting health geographic
analysis. Project methods and findings will assist those addressing a broader
set of health-related issues. The use of the data from a state cancer registry
and a birth registry will provide insights regarding the use of administrative
databases to obtain residential histories for health geographic analysis. The
new methods will be adaptable for use by researchers and by public health
practitioners and medical personnel in addressing problems besides long-latency
diseases. By analyzing daily-scale movement, for example, it will be possible to
map acute diseases like salmonella or health events like asthma attacks. The
project also will provide education and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students in health and medical geography, computer science, and
epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common methods for assessing risk factors
based on geographic-specific exposures or the clustering of health and disease
events generally have relied on static data limited to a single point in time
and space, such as a person's location at the time of diagnosis. Ignoring
residential history is a significant shortcoming in such analyses because of the
latency period between causative exposures and resulting health and disease
events. The investigators will address this shortcoming by providing a framework
for combining multipoint, longitudinal residential history data with health and
disease data that is normally based on a single time point. Building upon
previous research in health geography, geographical information sciences, and
data mining, they will develop hierarchical Bayes models that assess risk of
disease while accounting for latency and temporally changing social and
environmental exposures, geographic uncertainty, and missing data. They will
test and demonstrate these new statistical models using both synthetic data and
empirical secondary datasets of cancer and birth outcomes that include
residential histories.