* 1560356
* REU Site: Marine Biodiversity: lessons from molecules, development and behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Elaine Seaver, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 449,112.00

This REU Site award to the University of Florida's Whitney Laboratory for Marine
Bioscience in St. Augustine, FL will provide research training for 8 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016-2020. The program provides
undergraduates with a realistic research experience that will inspire student
interest in science and motivate their consideration of a basic research career.
Through individualized interactions with mentors, students perform full-time lab
or field research. Increased independence over the course of the program is
emphasized. Research projects typically use marine models to enhance student
understanding of basic mechanisms in biology in the context of evolution and
species biodiversity. Guided field trips to local marine estuaries, inland fresh
water springs, and the Gulf coast introduce varied ecosystems. Weekly research
seminars and workshops provide training on the responsible conduct of research,
professional communication skills, science literacy, and diverse career paths in
science related fields. Students meet with graduate coordinators at the
University of Florida to learn the graduate school application process. Students
are recruited nationwide through digital and flyer-based advertising, at
conferences, and trips to institutions. Students are selected based on academic
record and research potential. Special attention is given to applicants from
groups currently underrepresented in the sciences and groups for whom evidence
suggests the REU experience has the greatest impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 40 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences and pursue advanced STEM training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Students are tracked after the
program to determine their continued interest in science and their career paths.
Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information is available by visiting http://
http://www.whitney.ufl.edu/academic/undergrad-reu/. Alternatively, contact the
PI Dr. Elaine Seaver (seaver@whitney.ufl.edu) or the Whitney Education
Coordinator, Brenda Cannaliato (Brenda@whitney.ufl.edu).