* 1560345
* REU Site: Advances of Machine Learning in Theory &amp; Applications (AMALTHEA)
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Georgios Anagnostopoulos, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 359,998.00

The Advances of MAchine Learning in THEory and Applications (AMALTHEA) Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site aims to provide top quality
educational experiences to a diverse community of undergraduate students through
research participation in the area of Machine Learning (ML). The relevance and
importance of ML is not limited to specialized technological innovations, as it
was in the past. Nowadays, it also increasingly influences everyday life through
its contributions to applications such as voice/face recognition, credit fraud
detection, intelligent recommendation systems and many others. Furthermore, ML
is inherently multi-disciplinary as it draws from advances in multiple
disciplines such as engineering, computing, statistics, mathematics, physics and
biology, to name a few major ones. Since its start in 2009, AMALTHEA, one of the
first ML-focused REU sites, involves 10 undergraduate students per year from a
broad spectrum of disciplines, and the educational experience spans 10 weeks in
the summer. The participants are exposed to cutting-edge ML research, as well as
professional development activities, such as technical seminars and career-
related workshops. Moreover, these participants perform closely-mentored
research, whose results are going to impact the field of ML itself, as well as
how ML is applied in other scientific disciplines. Over the 2016-2019 time span,
the project will directly impact a diverse group of 30 motivated students, the
majority of which may not have access to such research participation
opportunities otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's thrust area is the
theory of ML and how it can be integrated and applied to important real-life
problems, hence exposing participants to both theory and applications. Past
projects include applications such as automated anuran recognition from frog
calls, uncovering criminal networks from crime locations, human-object
interaction recognition, modelling of group dynamics in virtual worlds, speaker-
independent speech recognition and license plate recognition among others. On
the other hand, past contributions to the theory of ML have been steered towards
topics such as functional data analysis, wavelet-based density estimation, non-
linear dimensionality reduction, kernel methods and anomaly detection to name a
few. Short video highlights of such projects can be found on AMALTHEA's YouTube
channel located at https://goo.gl/2JhYoF. Finally, additional information about
these topics and their outcomes can be found on the project's web site located
at http://www.amalthea-reu.org.