* 1560709
* EAGER: An Interfacial Approach to Artificial Red Blood Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Jiandi Wan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2018
* USD 103,934.00

Wan, Jiandi &lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1560709 &lt;br/&gt;EAGER: An Interfacial Approach
to Artificial Red Blood Cells&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red blood cells (RBCs)
deliver oxygen to tissues and are the essential component of blood. Significant
loss of RBCs due to emergencies and/or combat injuries requires blood
transfusion, a life-saving intervention. RBCs, however, can only be stored
outside the body for 14 days and transfusion of stored RBCs has been linked to
increased risks of sickness and death. Artificial RBCs that have the similar
features with natural RBCs and an improved storage lifetime are expected to
overcome the problems associated with natural RBCs. Furthermore, artificial RBCs
can be utilized as drug delivery vehicles when specific drugs are incorporated,
and thus provide novel therapeutic advances in drug delivery. Current methods
used to generate artificial RBCs, however, fail to mimic either the shape or
softness of natural RBCs or have limited oxygen delivery ability. Artificial
RBCs-based drug delivery is also less studied. Here, we are planning to produce
artificial RBCs using innovative nano/micro technologies that enable the
recapitulation of key features of natural RBCs and development of artificial
RBCs-based drug delivery system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial RBCs play a
critical role in blood transfusion, which is a commonly life-saving
intervention, especially for emergencies and combat injuries. This is
particularly true considering the risks associated with allogeneic blood
transfusion such as exposure to blood borne pathogens and inaccurate cross-
matching for blood types. In addition, blood storage lesion has been linked to
increased morbidity and mortality in clinical trials, and thus has urged the
research of alternative blood substitutes. Most developed artificial RBCs,
however, have encountered shortcomings including tissue injuries, immune system
suppression, and particularly the low hemoglobin encapsulation efficiency. Most
importantly, all current artificial RBCs are used as oxygen carriers and do not
have the ability to fulfill other key physiological functions of natural RBCs
such as deformation-induced adenosine triphosphate release, which is known to be
critically important in the regulation of vascular tone. Here, by using
innovative microfluidic approaches and tailor-designed amphiphilic block
copolymers at the molecular and nanoscale, we aim to develop artificial RBCs
that mimic the morphological and mechanical properties of natural RBCs and are
capable of controlled release of adenosine triphosphate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this proposal will provide
innovative engineering strategies to produce artificial RBCs mimicking the
morphological, mechanical, and biological functions of natural RBCs. Such
results are expected to have an important positive impact, because in addition
to significant advances in blood transfusion and drug delivery, what is learned
will contribute to a broader understanding of multiphase flow in microfluidics,
the interfacial dynamics of nanostructure materials and their interactions with
surrounding biological media. Consequently, the proposed research is expected to
provide unique and otherwise unattainable conceptual, experimental and
therapeutic advances in nano-bio phenomena and processes. Furthermore, once such
strategies are available, there is a promise that artificial RBCs can be used as
a universal type of RBCs (no need to match blood types) for safe and urgent (on-
spot) blood transfusion and controlled drug delivery, which will impact
significantly the nation and the global society. In addition, our research aims
are coupled to our educational and outreach programs, benefiting minority and
underrepresented groups, K-12 students, and graduate and undergraduate students.
In particular, the experimental projects in this proposal are excellent
opportunities for training young researchers in timely questions, nano/micro
technologies, high-speed imaging, data analysis, presentations skills, etc.
Especially as nano/micro technology is a popular theme, and the various imaging
tools and experimental methods are excellent training modules.