* 1560116
* REU Site: Next generation Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 279,139.00

This REU Site award to Ohio State University, located in Columbus, OH, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-
2019. This program will recruit rising sophomores and juniors to collaborate
with research mentors from the Department of Evolution, Ecology and Organismal
Biology to address questions about evolutionary relationships among plants,
microbes, or animals using leading-edge molecular biology and informatics
techniques for massively parallel DNA sequence data. In addition to developing
skills in research project design, data collection, and analysis, this program
will focus on professional development of the students, including meetings with
biologists in industry, natural resource management, and the Columbus Zoo.
Students will be recruited through websites, recruitment visits to undergraduate
student groups, and social media. Matching between students and potential
mentors will be done by a selection committee including the PIs and a subset of
potential mentors who will consider the student's research interests and
professional goals.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students from
diverse backgrounds will be recruited from institutions within OSU's Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation and from OSU regional campuses in
rural Ohio. Because the target population is rising sophomores and juniors, the
REU program includes extensive career exploration and professional development,
with the expectation that these will increase significantly the impact for
students as they navigate subsequent academic and professional opportunities.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://eeob.osu.edu/NextGenREU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Marymegan Daly at
daly.66@osu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Bryan Carstens at carstens.12@osu.edu).