* 1560813
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: US-MEXICO Planning Visit: Mexican Urban Stream Ecology (MUSE)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Krista Capps, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 35,309.00

Cities directly influence the quality and quantity of water that moves through
urban watersheds and to the human populations located downstream. Though
impacted by development, urban rivers and streams provide important ecosystem
services, including drinking water and stormwater drainage to surrounding human
populations. However, urban rivers in developing economies, such as Mexico may
be directly utilized by humans for sources of untreated drinking water, direct
conduits for sewage, and freshwater fisheries. To appropriately manage urban
watersheds in these regions, it is important to understand how biological
communities and biological processes are affected by increasing urbanization.
This proposal, the Mexican Urban Stream Ecology Collaboration (MUSE), will bring
together group of stream ecologists, fish biologists, and students from the
United States and Mexico to begin to understand the links among urbanization,
stream ecology, and freshwater fisheries in southern Mexico. The activities
conducted in MUSE will provide the foundation for greater understanding of urban
stream ecology and urban fisheries throughout the world and will initiate a new
collaboration that will generate knowledge and resources for scientists,
students, and natural resource managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urbanization is
considered to be an important driver of global decline in the integrity of
streams and rivers; yet, affected systems continue to provide essential
ecosystem services including stormwater drainage, drinking water, and freshwater
fisheries. The influence of urbanization on the structure and trophic
relationships of fishes and on the functional role of fishes in ecosystem
processes is not well understood. Through MUSE, U.S. and Mexican researchers
will begin to understand synergistic links among urbanization, biogeochemistry,
and freshwater fisheries in southern Mexico. Specifically, MUSE researchers will
investigate the influence of urbanization on freshwater fish communities and
energy and nutrient dynamics in the Usumacinta-Grijalva watershed in Chiapas and
Tabasco, Mexico. Through this project new scientific directions in urban ecology
and tropical ecology will open for collaborating researchers and students.