* 1560785
* Documenting the transition to plantation agriculture: Long term and comparative study of ecological change and human impacts
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Jonathan Padwe, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 174,295.00

Because of the rise in global demand for agricultural commodities, large land
areas continue to be converted from smallholder subsistence crop production to
plantation-based production of highly remunerative immediate-return crops, such
as cacao, palm oil, cassava, eucalyptus and rubber. Critics claim that this
transformation represents a new era of enclosures and constitutes a "global land
grab," which has negative effects on social equity and environmental
sustainability. Advocates acknowledge the impacts of the changes but argue in
turn that agricultural commodity production represents the most efficient use of
the resource base in many developing countries, and their best hope for economic
modernization. Social scientists who seek to understand the impacts of these
transformations on rural people have likewise been divided. Many studies have
focused on the economic marginalization that accompanies loss of land and the
transition from mixed subsistence economies to dependence on wage labor. Yet
some researchers have demonstrated that various indicators of well-being in fact
improve as rural residents become more integrated with national markets. This
award supports scientific research on this debate: Is agricultural conversion
and restructuring good for local people or not? Because this process occurs
throughout the world, including in the United States where it has been ongoing
for over a century, it is important to have a better understanding of its
consequences.

The research will use Cambodia as a manageable and appropriate test case; there,
smallholder farmers have lost their traditional resource base and have been
relegated to the in-between spaces at the edges of the new enclosures. Dr.
Jonathan Padwe (University of Hawai'i at Mânoa) will survey land-use patterns
and well-being across a series of highland villages. He will collect data to
inform both sides of the debate: fine-scaled study of land-holding, resource
use, and social differentiation as well as data on nutrition, well-being, and
household economy. The study will make synchronic and diachronic measurements of
the impact of new land regimes. Synchronic analysis involves the study of land
use and well-being across a range of villages, from those that are directly
affected to those that are indirectly affected. Diachronic analysis involves the
comparative study of land use and well-being in a single village where ten-year
longitudinal data are available. Findings from this research will contribute to
our understanding of the impacts of the transition to plantation-based commodity
production at a human scale, informing both theoretical debates and development
policy on an issue of global importance.