* 1560015
* REU Site: Preparing the Next Generation of Scholars through Geographic Information Systems and Citizen Science
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Christy Visaggi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 449,480.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. The Community
Geography and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) REU Site hosted by the
University of Central Florida will: 1) critically assess the opportunities for
and challenges to community-based models for international undergraduate
research experiences; 2) engage 24 students over three years in community-based
international fieldwork focused on community geography, GIS, and citizen science
to examine social and environmental disparities related to marine debris and
flooding/disaster management in Belize; and 3) disseminate a new conceptual and
methodological framework for international community geography and GIS research
by connecting theory with praxis. Students will work collaboratively with a
diverse group of international partners, including researchers at University of
Central Florida, Georgia State University, the Smithsonian National Museum of
Natural History's Caribbean Coral Reef Ecosystems Program, and University of
Belize. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of this REU Site is to provide
international experiences for students in community geography and GIS that
connect research to real-world problem solving that is inclusive of knowledge
production from local stakeholders. Student mastery of geospatial STEM research
skills will be accomplished largely through students creating an open and freely
available geospatial data infrastructure to address social and environmental
disparities related to marine debris and flooding/disaster management in Belize.
This objective will include the creation of an online, interactive geospatial
data and mapping portal through ArcGIS Online, a service providing template-
based web mapping applications. This REU Site will provide free and open access
to various research datasets, metadata, and geospatial training modules. The
geospatial infrastructure created by students will also include: quantitative
datasets, qualitative data, GPS field data, geographic analyses, and
maps/reports of findings. Students will also co-lead GIS training and community-
based fieldwork with Belizean residents and collaborators. This REU Site and the
growing subfield of community geography and GIS contribute to several national
STEM trends, including: 1) the National Science Foundation's continued emphasis
on the Science of Broadening Participating in STEM; 2) NSF's efforts to increase
public understanding of science and impact on broader society; and 3) rapid
growth in geospatial technology careers (identified as a U.S. Dept. of Labor
high-growth industry). The subfield of community geography and GIS is
particularly useful for training students in international, community-based
research as it provides opportunities to learn and apply geospatial STEM
research skills, including GPS data collection, GIS analysis, qualitative data
analysis, and geospatial database design. This project is co-funded by the NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).