* 1560776
* Evolution of a Post-Disaster Coping Network
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Arthur Murphy, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 120,537.00

This study, by anthropologists Dr. Eric C. Jones (University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston) and Dr. Arthur D. Murphy (University of North Carolina,
Greensboro), investigates the effects of community networks on individual and
family responses to mass trauma and extreme events. Mass trauma events, such as
public venue shootings and bombings, linger in people's lives long after the
events themselves. They also tie together former strangers and do so in ways
that significantly affect the recovery process for both individuals and
communities. The goal of the research is to understand how different networked
groups develop, how they change over time, and how those changes affect and are
affected by their reaction to the events and their aftermath. Because this is a
dynamic process that begins right after an event takes place and unfolds over
years, Jones and Murphy have taken a longitudinal approach: a sustained,
focused, long-term investigation of how social groups emerge, coalesce, and
divide, as well as how they affect and are affected by their contexts and
memberships, during the recovery process. Their focal event is a 2009 fire that
broke out in a Hermasillo, Mexico, day care center and killed 49 young children
while also injuring many more. This award supports a third round of data
collection and analysis.

The researchers will map out the formal named groups of local residents and
affected families and the informal sub-networks (calculated with hierarchical
clustering) among parents and caretakers. They also will conduct in-depth
interviews and participant observation (such as attending marches, meetings,
commemorations) to understand how the different subgroups generate diverse
meanings and pathways to recovery over time. The network data will be analyzed
with formal network modeling measures of embeddedness and bridging. The
interview data will be coded for analysis with text analysis software.
Preliminary findings suggest that while participation in a network of people who
shared and understood their experience sometimes afforded a support advantage,
this was not always true. Jones and Murphy will explore the sources of
disagreement and conflict, how these affect recovery, and what produces
exceptions where these conflicts and individual problems like guilt, depression,
fear and helplessness are overcome. This project builds new links between the
fields of community psychology and anthropology in disaster and trauma studies.
It also brings insights on impact and recovery to a broader audience of
political scientists interested in extreme events and governance, geographers
who study hazards and vulnerability, and sociologists concentrating on disasters
and social organization. Better knowledge of social aspects of coping in mass
trauma events is important for counselors, as well as public officials and
policy makers who must help those who struggle to find meaning and justice post-
trauma.