* 1560844
* Extratropical Persistent Anomalies on a Warmer Earth: Connections to Extratropical Storms and Storm Tracks
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,165,132.00

This is a study of persistent anomalies (PAs) in atmospheric circulation,
defined as unusual states of the atmospheric flow that remain approximately
fixed over periods longer than a few days. PAs addressed here occur in middle
latitudes when the normal eastward progression of weather systems over a given
location is disrupted. They are generally associated with splitting or
meridional shifting of jet streams and are loosely synonymous with atmospheric
blocking, although blocking has a more restrictive definition. Interest in PAs
comes largely from their association with high-impact weather events including
cold air outbreaks, droughts, pluvials, and heat waves. The project seeks to
understand the fundamental dynamics which determine the frequency, intensity,
and duration of persistent anomalies (PAs), as well as the changes in PA
behavior that are likely to occur as a result of warming due to greenhouse gas
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PAs are broader in spatial scale than the
weather fronts and cyclones that are collectively referred to as synoptic
systems. Studies of blocking show that synoptic systems play a large role in the
onset and maintenance of blocks, a finding that holds true for PAs as well. The
PIs hypothesize that the initiation and maintenance of PAs depends on smaller-
scale processes that occur inside the synoptic systems, including the
organization of rain-bearing clouds (where condensational heating occurs) into
mesoscale features (rain bands and squall lines, for example). The hypothesis is
motivated in part by studies showing that global weather and climate models with
higher resolution do a better job in simulating blocks, despite the large size
of blocks compared to grid spacing even in low resolution models. The PIs
propose that higher resolution is better because it allows a more accurate
representation of the much smaller mesoscale features where the condensational
heating takes place. Better representation of condensational heating leads to
more vigorous systems, which can more effectively move low vorticity air across
the jet stream from the tropics to high latitudes as required for PA formation.
One implication of this hypothesis is that models or climate states which are
more conducive to high intensity synoptic systems will produce more strong PAs.
This argument suggests that PAs could become stronger or more prominent as
climate warms, as the greater moisture content of warmer air allows for more
intense rainfall and condensational heating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
examines PAs in present-day climate by identifying a set of cases and performing
"hindcast" simulations of those cases using a global atmospheric model (the
Weather Research and Forecasting model, or the Model for Prediction Across
Scales if it becomes available). Model configurations which produce the best
simulations of these cases will be identified, and a number of diagnostics will
be performed to identify the key ingredients which lead to PA initiation and
persistence. Additional experiments are performed using a technique in which the
initial atmospheric state for the simulation is modified to remove particular
synoptic features, in order to assess the role of these features in PA
formation. The impact of climate change on PAs is studied by repeating the
hindcasts but with the background state modified to approximate the effects of
greenhouse warming as simulated by climate models. Long model integrations are
used to consider PA behavior in a statistical sense, and simple single-layer
models are used to further examine the basic dynamics of
PAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of PAs is a topic of practical as well as
scientific interest, given the close association of PAs with high-impact weather
events that affect human activities. The work addresses questions which are
directly relevant to improving the ability of weather models to forecast PA-
related extreme weather, and the ability of climate models to anticipate future
changes in PA behavior. In addition, the project provides undergraduate research
opportunities through two new courses emphasizing collaborative research, one on
data analysis and the other on numerical simulations. An undergraduate
internship is also supported in each summer of the project, and the position is
advertised at minority-serving institutions. In addition, the project will
employ and train two graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow, thereby
providing future workforce development in this area of research.