* 1560643
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparative, State-Level Study of Strength of Political Party and Lobbying Expenditures
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2018
* William Minozzi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2018
* USD 22,837.00

General Summary

Although political scientists have long believed that more disciplined and
cohesive political parties are better able to resist interest group influence,
recent scholarship calls this proposition into question for two reasons. First,
interest groups possess specialized policy information that legislators need,
and, second, lobbying strategies have grown more sophisticated in the last
couple decades. Using an original dataset of lobbying expenditures in thirty-two
state legislatures between 2001 and 2014, this project will tests how party
conditions (polarization, cohesion, and majority party seat share) affect
lobbying expenditures. The expected relationship between each of these
conditions and lobbying expenditures depends on what interest groups do when
they lobby. If groups lobby only when they believe they can change legislator
beliefs about policy, then interest groups should spend less on lobbying as
legislator beliefs become more fixed, i.e., as the legislature grows more
polarized. However, if groups are successful at moderating the beliefs of
increasingly stubborn legislators, then we might expect that groups opposed to
the majority party will spend more as polarization increases. Alternatively, if
interest groups advance their agendas primarily by enhancing the efforts of
their legislative allies, then they should lobby harder when their friends are
both more productive and more supportive. Thus, party polarization should
encourage more lobbying by groups allied with the majority party. Party cohesion
and majority party seat share are expected to have the same effect as party
polarization. Preliminary results suggest that as the parties grow more
polarized, interest groups spend less on lobbying. Technical Summary Scholars
have long believed that the power of interest groups is inversely related to the
discipline and cohesion of the governing political parties. But interest groups
may remain influential even in the face of strong parties, because they provide
and process technical information and have grown more experienced at lobbying.
This project examines how party conditions associated with party strength affect
lobbying expenditures by organized interests. A negative relationship between
each of these conditions and lobbying expenditures would be consistent with the
exogenous cost model of lobbying. Alternatively, increases in each party
condition might encourage interest groups allied with the majority party to
increasingly subsidize the efforts of friendly legislators. The endogenous cost
model of lobbying predicts that, as each party condition increases, interest
groups opposed to the majority party will spend more on lobbying. Quantitative
analyses is performed using an original dataset of lobbying expenditures in
thirty-two state legislatures from 2001 to 2014 and interviews of lobbyists. The
investigator expects that an increase in party polarization will substantially
reduce interest group lobbying expenditures. The project will not only provide
an indirect test of contemporary lobbying theories, but it will help to build
empirical generalizations about the roles and relationship between political
parties and interest groups in democratic politics.