* 1560243
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Intelligent Multimodal Human-Computer Interaction
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Kristy Boyer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 368,618.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. The University of Florida will host a new REU site that will train
students on research in Intelligent Multimodal Human-Computer Interaction. By
becoming deeply involved in research projects and participating as members of
cutting-edge research labs, students will: 1) develop research skills through
authentic research experiences and targeted training; 2) strengthen preparation
for completing the baccalaureate degree in computer science or a related
discipline; 3) increase preparation for applying to and entering doctoral
programs; and 4) create and disseminate novel innovations through collaborative
research and publications with graduate student and faculty mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-computer interaction (HCI) is a growing field that
is concerned with how to design and create computational artifacts that serve
the needs of their users. Multimodal HCI involves enabling users to interact
through multiple modalities, such as speech, gesture, and touch, modalities that
tremendously increase the contexts and users that our software systems can
serve. This REU site focuses on intelligent multimodal HCI, which brings
together the power of adapting to individual users with the flexibility of
multimodal interfaces. This project, which targets students who are historically
underrepresented in computing, will help build a generation of computer science
students whose research and development work directly benefits many facets of
society.