* 1560279
* REU Site: A Summer Experience for Undergraduates Integrating Research, Education, and Career Development in an Interdisciplinary Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Joseph Heppert, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 288,920.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) of the National Science
Foundation (NSF) supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at the University of Kansas (KU) for summers 2016-2018. Professor David R.
Benson directs the ten week program, and Professor Joseph A. Heppert is the co-
director. Ten students, recruited from primarily undergraduate institutions
across the nation, select and participate in individual research projects led by
faculty members in the Department of Chemistry at KU. The interdisciplinary
research experience is complemented by a career enhancement program that
includes professional development activities, a three session short course on
green chemistry organized in cooperation with the KU Center for Environmentally
Beneficial Catalysis, and panel discussions and field trips that expose the
participants to the variety of career options available to chemists. The program
serves the broader chemical sciences community by mentoring and training
students with otherwise limited opportunities for research experience, and by
encouraging participation of women and members of traditionally underrepresented
groups in the sciences, including students with disabilities. Projects available
to REU participants span the full range of research areas represented in the
department. Examples include examination of electronic structure contributions
to reactivity in biomimetic manganese complexes, investigations of structure and
electronic properties of azulene-based materials, studies of neurotransmitter
release dynamics in neurological disease, synthesis and characterization of
soluble polymers with tunable properties, and ultra-fast laser studies of
reaction dynamics of photochromic molecular switches. Participants benefit from
the highly collaborative environment provided by the large KU chemical
community, close interactions with faculty and graduate student (or
postdoctoral) mentors, state-of-the-art facilities, and opportunities to
communicate and disseminate their accomplishments in written and oral forms.