* 1560424
* REU Site: Aerospace Engineering Research Opportunities for Undergraduates (AERO-U)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2016,07/31/2022
* James Boyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 364,766.00

This renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
Aerospace Engineering Research Opportunities for Undergraduates (AERO-U) at
Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) has at its overarching goal to encourage
undergraduate students, especially underrepresented minorities and women, to
pursue careers as researchers in aerospace engineering. Projects span a number
of aerospace related research topics and will include new projects on the design
of a bio-mimetic morphing wing, cyclocopters, and uninhabited autonomous
vehicles. Continuing research activities include projects on modeling and
testing of electromagnetic field effects on hypersonic vehicle scramjet inlet,
wing, stability and transition to turbulence and plasmas in propulsion and other
fields (e.g. bio-medical, materials synthesis. Many of the research areas are
critical to national goals for leadership in space exploration, future
transportation needs, and homeland security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three
year period, this REU Site program will engage undergraduate students in a
10-week intensive, summer experience focused on conducting cutting-edge
aerospace engineering research. The students will work on individualized
projects, engage in community building activities with other REU students, TAMU
undergraduates and graduate students, and TAMU faculty, receive professional
development opportunities, receive tutoring concerning graduate school, and
attend field trips which connect the research to real-world problems. Students
to be recruited focus on underrepresented minorities and women nationwide and
from the 18 universities in the TAMU Engineering Experiment Station (TEES) and
many are minority serving institutions. These include TAMU-Kingsville and TAMU-
Corpus Christi, both Hispanic Serving institutions (HSI), and Prairie View
A&amp;M (PVAMU), an historically black college and university (HBCU). PVAMU and
TAMU-Kingsville have established engineering programs, and other TEES
institutions have emerging ones.