* 1560945
* Studies of Tornadoes and Severe Convective Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Howard Bluestein, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2021
* USD 860,027.00

This project seeks to improve our basic scientific understanding of severe
convective storms and tornadoes by conducting small, annual field programs,
testing out the latest, innovative observing instruments, and analyzing the data
collected using these instruments and all other available data. New analysis
techniques will be devised for the instruments, tested, and then applied to
scientific studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, it is to continue to study the structure and evolution of severe
convective storms and tornadoes using rapidly scanning mobile Doppler radars,
one of which has polarimetric capabilities, thus facilitating the identification
of debris, the types of scatterers in the storms, and locating strong updrafts
without the need for multiple radars. Rapid-scan radars are necessary because
tornadoes evolve very quickly. It is also to continue to experiment with a
pulsed Doppler lidar system, which has the potential for providing ultra-high
vertical resolution of the wind field in the clear-air boundary layer in and
near tornadoes and their parent storms. It is thought that the structure and
behavior of the boundary layer are critical to the dynamics of tornadoes and
severe convective storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to analyze
existing data collected during previous grants and also to collect new datasets
in the Plains of the U. S. during the spring. Owing to the unpredictable and
highly variable nature of severe weather on inter-annual time scales, it is
necessary to conduct field operations for a number of years to increase the
chances for successful data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research have the potential to increase
our skill in issuing more accurate short-term forecasts and more timely warnings
of severe convective storms and tornadoes, thereby reducing the risk of death
and injuries. A more detailed knowledge of the wind field in and near tornadoes
has the potential to provide information to structural engineers that can lead
to improved construction practices, thereby mitigating property damage. The
educational impact of this project in mentoring graduate students in their
studies, conducting field studies, learning to use state-of-the art
instrumentation, analyzing data, and advancing our basic scientific knowledge,
will contribute to providing the human capital for the next generation of
forecasters, educators, and researchers in the U. S. What is learned from this
research will be widely disseminated in scientific journals, made available to
the general public via the media, and in the next generation of textbooks.