* 1560325
* REU Site: Chemical Sciences Leadership Initiative (CSLI)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Karl Booksh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 315,000.00

Professors Booksh, Rozovsky and colleagues in the Chemistry Department of the
University of Delaware host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site. The site is supported by NSF Chemistry REU program. This site provides
students with disabilities the mentoring and experience important for success in
graduate school. Students with disabilities are underrepresented at the doctoral
level and constitute a largely untapped resource for meeting the increasing STEM
workforce needs. Research shows that students with disabilities want to achieve
advanced STEM degrees at the same rate as non-disabled students. However,
students with disabilities are less likely to receive the encouragement,
mentoring, or other support offered to students without disabilities. This
program works to build a supportive community, with a goal of providing role
models for future generations of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ten week REU
program provides students with a state-of-the-art chemistry research experience
across five sub disciplines. Each student works closely with a graduate and
faculty mentor on topics such as structural determination and mechanism of
enzymes, multichannel optical spectroscopy, and chemical sensors for
environmental and biomedical applications. Students are primarily recruited from
smaller liberal arts colleges where they do not have access to a graduate level
research program. In addition to research, the students engage with faculty in
four layers of mutually-supportive career development activities. One layer
addresses skills development such as presentations, research expectations,
literature searches, and scientific ethics. The second layer addresses academic
and career development topics that span multiple disciplines such as
expectations of and preparation for graduate school. The third layer includes
topics closely related to chemistry and disability intersection such as
accommodations and disclosure. The forth layer is individualized instruction
with mentors tailored to the students' career goals, research interests, and
accrued skill sets. Students present their research at the University of
Delaware Undergraduate Research Symposium and the Spring National Meeting of the
American Chemical Society.