* 1560352
* REU Site: Biological Adaptation to Stress -- Molecular, Cellular, Ecological
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Jay Brewster, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 363,214.00

This REU Site award to Pepperdine University, located in Malibu, CA, will
support the training of 8 students for 11 weeks during the summers of 2016-
2019. Research opportunities associated with the program range from cellular to
organismal systems, and students will have access to state of the art equipment
and computer systems essential for such research. The primary goals of the
program include the following: 1) provide training in the application of the
scientific method; 2) involve students in collaborative and interdisciplinary
research; 3) expose students to the overall enterprise of science as it relates
to the design and implementation of a research project; 4) develop skills in
scientific communication; 5) provide students with training in ethical decision-
making as it relates to science; 6) train students in various forms of
scientific communication; and 7) foster an appreciation for career opportunities
in the life sciences as well as training in preparation for graduate school. In
collaboration with a faculty mentor, each student will be encouraged to design a
research project that interfaces with ongoing research at Pepperdine. This
research will involve a mixture of lab and field-based activities and will
culminate with a student symposium that includes both oral presentations and a
poster session. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over four years of funding, the program
will award NSF fellowships to a total of 32 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities and from underrepresented populations.
Student recruitment is primarily web-based but includes direct communication
with undergraduate-serving institutions with high enrollment of underrepresented
groups. Several factors are considered important for student selection,
including academic record, letters of reference, student interest in obtaining
an advanced career in science, and diversity. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program success will be assessed using a
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division
of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) as well as
specific tools developed within the Pepperdine program. Follow-through of the
REU program will include presentations at regional and national meetings. For
more information about the program, students can visit the website
(https://seaver.pepperdine.edu/surb/) where they can apply online. In addition,
students can contact the PI (Dr. Jay Brewster at jay.brewster@pepperdine.edu).
This REU site is co-funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences), and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences).