* 1560247
* REU Site: Summer Research in Neural Systems Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Theoden Netoff, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 341,652.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site from the University of
Minnesota will support a diverse cohort of undergraduate students to pursue
research in the interdisciplinary field of neural systems engineering. This
program will highlight recent developments in neurotechnology for basic science
research and healthcare. It is estimated that 100 million U.S. citizens will
have a significant brain-related disorder in their lifetime. There is a need to
train scientists and engineers who will research and understand the process for
translating neural systems engineering research into human applications. This
site will focus on recruiting a diverse group of students with an emphasis on
recruiting women, underrepresented minorities, and undergraduates from colleges
where opportunities to pursue STEM-based research are opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this REU program will engage
undergraduate students in a 10-week intensive, summer research experience aimed
at further developing neurotechnology for brain imaging, decoding and
modulation. Projects will focus on developing technology, running simulations or
data analysis. Many of the projects will integrate multiple modalities of
neurotechnology, such as multi-modal imaging, brain-computer interfaces and
closed-loop neuromodulation. Students will have opportunities to investigate
neuronal dynamics, plasticity, learning and attention as feedback metrics to
optimize neurotechnologies. Research projects will provide opportunities for REU
students to learn about large scale data analysis, computational modeling of the
brain, and participate in experiments. The program will have group building
projects to develop a cohesion between the students within the program and with
their graduate student mentors to create lasting friendships and collaborations.
The program will emphasize near-peer mentoring where the REU students will be
directly mentored students in their second and third year of graduate school,
and in turn will be offered the opportunity to meet and educate high school
students about neural engineering. To broaden their perspective, students will
participate in a bi-weekly neuroengineering seminar series hosted in conjunction
with a NSF IGERT program and the Center for Neuroengineering. Multiple
mechanisms will help guide students in their professional development and
prepare them for graduate school. To develop communication skills, students will
participate in outreach programs and present their research in a small forum at
the end of the program.