* 1560049
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience in Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2022
* Ramesh Katam, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 338,639.00

This REU Site award to Florida A&amp;M University, located in Tallahassee, FL,
will support the training of 8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2016-2018. This project is supported by the Divisions of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) and Integrative and Organismal Systems (IOS) within the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the Division of Human Resource
Development (HRD) in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR).
The goal is to enhance student learning experience in "Systems Biology" and
stimulate student interest in graduate studies and commitment to careers in STEM
disciplines. This REU site will provide opportunities for participation in
professional events that will allow students to form networks, which is critical
to their development as a scientist. The program will introduce the students to
Ethics and the Responsible Conduct of Research. The interdisciplinary research
training focuses on the areas of genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and
bioinformatics. Examples of independent projects include 1) determining
molecular responses for cross-tolerance mechanism in plants for various abiotic
and biotic stresses; 2) elucidating the disease pathways and networks in model
organisms via molecular and cellular studies; and 3) using bioinformatics to
predict networks and model protein interactions. Recruitment will emphasize
students from institutions with limited opportunities for research and those
from underrepresented and underserved groups. Application forms are available
online, and student selection will be based on interviews by a panel. Selected
candidates will be notified before April 30. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be mentored and trained in the program. Students
will engage in cohort building activities and gain insights into potential
careers in science. Students will present their research at regional, national,
and international conferences and have the opportunity to publish as co-authors
in peer-reviewed scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program is completed in order to
determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by contacting the PI (Dr. Ramesh Katam at
ramesh.katam@famu.edu) or Co-PI (Dr. Virginia Gottschalk at
virginia.gottachalk@famu.edu), or visiting the website
http://www.famu.edu/index.cfm?REU&amp;Introduction.