* 1560919
* RUI:  Documenting Ojibwe Land Use Through Tree-Ring Analysis of Culturally Modified Trees in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Evan Larson, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 11/30/2018
* USD 76,270.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will provide new knowledge regarding the ecological impacts of pre-European
settlement land use and the critical importance of these legacies for the
management of protected areas. The investigators will advance understanding
about the complex interplay between people and the natural environment for
understanding past and future biogeographical patterns across multiple scales.
Project outcomes will be valuable in identifying the ecological legacies of low-
intensity land use and for identifying reference conditions and baseline data
for ecological restoration. The project will provide valuable education and
training opportunities for undergraduate students enrolled at a primarily
undergraduate institution and will foster professional development of early
career science educators. The investigators will actively collaborate with
Native American tribal resource managers and will conduct outreach activities
for sharing outcomes with land-resource management communities and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing knowledge about the extent of human
influence on fire regimes of past millennia has important implications for the
understanding and management of fire-adapted vegetation communities in the U.S.
and around the world. Bark-peeled pine can provide a compelling context of land
use to inform interpretations of an extensive and growing fire history and
forest age structure. The investigator will use dendrochronological dating of
peel scars on trees in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness to provide the
first absolutely dated and spatially precise record of Ojibwe land use in the
Great Lakes region. Parametric and non-parametric tests will be performed to
compare fire frequency, fire synchrony, and spatial association of areas of high
fire frequency with peel-scar occurrence in order to ascertain the association
between human and fire activity. Collaboration with archaeologists will provide
the cultural context for the tree-ring data and will enable a direct examination
of the influence people had on the fire regimes and vegetation communities of
this wilderness area. The results of this work will establish a new
understanding of the role of people in the pre-European landscape that will help
guide future research and management in the Great Lakes Region and throughout
temperate forest regions of the world.