* 1560005
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: A Distributed Network of Neuroscience Scholars
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Hewlet McFarlane, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2019
* USD 108,203.00

This REU Site award to the College of Wooster (Wooster, OH), Ohio Wesleyan
University (Delaware, OH), Kenyon College (Gambier, OH) and Earlham College
(Richmond, IN) will support 16 students for 9 weeks during the summers of
2016-2018. This project is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences(SBE). The research
theme in the broad area of neuroscience include projects such as genetic model
systems, neuromodulation, cellular responses to neurotrauma, rodent behavioral
assessment, and cognitive and stress neuroscience. Participating labs are
located in Biology, Chemistry, and Psychology departments. The diverse student
research projects span the biological and social sciences, including gene
expression studies during nervous system development in Drosophila, regulation
of sodium channel expression in lamprey neurons, the effect of nitric oxide
synthase on olfactory neurons in the fleshfly, computational modeling of the
microglia-astrocyte-neuron system, and studies of action video games (AVGs) on
executive functioning and perceptual ability. All of these projects contribute
to important basic and applied research with the AVG project providing a
thorough scientific investigation of effects and potential transfer of acquired
skills to other contexts using a combined behavioral and psychophysiological
approach. Students will participate in a full-time, mentored, team-based
research project. A 3-day opening workshop will introduce students to the
research theme, development of research plans, and data management. In addition,
students will be trained on the responsible conduct of research. Participants
will gather weekly either virtually or at one of the participating institutions
for research updates, demonstrations, and professional development in writing
CVs, attending and presenting at scientific meetings, local outreach, career
planning, and applying to graduate programs. Students will present their
findings at a research symposium at the conclusion of the program. Housing, a
stipend, and meal and travel allowances will be provided. Students will be
selected based on their interest in research, academic record, and other
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 48 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained over
a period of 3 years. Students, especially those from groups that are typically
underrepresented in science, are encouraged to apply. Students will learn how
research is conducted, data analyzed, and results presented to both scientific
and public audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the program. Students will be tracked after the program in
order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available at http://amyjostavnezer.voices.wooster.edu/nsf-reu/, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Amy Jo Stavnezer at ajstavnezer@wooster.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Jennifer Yates at jryates@owu.edu).