* 1560491
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in DNA-based discoveries in Hawaii's biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Stuart Donachie, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 394,594.00

This REU Site award to the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM), located in
Honolulu, HI, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2016-2018. Participants will take advantage of high-throughput DNA
sequencing and phylogenetic methods to study the identity and origins of
Hawaii's native, endemic and invasive organisms. REU participants will be
mentored by a diverse faculty from the departments of Botany, Biology, and
Microbiology, the Hawaii Natural Energy Institute at UHM, and Kapi'olani
Community College. A guest mentor from the Los Alamos National Laboratory will
also participate for one week each summer. The REU experience will begin with
one week of laboratory training in molecular, microbiology and genomic
techniques, to allow students with limited higher-level biology background or no
research experience to participate. A diverse group of REU participants from a
variety of institutions and backgrounds will be recruited. Funds will provide
for on-campus housing to support students who must relocate to participate. The
REU experience will be enhanced by weekly workshops to explore graduate school,
scientific communication, responsible conduct of research, and culminate in a
scientific poster presentation by each participant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be exposed
to career options which utilize skills they learned in working with DNA and
bioinformatic tools. Students will learn how research is conducted, and may
present their work at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://manoa.hawaii.edu/biodiversity-REU, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Stuart
Donachie at donachie@hawaii.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Stephanie Kraft-Terry at
kraft2@hawaii.edu).