* 1560137
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 359,364.00

This project sets up a new REU site at Carnegie-Mellon University focused on
multi-faceted aspects of software engineering. The program will be recruiting a
diverse set of students based on stop-past-the-post strategy successfully
employed previously by other sites. The site will focus on recruiting women
students and students from undergraduate-only institutions with limited research
exposure. The students will not only be acquiring research skills through the
training program, but also gain exposure to a broader research landscape through
interactions and seminars. The students will be exposed to faculty life and
research career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skills in software engineering have
always been core to computer science, programming and software development. The
project will offer research opportunity in secure languages, requirement
engineering, program repair, variational data structures and API usability. The
projects emphasize separate modules on training, exposure and graduate life
mentoring. The project will build on the experience of many of the faculty
mentors who have worked with undergraduate students in their individual
research. The students will be encouraged to disseminate their research findings
by publishing in quality venues and giving presentations.