* 1560019
* REU Site: Research Challenges of Identifying Integer Sequences Using the OEIS
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Byungchul Cha, Muhlenberg College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2019
* USD 323,916.00

This award provides support for REU Site: Research Challenges of Identifying
Integer Sequences Using the OEIS, at Muhlenberg College. Projects make an
effective use the On-line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (OEIS) as a resource
tool, and provide glimpses into future. The research impact of the OEIS across
disciplines continues to grow. Applications of the to the life sciences,
physical sciences, and earth sciences abound. The OEIS has also impacted
research in scientific and engineering fields beyond the mathematical sciences.
There are currently more than 3,000 papers and books in many areas of
mathematics, computer science, and many other branches of science that reference
and/or acknowledge the OEIS. The large number of citations and links to OEIS
attests to its impact on advancing many areas of active research and its appeal
to a broad multidisciplinary community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
focus of this research concentrates on the important role sequences play in
mathematics, as well as their contributions to other fields. The program will
contribute to the OEIS knowledge base through projects that are influenced by
recent developments and tackle challenges of mathematical and scientific
discovery inspired by integer sequences. These challenges include
experimentation by developing computational algorithms and meta-algorithms
through the use of computers. The methodologies applied to these challenges have
come to be loosely defined as "rigorous experimental mathematics" and have
proven effective in developing conjectures in areas that include number theory,
algorithmic and enumerative combinatorics, combinatorial number theory, and many
other mathematical fields. Our program aims to prepare students to become the
next generation of mathematical scientists efficient in researching sequences
and their applications through the OEIS database, the most successful of whom
will have the capacity to look to the OEIS for inspiration. We will nurture this
capacity by highlighting the contributions to the mathematical sciences of the
On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. A particular emphasis of our program
will be to discuss the important role the OEIS has played in developing
conjectures in areas that include number theory, algorithmic and enumerative
combinatorics, combinatorial number theory, and many other mathematical and
scientific fields, as well as the tools necessary for identifying such
conjectures.