* 1560970
* Finding Safe Drinking Water to Mitigate Arsenic Contamination: Tube Wells, Storage, and Diarrhea
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2022
* Mark Sobsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2022
* USD 426,999.00

In an effort to reduce diarrheal disease incidence, public health efforts during
the past 30 years have led to an almost universal shift from the consumption of
surface water to groundwater from shallow aquifers (&lt;140 feet). The shift to
shallow tube wells, however, has exposed tens of millions of people to arsenic,
which causes cancer and other health problems. Groundwater arsenic is a major
problem in several countries in the Americas and Asia. One mitigation approach
has been for households to switch to deep public tube wells that are mostly
&gt;500 feet deep because they tap water in an aquifer that is low in arsenic.
Although deep tube wells are being installed to reduce exposure to arsenic, the
health effects of switching to these often more distant, wells has not been
adequately investigated. A concern is that water obtained from a distant well
may be stored for a longer period of time in the home, thereby increasing the
risk of microbial contamination by extended handling and use. This study
provides a comprehensive assessment of whether deep tube wells installed through
arsenic mitigation programs are a safe drinking water source in countries
groundwater arsenic problem. It also provides insights about the circumstances
in which household drinking water storage containers are most likely to be
contaminated with waterborne pathogens. Lastly, the study develops a rich
database on water, sanitation, hygiene that will be made available and can be
linked to another large survey on the health, demographic, and socioeconomic
characteristics of the same study population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
integrates theory and methods from the disease ecology tradition of medical
geography and environmental microbiology. It combines geographic and
environmental microbiology methods with community surveys to provide information
that is critical for developing drinking water policies and programs. The
objectives of this study are to: (1) determine if deep tube wells protect
against diarrheal diseases compared to shallow tube wells, (2) compare the
microbial water quality of deep and shallow tube well sources and from household
storage containers with water from those wells, and (3) determine if longer
travel distance and time to deep tube wells leads to longer duration of water
storage, poor water quality in storage containers, and higher diarrheal disease
incidence. The study will be conducted in Bangladesh where groundwater arsenic
is most severe. A household survey will determine water source, use, storage,
hygiene, and sanitation practices. The microbial water quality of tube wells and
household water storage containers will be measured for the presence and
concentrations of E. coli as fecal indicator bacteria. Distance to tube wells
will be measured using a geographic information system database that includes
households and tube wells. The analysis will determine if distance/travel
time/storage time is related to water quality in storage containers and
diarrheal diseases.