* 1560174
* REU Site: American Student Placements in Rehabilitation Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Rory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 411,506.00

This renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Pittsburgh entitled, "American Student Placements in
Rehabilitation Engineering (ASPIRE) offers research experiences in
rehabilitation engineering to students from institutions with limited research
opportunities, women, underrepresented minorities, veterans and students with
disabilities. The research is focused on identifying and addressing problems
critical to achieving and maintaining the highest possible level of function and
participation in areas related to mobility, communications, sensory (e.g.,
hearing, tactile, vision), cognition and in areas associated with recreation,
daily living, health, employment, independent living, and education. The broader
impact of this REU Site is about empowering undergraduate students with the
confidence, experience and skills necessary to excel in graduate studies and in
their future careers as engineers or scientists. This Site provides
opportunities for students to work on projects that have direct application to
the betterment of society. Having this experience early in their academic
careers not only raises awareness to the social obligations of being an
engineering, but also provides a "beyond the classroom experience" that brings
purpose and meaning to an engineering curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the ASPIRE REU Site renewal are to: 1) Enroll highly-motivated
undergraduate students majoring in diversified areas of engineering, computer
science or related fields such as rehabilitation science who attend universities
and colleges that have few opportunities for structured undergraduate research
in RE. 2) Engage undergraduate students in RE to understand critical issues
faced by persons with disabilities and apply engineering principles to improve
their level of functionality, quality of life and society participation. 3)
Employ targeted recruitment efforts in order to increase the numbers of
qualified underrepresented students who apply; in particular veterans, students
with disabilities and women. 4) Increase the number of undergraduate students
who are well-prepared for graduate studies and professional careers in RE, and
assist them in pursuing their career goals. During the 10 week experience,
students will gain understanding of the research process by 1) exposure to the
real life problems that persons with disabilities face, 2) interacting directly
with the assistive devices and systems used to ameliorate these problems and by
conducting extensive scientific literature and product reviews, 3) assimilating
these experiences and information to formulate research questions and/or design
criteria to meet the current and evolving needs of persons with disabilities,
and 4) working with highly qualified research mentors on a team project that
will lead to new therapeutic or technological innovations in rehabilitation
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Rehabilitation Science &amp;
Technology (RST) is the lead organization in this REU Site. The other
organizations involved with ASPIRE are the University of Pittsburgh Center for
Assistive Technology (CAT), VA Pittsburgh HealthCare System-Human Engineering
Research Laboratories (HERL), and the Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation (PM&amp;R)