* 1560850
* Processing of Fully-Dense Nanocomposites through Novel Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* K Morsi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,517.00

Combustion Synthesis is a manufacturing process that utilizes the chemical
energy produced from a reaction between powders during heating. Such internally
produced chemical energy can avoid the use of an energy-intensive heating
furnace, thus reducing energy consumption during manufacturing. Combustion
Synthesis has been used to form many advanced materials including ceramics,
intermetallics and composites. So far, this advantageous process of combustion
synthesis has generally not been capable of producing pore-free high-strength
composites and nanocomposites, except by pressing the materials during
manufacturing, and/or using an additional manufacturing step to fully form the
material. These are extra energy-intensive and costly steps. This award supports
fundamental research to design powders and powder compacts which can form strong
pore-free composites and stronger pore-free nanocomposites in only one rapid
reaction step, thus eliminating the need for any extra costly and energy-
intensive manufacturing steps. The benefits to society will be significant, as
there are many materials that can be produced using this process, and they have
applications in the aerospace, automotive, biomedical and energy industries. The
research project involves the participation of underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students in the research and educational activities, thus
engineering education will also
be positively impacted. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research tackles the long-
standing Combustion Synthesis problems of residual porosity and inhomogeneity
from a new fundamental scientific standpoint. Specifically, the influence of
powder and powder compact multi-scale design on the densification and
homogenization mechanisms in combustion synthesis will be investigated. A
fundamental understanding of the effects of defect concentrations on the rapid
synthesis and homogenization of nanocomposites with or without external field
will be established for materials that generate a liquid phase during the
reaction. The research will fulfill a previously thought to be impossible task
of producing full or near-full density homogeneous composites and nanocomposites
via combustion synthesis without the application of external pressure or post
processing heat treatments. Through in-depth characterization and mechanical
properties investigations, the research will also establish the processing-
microstructure-properties relations for these new materials.