* 1560156
* Scaling limit in dispersive equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2015,06/30/2016
* Benoit Pausader, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 17,718.00

This project aims at developing the study of three fundamental equations from
physics. First, stability issues for the 2-fluids Euler-Maxwell equation, which
is one of the fundamental equations in plasma physics, are considered. The goal
is to prove that, under certain conditions, small perturbations of an
equilibrium will not develop shocks, and that, actually, the plasma will get
back to equilibrium, even in the absence of dissipation. Such a result would be
of great physical and mathematical importance as it is known to be false for the
compressible Euler equation in the absence of a self-consistent electromagnetic
field. In a second part, a study is made of the Schrodinger equation on a curved
background. In this case, many classical tools from the Euclidean theory break
down and one expects the appearance of many new phenomena due to the influence
of the geometry of the background. In particular, a study will be made of the
effect of the growth of the volume on the global existence and global behavior
of the solutions to the energy-critical equation. Finally, in a third part,
ideas developed before are used to upgrade some known results about the
homogeneous fourth-order equation to the more physical inhomogeneous equation.

Understanding how a fluid can be stabilized by a self-consistent electromagnetic
field in the absence of any friction represents a cross-disciplinary
collaboration between pure mathematics, applied mathematics, and physics, with
applications in fluid engineering. More specifically, proving that a plasma at
rest is stable under small perturbations would be a major physical discovery and
would most certainly greatly enhance our ways to control plasma. This is
especially fitting since plasma stability is one of the main factor limiting
performances in tokamaks. Finally, beyond industrial applications, plasma
represents the state of more than 99% of the matter in the universe and any work
providing better understanding of this state would be of great importance.
Dispersive equations and equations on curved spaces (manifolds) provide a rich
area of interaction between various branches of mathematics as well as between
different sciences. The study of equations on curved spaces is of interest to
geometers, analysts, and number theorists in mathematics, as well as to
theoretical physicists working in quantum chaos and general relativity. Fourth-
order equations naturally arise in many different branches of physics and
mathematics, especially those linked with elasticity and are critical to
understand phenomena as diverse as the movement (and possible oscillations and
breakdown) of bridges or the structure of blood vessels and the interaction
between their membranes and the biofluids.