* 1560460
* REU Site: Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at The University of Nevada Reno (RUSIS@UNR)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Javier Rojo, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 03/31/2017
* USD 398,061.00

Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at The University of
Nevada Reno (RUSIS@UNR) is the continuation of a successful (AMS award-winning)
summer REU site. The underlying motivation for the Institute is to attract more
students into graduate work in the Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, and
facilitate their transition into research work at a time when demand for human
resources with data analytic skills easily exceeds the supply. The RUSIS@UNR
program will prepare students to compete globally in a vibrant world where data-
driven decisions are becoming more prominent in all human endeavors. While the
program has been successful in motivating and enticing students to pursue
graduate careers in the statistical sciences, it also provides the necessary
tools for students to join the workforce in a wide range of professional
positions. From academic jobs, to jobs in the pharmaceutical companies, private
industry, government agencies and national laboratories, professional sports as
data analysts, and climate scientists, the job outlook for statisticians and
data scientists is excellent. The RUSIS@UNR objectives will be accomplished
through the following mechanisms: (1) Mentoring and research supervision, of 15
selected underrepresented minority undergraduate students and students with no
easy access to a career experience at their institution, through an intensive
core course in probability and statistics. In addition, topics in stochastic
processes, and statistical inference, with special emphasis on areas of current
interest will be discussed; (2) Engaging the students in research projects from
areas of current interest. Statistical thinking is ubiquitous in every aspect of
modern life. Data Mining, Big Data, Data Analytics, Knowledge Discovery are
terms that have been coined in the past to denote essentially the same thing:
activities related to the extraction of information from data to advance
science, technology, and society. Statistics provides the tools (from concepts
and methods to algorithms to operational software) needed to extract valid and
reliable information from large data sets of diverse origin, and provides the
methodologies to validate the models and quantify the inherent uncertainty. The
students will engage in projects selected from (a) areas of genomics,
metabolomics, proteomics, gene annotation, brain imaging, that rely to a very
high degree on large and high-dimensional data sets, (b) environmental sciences,
geophysics (including climate studies) astrophysics, cosmology, that regularly
collect terabytes of high-dimensional data containing essential information
about our World, and rely on knowledge extraction using tools inherent in
statistical techniques, and (c) autonomous systems (e.g. autonomous cars) that
make use of statistical techniques such as pattern recognition, statistical
learning, and dimension reduction methodologies. In the last few years, there
have been several national initiatives that require new statistical tools and
theories, as well as an increased production of modernly trained statisticians.
Prominent among these initiatives are: The brain initiative, the smart power
grid initiative, big data and data analytics, climate change, and precision
medicine; (3) Students will present their results at national meetings and they
will be mentored in the preparation and presentation of their talks. Short
courses in LaTeX, and software used for research purposes (Mathematica, MatLab,
R) will be taught; (4) Visits to scientific facilities (e.g., Desert Research
Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) will be organized. The
progress of students for seven years (expected time for them to finish graduate
school) after their participation will be monitored and annual evaluation of the
program by the participating students and an external advisory committee will
take place.