* 1560965
* CAREER: Mechanoregulation of Tenogenesis During Embryonic Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/06/2015,01/31/2019
* Catherine Kuo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2019
* USD 210,830.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
is to investigate how the cytoskeleton (internal cell scaffolding) of tendon
progenitor cells regulates developing tissue mechanical properties to influence
tendon formation. Tendon transmits forces from muscle to bone, and fails to
regenerate when injured, often resulting in permanent orthopedic dysfunction.
The premise of this study is that understanding how the tendon forms during
embryonic development will advance tendon regeneration strategies. Inside all
cells are cytoskeletal filaments that act as scaffolding to impart mechanical
integrity to a cell, and that also sense and transmit extracellular physical
forces as biological signals inside a cell. These signals can direct cells to
secrete and surround themselves with matrix, from which adult tissues derive
their mechanical properties. In turn, cells can sense these mechanical
properties and receive new signals, and so forth. However, this scenario is less
likely with embryonic tendon as the tissue is highly cellular and lower in
matrix content, leading to the question of from where do mechanical cues arise
during development, and how do they direct tendon formation? The goals of this
project are to investigate the cytoskeleton as a significant contributor to the
mechanical properties of highly cellular embryonic tendon, and to determine its
role in the mechanoregulation of new tendon formation. Toward that end, this
study will chemically modify the cytoskeletal network of tendon progenitor cells
in both embryonic tissues and simplified 3-dimensional engineered tendons, and
the resultant effects on embryonic tendon mechanical properties and new tissue
formation will be assessed with engineering and biological
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful outcomes of this study would advance the
field's understanding of embryonic tendon development, and significant roles the
cell cytoskeleton plays in this process. Knowledge gained could lead to improved
medical interventions for orthopedic disorders. Scientifically, this work could
have a transformative impact across biological fields since the cytoskeleton
influences important cell functions in tissue maintenance, aging and disease.
The educational objectives of this award focus on the recruitment and mentorship
of undergraduate engineering students as young scientists and educators, and on
outreach activities to educate the public about cutting-edge research at the
intersection of engineering and biology. This will be accomplished via
undergraduate student-driven research projects in the laboratory, course
projects in the classroom, and teaching events at the Museum of Science in
Boston and the Museum of Science in Rochester.