* 1560064
* REU Site: Penn State Cardiovascular Research: Engineering A Translational Experience (CREATE)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Keefe Manning, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2019
* USD 484,545.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Pennsylvania State
University-University Park, entitled Penn State Cardiovascular Research:
Engineering A Translational Experience (CREATE)," will expose students to
research that will elucidate cellular/molecular processes governing biological
responses to materials as applied to cardiovascular disease (CVD) and the
development of therapeutic CVD interventions. This focus on education in
cardiovascular disease (CVD) is extremely important and highly relevant for two
reasons. First, CVD remains the number one killer in the United States. Thus,
there is a great need to develop a pipeline of new engineers and scientists who
can become leaders in the detection, prevention, and treatment of the disease.
Second, the underlying etiology of CVD and its associated technologies combine
to form a perfect platform for training in the creative and integrative thinking
that is the hallmark of biomedical engineering. The objectives of this program
are: 1) To conduct research on multi-scale problems to improve the understanding
and treatment of CVD, 2) To apply the creative process to solve engineering
problems applied to CVD treatment or intervention, 3) To be able to describe the
process of translating research into marketable technology, and 4) To be able to
identify requirements for success in graduate and professional schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, this REU program will engage
undergraduate students in a 10-week intensive hands-on summer research and
professional development/training experience, where they will develop
proficiency in the underlying concepts and practice of cellular/molecular
engineering, microscopy, or computational methods in biomedical engineering
while integrating the creative process towards understanding CVD. The program
will include individual research projects with faculty research mentors,
seminars on safety training, research needs, and responsible conduct of
research, workshops on the creative process applied to research, medical device
development and intellectual property, outreach/dissemination of student
research, and a research symposium. Through these activities Penn State CREATE
will provide young researchers with new avenues of investigation, new
technologies in quantitative and analytical methods, and new opportunities in
novel diagnostic and interventional tools in medicine.