* 1560432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Explaining Public Opposition to Government  Assistance Programs
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Elizabeth Theiss-Morse, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* timothy nokken
* 04/30/2017
* USD 22,575.00

General Summary

A great deal of research in political science and psychology shows that racial
prejudice is a substantial component of race-based policy opposition. Some work
suggests that prejudice is most likely to play a role when racial appeals are
subtle and covert. Other work contends that people use higher-level cognitive
processes to inhibit prejudiced instincts and abide by egalitarian social norms
when race is explicit. In other words, when people are encouraged to think more
about racial policies, they should be able to recognize and restrain the racial
biases that might otherwise influence their opinions. This study test the
contention that higher-level cognitive processes reduce the role of prejudice
against the research hypothesis that higher-level cognitive processes may in
some instances reinforce and even exacerbate the role of prejudice because of
conscious motivations to reject egalitarian norms.

Technical Summary

Building on work in social neuroscience, this project uses functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to directly observe the neural mechanisms by which
prejudice influences policy attitudes. A 2 (race: White vs. Black) x 2
(conscious awareness: implicit/non-conscious racial primes vs.
explicit/conscious primes) within-subjects experiment is used to examine the
impact of racial biases on support for various government assistance programs
when the race of the programs' recipients is consciously versus subconsciously
known. The PI hypothesizes that racial biases will be stronger when race is
implicit, and that this relationship is mediated by increased activity in the
amygdala and right insula and decreased activity in the prefrontal cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex. However, the PI expects that racial biases will exist
when race is explicit. If the key to diminishing the role of prejudice is to get
people to think more about race, these biases will be due to a lack of
controlled processing even when race is explicitly indicated by lower levels of
activation in the prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex and increased
activity in the amygdala and right insula. However, if controlled processes
sometimes lead to reinforcement of prejudice, there will be no relationship
between racial biases in policy support and activation in the prefrontal cortex
or anterior cingulate cortex.