* 1560401
* REU Site:  Applied Mathematics Research Experience -- Theory, Applications, and Numerics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Michael Tobin, University of Houston - Downtown
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 280,000.00

This award provides support to the University of Houston-Downtown to host an
interdisciplinary research experience for undergraduates (REU) program developed
to build bridges between students with mathematical backgrounds and students
interested in engineering and biological sciences. Students will conduct
collaborative research projects requiring extensive application of mathematical
skills in interdisciplinary research teams. The program consists of three major
components: theory, experiments, and numerics, and it aims to provide students a
complete and balanced research experience. The program will host ten
undergraduate students each summer for eight weeks. The research experience has
been designed with three specific aims: (1) increase the number of
undergraduates, particularly under-represented groups, engaged in collaborative
research on projects that require quantitative methods in the sciences; (2)
train and educate students to communicate research findings effectively across
both the sciences and mathematics; (3) encourage students to pursue careers
employing the intellectual and computational skills featured in their REU
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students in this REU program will learn
and participate in the applied mathematics research fields that include problems
in solid mechanics and plant transport systems. The central theme is on the
governing partial differential equations, which include equations of linear
elasticity, transport equations, and diffusion equations. All projects also
include a laboratory and/or fieldwork component that gives students a firsthand
experience in collecting data underlying the models. These models will be
studied through a combination of qualitative analysis and numerical simulation.
Effects of parameter variation will be surveyed to interpret the results and to
formulate practical conclusions. All student participants will apply a complete
cycle of the scientific method.