* 1560242
* REU Site: Ocean and Coastal ResEArch ExperieNces for UndergraduateS (REU-OCEANUS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Patrick Louchouarn, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2020
* USD 390,259.00

A new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at Texas A&amp;M
University Galveston (TAMUG), which is located on the Texas Gulf Coast, will be
established with this award. The REU Site: Ocean and Coastal Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU-OCEANUS) will host ten participants in each
summer for three years during a 10-week REU program. Students will have the
opportunity to conduct independent, marine-focused research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REUs will work in active research labs, be mentored by the
research faculty and use state-of-the-art scientific facilities and resources.
Participating faculty mentors from the Department of Marine Biology, Department
of Marine Sciences and Department of Ocean Engineering will engage REUs in
ongoing diverse research topics including: Gulf of Mexico coastal wetlands
response to climate change; shark feeding ecology; hydrozoan biodiversity;
tsunami modeling; Texas coast paleoclimatology, sedimentology, physical/chemical
oceanography and geology; Caribbean reef fish speciation; and Arctic Ocean
biogeochemistry. REU students will gain skills in communicating their research
by completing a research prospectus, a mock research budget and budget
justification, an oral presentation, a Research Symposium oral and poster
presentation, and a three-minute video abstract. The program will engage
students in various enrichment activities, including research seminars given by
the faculty, graduate school planning and workshops designed to enhance REU
scholar success and to highlight various career options. The site will recruit
students from diverse backgrounds with active recruitment efforts nationwide and
at institutions serving as alliance partner institutions of the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation Programs in Texas.