* 1560625
* BIGDATA: Mid-Scale: ESCE: DCM: Collaborative Research: DataBridge - A Sociometric System for Long-Tail Science Data Collections
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2015,10/31/2016
* Justin Zhan, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 10/31/2016
* USD 102,961.00

DataBridge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are currently thousands of scientists
creating millions of data sets describing an increasingly diverse matrix of
social and physical phenomena. This rapid increase in both amount and diversity
of data implies a corresponding increase in the potential of data to empower
important new collaborative research initiatives. However, the sheer volume and
diversity of data presents a new set of challenges in locating all of the data
relevant to a particular line of research. Taking full advantage of the unique
data managed by the "long-tail of science" requires new tools specifically
created to assist scientists in their search for relevant data sets. DataBridge
is an e-science collaboration environment tool designed specifically for the
exploration of a rich set of sociometric tools and the corresponding space of
relevance algorithms, and their adaptation to define semantic bridges that link
large numbers of diverse datasets into a sociometric network. Data from several
large NSF funded projects will be analyzed to develop relevance-based data
discovery methods. Sociometric network analysis (SNA) algorithms will be used to
explore the space of relevancy (different ways data can be related to each
other) by metadata and ontology, by pattern analysis and feature extraction, and
via human connections. By linking data, human interactions, and usage methods
and practices, rich models of social networks inter-connecting massive long tail
science data can be created that enhance scientific collaboration and discovery.
DataBridge supports advances in Science and Engineering by directly enabling and
improving discovery of relevant scientific data across large, distributed and
diverse collections. The system will also provide an easy means of publishing
data to the DataBridge and incentivize data producers to do so by enabling
collaboration and citation. The design will be domain-agnostic and highly
extensible and adaptive, supporting inclusion of new relevance algorithms and
indexing techniques. DataBridge will be distributed under an open source license
enabling wider use and crowd-sourced improvements of the technology. The
concepts developed in the project - semantically linking data through
sociometric network analysis - will have an impact on non-scientific data
collections and will effectively improve access and discovery of information
over the web.