* 1560012
* REU Site: Biological Materials and Processes (BioMaP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Andrew Hillier, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2019
* USD 352,062.00

This renewal of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Iowa
State University entitled, Biological Materials and Processes (BioMaP), will
create novel research experiences for a talented and diverse group of
undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented populations, with
limited access to STEM research opportunities. The cross-disciplinary nature of
BioMaP enables students to discover the exciting biology/interface and will
focus on two research themes. (1) Biological Materials - The interface between
biology and materials can be exploited to design robust materials with unique
properties. In this context, biological materials are synthetic materials that
interact with biological molecules/systems in specific ways to promote
biological function. The students will work on projects that include working
with new techniques for using bacteriophages as sensors, new thermochemical
processing methods for biomass in fluidized bed reactors, and new biosensors for
use in pancreatic cancer diagnostics. (2) Biological Processes - A fundamental
knowledge of biological processes will be critical in the future chemical
industry. Students will be exposed to this area through projects on protein
recovery from transgenic plants, molecular modeling of peptide mimics, and
metabolic engineering of alkaloids. Students will be exposed to exciting
research experiences of working in a global environment where their research
will evolve from dependent to independent status and they will attain life-long
learning skills that will impact their contributions to engineering, science and
society.

Over a three year period, this REU Site program will engage undergraduate
students in a 10-week intensive, summer research experience focused on the two
research themes of Biological Materials and Biological Processes. The students
will be active members of inter-disciplinary groups and will interact with a
faculty team that is diverse, has broad research interests and an outstanding
record of mentoring undergraduate students. The REU students will participate in
cohort experiences such as short courses, joint seminars/meetings, workshops,
tours of research facilities, and field trips. Formalized written reports and
poster presentations will be used to develop communication skills and
significant follow-up will insure that the participants are given the greatest
opportunity to pursue careers in Chemical and Biological Engineering. At the end
of the summer program, the students will participate in a joint poster symposium
together with students from other ISU undergraduate research programs.