* 1560078
* REU Site: Effects of political upheaval and ethnic discord on the mental health of a population
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Nathan Tintle, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 383,504.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate, with joint support and funding from the
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE). As an REU Site with
international activities, it has both scientific and societal benefits, and it
integrates research and education at multiple levels. The research in this
program involves mental health, from a social/behavioral science perspective.
Long-term effects of deep-rooted tensions in any country and within any
population can include political upheaval, socio-economic disadvantages, ethnic
discord and rapid change from one economic system to another; all these factors
can have an effect on the rates of mental illness in that population. This REU
Site's research program directly impacts a group of 27 undergraduate students
over a three year period by broadening students' global awareness and cross-
cultural competence through a meaningful, interdisciplinary research experience
focusing on a case study for elevated levels of mental illness in a country that
has been going through multiple transitions. The case study is Ukraine in post-
Soviet era. As part of this REU site, a diverse group of undergraduate students
are involved in an ongoing research project exploring the mental health of
Ukrainian citizens. In this REU site the PI-team recruits students with an
emphasis on the participation of students participants from under-represented
groups and institutions where research opportunities are limited. These students
will further broaden the impact of their research experience by presenting to
high school students and students at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is focused on a topic of research that is of
great interest in the fields of sociology and social psychology. The program
incorporates an on-site collaborative research and cultural immersion experience
for students in Ukraine, working directly with collaborators at the Kiev
International Institute of Sociology (a national research firm in Ukraine). The
project provides strong mentorship and development of undergraduate student
researchers by an interdisciplinary team of four experienced faculty members, in
conjunction with a team of worldwide experts on Ukraine mental health and, and
it provides some of the only nationally representative information on mental
health risk factors and impacts in Ukraine. The dataset students will be able to
use in this project is innovative and unique in the fields of psychology and
global health studies. Analyzing these types of global data as a means of
training students for future work in psychology and/or health studies means that
the work itself has intellectual merit, but that inasmuch as this affects future
generations of scholars, it also has long-term impact on the fields. Making
American students aware of the cultural biases they bring to the table when
analyzing global data is crucial for producing good future science. This project
is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.