* 1560667
* Collaborative Research:  Biotic Surveys of Central Saharan Oases
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2015,07/31/2016
* David Blackburn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2016
* USD 87,524.00

This collaborative research project aims to survey comprehensively the fauna of
isolated desert oases in Libya and Egypt. Surveys will focus on vertebrate and
parasite diversity, with focal research on amphibians, fishes, reptiles,
mollusks, and schistosome and hematozoan parasites. Using new GIS data and geo-
referenced historical records, the geographical relationship between the
Mediterranean and sub-Saharan faunas will be mapped. With a new collection of
specimens that includes tissue samples, long-standing biogeographic hypotheses
will be tested via molecular phylogenetic methods. By revisiting historical
localities, important new data will be provided on changes in faunal composition
driven by recent aridification. Analyses of new genetic, morphological, and
ecological data will also provide a window into the evolutionary dynamics of
refugial populations, including adaptation to extreme environments. Specimens,
tissues, and data will be deposited in publicly accessible U.S. museum
collections and databases and will serve as an important resource for future
work on North African biodiversity. New distributional data on parasites,
including schistosome worms, and on venomous snakes will have a direct effect on
managing human health. These isolated oases are threatened by climate change,
including a water table that is diminishing because of regional changes in water
utilization; the investigators' surveys will draw attention to the fragility of
these irreplaceable ecosystems. Through collaboration with foreign and U.S.
museums, important historical specimen collections from Libya and Egypt will be
updated and curated. This project includes diverse specialties and institutions,
and integrates North African researchers and students in fieldwork and the
resulting research. Undergraduate and graduate students will be included in both
field surveys and subsequent research. This project will provide the resources
for conducting taxonomic revisions, pursuing broad-scale phylogeographic
studies, and applying molecular genetic tools to long-standing problems in
African biogeography. This project is co-funded by the National Science
Foundation's Office of International Science and Engineering.