* 1560838
* Direct Conversion of Carbon into Diamond and Useful Micro and Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on direct conversion of carbon
into diamond at ambient temperatures and atmospheric pressures in air. By NCSU's
transformative approach, carbon can be converted into so-called Q-carbon (named
because of laser quenching) and diamond in a variety of useful nanostructures
and microstructures in the form of nanoscale needles, microscale needles,
nanoscale dots, microscale crystals, and large-area single-crystal films on
practical substrates such as sapphire, glass and heat-sensitive polymers. These
microscale and nanoscale structures have potential applications, e.g., as
cutting tools and high-speed machining; and in high-power, quantum computing
devices, and biomedical devices. The goals in this very critical stage are to
develop a basic understanding and address issues related to scale-up and
manufacturing of diamond-related products. This project has a strong education
value through training of graduate students in this exciting new area in
collaboration with NC A&amp;T faculty and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research addresses
fundamental understanding and investigations of basic mechanisms involved in the
direct conversion of carbon into diamond. By using nanosecond pulsed laser
irradiation, carbon is melted in a highly undercooled state at 4000 K (over 1000
K below the melting point of carbon). This state is then quenched to form
Q-carbon (a new phase of carbon) or diamond or a mixture of both; the result
depends on the degree of undercooling. Q-carbon has many exciting new
properties, including ferromagnetism, super hardness and enhanced field emission
for next-generation displays. Q-carbon is converted into diamond by laser
irradiation with a second laser pulse. By controlling interfacial instability
during rapid quenching nanodots, microdots, nanoneedles and microneedles are
created with a single nanosecond laser pulse; the entire process is completed in
less than two hundred nanoseconds. This novel approach provides an inexpensive
way to convert carbon into diamond and harvest various structures conveniently
for a variety of applications. This research expands our fundamental knowledge
base on laser-solid interactions and transient thermal processing of materials,
and on the critical role of structure, defects and chemistry in the properties
of novel Q-carbon and diamond-based structures.