* 1560519
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Tuning Catalyst Surfaces to Control Aldol Reactions in Biomass Conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2015,07/31/2017
* Friederike Jentoft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2017
* USD 168,784.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the NSF Division of Chemistry supports
Professor Jentoft of the University of Oklahoma in Norman in investigating
heterogeneously catalyzed aldol condensation reactions for biomass conversion.
This endeavor will be undertaken in collaboration with Karen Wilson at the
Cardiff Catalysis Institute in Wales in the UK, whose research will be supported
by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of the UK (EPSRC).
Aldol condensation is a key chemical transformation for the conversion of small
oxygenates from biomass to fungible fuels because it increases carbon chain
length and reduces oxygen content. The PIs will synthesize families of novel
materials that differ in acid-base properties, surface hydrophobicity, and
morphology. The catalytic performance in aldol condensations using diagnostic
and bio-oil-representative reactants will be tested. The acquired knowledge will
allow the development of improved solid aldol condensation catalysts that are
highly selective and stable in aggressive media.

The investigated chemical transformation, aldol condensation, is a key step in
the production of second generation bio-fuels and plays a role in several
commercial chemical processes. The proposed research will provide the
fundamental insight that is necessary to develop novel materials that catalyze
this transformation with great efficiency, that is, without excessive energy
input or generation of chemical waste. The program will also provide cross-
disciplinary scientific and technical training and an international exchange
experience for the involved researchers. US students will have the opportunity
to perform research and participate in educational activities within the Cardiff
Catalysis Institute, a center of excellence in the UK established at Cardiff
University.