* 1560239
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Fluid Power
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Kim Stelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 404,486.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
Minnesota, NSF Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Compact and Efficient Fluid
Power (CCEFP) will expose a diverse group of undergraduate students to the
transformational research underway in hydraulics and pneumatics in the hope that
they will become the academic and industry leaders of the future. The CCEFP is a
network of researchers, educators, students and industry working together to
transform the fluid power industry--how it is researched applied and studied.
CCEFP research projects are organized into three thrusts that achieve the
following societal benefits: creation of new fluid power technology that, with
improved efficiency, will significantly reduce petroleum consumption, energy use
and pollution; creation of new fluid power technology that, with improved
effectiveness, will make fluid power clean, quiet and safe for its millions of
users; and creation of new fluid power technology that with improved
compactness, will exploit its attributes in a new generation of human scale
devices and equipment. The University of Minnesota is the lead institution of
the CCEFP ERC. Institution partners include Purdue University, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Georgia Institute of Technology, Vanderbilt
University, and the Milwaukee School of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
REU Site offers opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in fluid
power research during a 10-week summer program, on a wide range of topics
including: hydraulics, pneumatics, power supplies, tribology, wind power,
pneumatic medical devices, noise-vibration-harshness, and fluids. This REU Site
will take advantage of CCEFP's unique ability to leverage the power and
potential of its broad menu of research projects, the opportunities afforded to
pursue these projects in well-equipped laboratories at partner universities, and
the subject matter expertise of its faculty. Highlights for REU participants
include: 1) immersion in one of CCEFP 16+ research projects and test beds under
the supervision of faculty and graduate student mentors; 2)access to state-of-
the-art fluid power research facilities; 3) participation in the bi-weekly CCEFP
webcasts on fluid power research and professional development topics, led by
academic and industry experts; 4)the Fluid Power Boot Camp at the outset of the
program in which REU students from all sites will gather in one location for an
intensive short course on fluid power and an introduction to CCEFP research; 5)
an invitation and travel grant to attend CCEFP's Fluid Power Innovation &amp;
Research Conference (FPIRC)--the premier fluid power technical conference in
North America; and interaction with industry leaders from the CCEFP's member
supporters. This REU Site will focus on engaging students from institutions
without significant research opportunities, women, underrepresented minorities,
persons with disabilities, and military veterans in CCEFP activities. This is
one way the CCEFP strives to change the traditional face of the fluid power
industry to better reflect the diverse composition of the United States.