* 1560534
* Collaborative Research: Vulnerabilities in Critical Global Trade Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Ashley Carse, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,834.00

Scientific interest in infrastructure has tried to understand the mechanical,
human, and natural forces that impact the flow of information and services.
These infrastructures have become increasingly dependent on the global movement
of goods and peoples. The global systems that deliver these resources, however,
are inevitably funneled through bottlenecks or "chokepoints", such as canals,
tunnels, maritime straights, border crossings, etc. Constricting the flow of
materials and people, such chokepoints are both vital to national and economic
interests, and uniquely vulnerable, dynamic, and prone to disturbances. Not
surprisingly, governments, corporations, and communities have taken a keen
interest in securing and regulating these sites. Little is known, however, about
how these passageways actually work. This collaborative project seeks to explore
how local communities, environments, and infrastructures interact to allow
passage through these sites (or not), as well how ordinary (and sometimes
extraordinary) events at chokepoints affect economic systems, security, and
lives well beyond these points of passage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christopher
Middleton and Gabriela Valdivia of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Ashley Carse of Vanderbilt University, Jatin Dua of the University of
Michigan at Ann Arbor, Elizabeth Dunn of Indiana University, and Jason Cons of
the University of Texas at Austin, will explore six chokepoints around the
world. Each member of the team is an expert in their region of study. Each will
focus on a particular kind of chokepoint. These include: the Panama Canal, a
tunnel in Russia, a land bridge in India, an oil-refinery and pipelines in
Ecuador, a network of rivers in Bangladesh, and a maritime strait leading into
the Red Sea. The researchers will utilize extensive interviews, observation, and
first-person engagement with officials, workers, and chokepoint residents in
order to understand the distinctly human dimensions of these transit zones.
Bringing together data from around the world, this study will provide a
strategic reassessment of the global movement of goods, information, and people
by examining these vital and dynamic points of national and world interest. The
results will speak directly to current concerns over migration, security, and
economic wellbeing. In doing so, this project promises to alter the ways
governments, industries, and others understand and engage with these critical
transit points of the world today.