* 1560035
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Keivan Stassun, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2019
* USD 369,231.00

Training the next generation of physicists for American competitiveness and
technological leadership&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American competitiveness in basic
science research and technology development depends crucially on a highly
skilled, trained physics workforce. Physics is foundational to much of the
fundamental research activity of US research and development efforts. The
Vanderbilt University Summer REU program offers undergraduate physics students
the opportunity to work closely with faculty on forefront research projects in a
variety of subfields of physics. The areas include astronomy, biological
physics, condensed matter physics including nanoscience, laser physics, nuclear
physics, and particle physics. The research mentors are all well funded
researchers and all have committed to personally directing the students. The
extensive research infrastructure, including the facilities of several large
interdisciplinary centers, will be available to the students. Physics students
will have the opportunity to visit major facilities at government laboratories,
both domestic and international, including FermiLab, Brookhaven, Oak Ridge, and
CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the program's emphasis on leadership
development, the program includes training in ethical conduct of research, and
as part of the program's emphasis on developing the future workforce includes a
focus on broadening participation of underrepresented groups in physics. The REU
program will achieve broad impact. In particular, the track record of the
program over the past six years shows that a high percentage of the participants
will be underrepresented minority students, and the track record moreover shows
that more than half of the participants will be from institutions with limited
research opportunities. Finally, to achieve sustained impact, the program is
designed to build ties between the Vanderbilt mentors, all of whom are supported
with appropriate salary, and faculty at the student's home institution. This
builds a larger community, provides for continued support for the student, and
enhances the ability for continued mentoring and research participation of the
student beyond the REU site experience.