* 1560594
* The Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Hyperspectral Imaging (IDREHSI)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2021
* USD 408,587.00

Recent technological developments and the increased availability of laboratory,
airborne, and satellite hyperspectral imaging (HI) data have led to a growing
demand for HI related jobs which calls for greater learning, understanding, and
use of HI for various applications. The REU Site - Interdisciplinary Research
Experience in Hyperspectral Imaging (IDREHSI) program at the University of
Northern Iowa is an 8-week summer school that introduces 10 undergraduate
students each year to a highly interdisciplinary research environment with a
unifying theme of fundamental and applied research in HI. Student participants
will have opportunities to engage in HI based research in various STEM fields
such as geographic information science, earth science, environmental science,
physics, biology, computer science, and atmospheric science for different
applications. Specifically, they will: (1) be exposed to existing scientific
approaches and experimental methods in HI, (2) develop skills that make students
competitive in academic and professional environments, (3) be involved in
scientific investigations that prepares them for graduate studies and/or
professional careers, (4) operate in highly interdisciplinary research settings
and work across disciplinary boundaries in problem-based research, (5) improve
their capability for learning independently, and (6) provide opportunities to
discuss ethical issues related to collection and use of data, experimental
design, and professional standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual core
and unifying theme of the IDREHSl REU program is the science of HI that deals
with the acquisition, processing, analysis and interpretation of spectra
represented by multiple contiguous bands in a wide range of electromagnetic
radiation wavelengths. The program builds on years of HI-related research
activities by the research-mentors who work in different areas of HI science and
will integrate their research with education by developing REU projects that can
be completed by undergraduates during an eight week program. These projects are
either lab-based (involving microscopic level data spectral analysis of
materials such as minerals and chemical contamination, soil cores,
photovoltaics, and other electro-optical characterization) or field-based
(allowing outdoor data collection including the monitoring and estimation of
water quality, crop condition assessment, wetland mapping, soil and sediment
mapping, invasive species mapping and modeling, urban planning, and crop yield
prediction). Participants will gain professional and personal experiences that
are particularly valuable for young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site
is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.