* 1560139
* REU Site: Models in Evolution, Ecology and Systematics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Deborah Smith, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2019
* USD 239,610.00

This REU Site award to the University of Kansas (KU), located in Lawrence, KS,
will support the training of ten students for ten weeks during the summers of
2017-2018. Housed within the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, the
program focuses on the use of models in evolution, ecology and systematics.
Students conduct full-time independent research with a faculty mentor on a topic
that interests them. Students also participate in workshops covering topics
including the responsible conduct of research, career opportunities in industry
and academia, the graduate school application process, and professional
communication skills. REU students will have access to mentors' labs, field
sites, museum collections, and core facilities such as the electron microscopy
lab, DNA core laboratory, bioinformatics center, and a genomics facility.
Biology, mathematics and computer science students are encouraged to apply,
particularly those who are underrepresented in STEM fields and those from
primarily undergraduate institutions or community colleges. Students will be
selected by the director and assistant director in conjunction with the mentors
based on academic record, research performance, and potential for research.

It is anticipated that a total of 20 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. By engaging in
mentored, independent research, students will learn how science is conducted in
an ethically responsible manner as well as be able to improve their problem
solving and research skills. Students will also gain useful skills in
disseminating their research to diverse audiences. It is expected that many
students will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after completion of the program in order to determine their career
paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://eebreu.ku.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jennifer Gleason at
eebreu@ku.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Deborah Smith, eebreu@ku.edu).