* 1560732
* Collaborative Research: Design and modeling of novel superconducting circuits with coherent phase slips
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Alex Levchenko, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 83,522.00

Superconductivity is a quantum phenomenon that manifests itself as an abrupt
disappearance of resistivity in certain materials as temperature is lowered
below their critical temperature. Recent advances in the nanometer size
fabrication, materials science and high precision measurements made it possible
to investigate a variety of novel superconducting nanosystems, which were almost
unthinkable only a few years ago. Specifically the studies of quantum transport
phenomena in nanoscale superconducting wires and circuits made of them are
rapidly emerging as one of the central themes of modern physics and engineering.
As wire is made narrower, a variety of intriguing quantum effects becomes
apparent. Strong spatial confinement leads to intricate electron correlations
that influence superconducting properties of the structure. Ultimately
superconductivity could be gradually extinguished and some wires may display
pronounced insulating behavior, leading to the so-called superconductor-
insulator transition. Superconductors are extremely attractive systems from the
point of view of future applications as they could become elementary building
blocks for memory bits of quantum computers and other devices operating on
coherent quantum tunneling events. The main aim of this joint project is to
harness the power of quantum coherence, address the urgent problems of
nanoscale-circuit-superconductivity at the frontier of current research, and
discover new physics in this exciting field. Our approach will be to combine the
expertise of a condensed matter theorist and an experimentalist both having
extended experience in related fields. The collaborative structure of the
research will provide a rich environment for training students in a broad
spectrum of experimental nanoscience and theoretical condensed matter physics.
Educational aspects will be further integrated through the development of
courses directly related to the proposed research and through research-related
seminars, science olympiads, and meetings that target high-school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to study emergent
quantum transport phenomena in the modern nanoscale superconducting circuits
driven far from equilibrium and populated with coherent phase slips to reveal
the ultimate fate of superconducting correlations in the new domain of external
conditions and environments. A substantial part of the proposed research is
devoted to stochastic kinetics of the coherent phase slips in superconducting
nanowires, nanowire-bridged resonators, and interferometers. The focus in on the
mutual role of microwave bias and a magnetic field on the reentrant
superconductivity, statistics of the supercurrent switching, bi-stability and
current-voltage characteristics, and a study of even-odd parity effects for the
phase slip tunneling events. Suggested studies of the excess shot noise, carried
across the superconducting transition, will provide additional insights into the
microscopic mechanisms of the relaxation and fluctuations. The project also
dwells into the new area of exploring proximity-induced superconductivity
between superconducting and semiconducting heterostructures that host
topological order. This research direction aims to answer the key questions
concerning robustness and stability of the topological protection to effects of
interactions, disorder and other relevant perturbations. The long-term goal of
this project is to develop novel superconducting qubits with coherent phase
slips for quantum circuit electrodynamics applications. The proposed
architecture designs are based on the phase-slip-junction, the phase-slip-
oscillator and an alternative device based on the supercurrent carrying inductor
with tunable nonlinearity. The success and completion of this proposal will be
of value for the technological advances in the information processing and the
photon detection. The technical and theoretical methods that will be developed
as a part of this proposal are relevant to a much wider class of problems in the
quantum physics of many-body systems. The results of the proposed work will be
widely disseminated in publications, seminars, colloquia and conference
presentations. Students working under this project will receive extensive
training by studying modern aspects of the condensed matter physics, developing
new conceptual approaches to nonequilibrium superconducting systems and pursuing
original research. As a part of the diversity and educational initiatives PIs
will expand research opportunities for the undergraduate students of
underrepresented groups and contribute to the science olympiad interscholastic
competition program.