* 1560048
* REU Site:  Sustainable RIVER (Remediating InVasives to Encourage Resilience)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Meghann Jarchow, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 323,864.00

REU Site: Sustainable RIVER (Remediating InVasives to Encourage
Resilience)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to the University of South
Dakota, located in Vermillion, SD, will support the training of 10 students for
11 weeks during the summers of 2017-2019. REU students participating in the
Sustainable RIVER project will examine the functioning and management of the
Missouri River as a lens through which to study complex, interdisciplinary
systems. Through individual research projects with faculty mentors from USD's
multi-disciplinary Missouri River Institute, students will address the question
of how invasive elements in the Missouri River and its uplands affect the
sustainability of the river and the humans who depend on it. Students will also
meet as a team weekly to integrate knowledge gained from the individual projects
to create a team project to address the question of how a more resilient
Missouri River, which meets the needs of multiple stakeholders and sustains
diverse, functioning ecosystems, can be cultivated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of thirty students will be trained in the program.
Active recruitment efforts will focus on Native American students, students in
sustainability programs across the US, and students attending 2- and 4-year
institutions in South Dakota. There will be an explicit focus in the Sustainable
RIVER project on the critical pedagogy of place, where students learn how to
live sustainably in places that have been disrupted while learning to recognize
and address the causes of such disruptions. The Sustainable RIVER project will
create student scientists who will become leaders in interdisciplinary research
and leaders in creating a more sustainable society through their development of
a multi-perspective, systems-thinking approach to understanding and addressing
complex challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://SustainableRIVER.org or by contacting the PI (Dr. Meghann Jarchow at
Meghann.Jarchow@usd.edu). This REU site is co-funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences), and the
Division of Earth Sciences (Directorate for Geosciences).