* 1560592
* Social Circle Panel for Studying the Accuracy of Social Judgements
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Mirta Galesic, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 89,752.00

This research project will examine the feasibility, challenges, and potential
solutions to collecting valid and reliable data about how people's judgments of
their social environments correspond to objective indicators about those
environments. The literature in social psychology suggests that human social
cognition is fraught with a host of cognitive and motivational biases that are
difficult to explain within a coherent theoretical framework. In contrast,
research in other fields studying human social behavior as well as some studies
in the area of social cognition suggest that people are well attuned to their
immediate social environments and that apparent biases may be caused by
methodological problems. The data collected in this pilot project will inform
this debate and help researchers from psychology, sociology, computational
social science, and other fields build more coherent models of cognitive
processes underlying social judgments. Many public educational programs rely on
spread of knowledge and behaviors through people's networks. Project findings
regarding the accuracy of human social judgments will have implications for
those programs. The data will be archived in the public repository Open Science
Collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test the
feasibility of building an innovative methodological tool called the social
circle panel to study the accuracy of people's judgments about the presence of
different beliefs and behaviors in their social environments. Social circles
will be defined by the frequency of contact. The online panel will aim to
include participants with diverse sociodemographic characteristics as well as
members of their social circles or personal networks. The panel will enable both
the elicitation of subjective judgments of beliefs and behaviors in individuals'
social circles, and the evaluation of those judgments against objective data
collected from the members of their social circles. It also will enable
measurement of the stability of people's judgments over time and the
investigation of whether changes in one's social circle are reflected in one's
judgments. Building the panel will require dealing with a number of
methodological challenges ranging from biased samples to panel contamination.
The data produced by this pilot study will be useful for researchers who wish to
use similar tools to understand cognitive processes underlying network effects.