* 1560166
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Enforcing Pollution Regulations in Authoritarian Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2016
* Kevin O'Brien, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 18,648.00

General Summary

This research project explains how authoritarian countries enforce pollution
regulation. Moreover, this research examines the interactions between national
and subnational institutions as they relate to enforcement of pollution
regulation. This project examines how two major institutions have created
divergent incentives structures for local bureaucrats that produce the following
research questions: 1) Does the fact that budget-poor bureaucrats are dependent
on polluting firms make budget-poor bureaucrats more likely to defy the central
authority and protect polluters than their budget-rich counterparts?; 2)Do state
ownership of firms make it easier for local officials to obtain compliance from
certain polluters? By highlighting the impact of state institutions on
bureaucratic behavior, this project draws attention to under-explored structural
explanations for why government agents systematically defy-or obey-government
leaders. It also examines the tools and strategies authoritarian leaders use to
confront emerging governance crisis.

Technical Summary

This research project explains how authoritarian countries enforce pollution
regulation. Moreover, this research examines the interactions between national
and subnational institutions as they relate to enforcement of pollution
regulation. Using China as the case of interest, this project draws on case
study research and statistical analysis to ascertain when officials in China's
283 prefecture-level cities choose to punish-or protect-polluters. The
quantitative component uses two original datasets to test for key variables
associated with weak enforcement of pollution regulation in China: First, using
NASA satellite data, the PI compiles a database on the level of pollution
violations in 283 cities. Second, to assess how firm ownership affects pollution
enforcement, the PI compiles data on individual firm characteristics of all
major polluting firms in the 283 cities. The PI project then uses interview
research with regulators (local officials) and the regulated (polluting firms)
to explain the patterns revealed by quantitative data. Interviews are conducted
in two regions of China with contrasting records on pollution to understand how
incentives to enforce pollution regulation may vary in these two regions. The PI
focuses on the motivations of individual officials and factory owners. This
study provides important understanding on the incentive structure that regulates
administrative behavior in authoritarian regimes.