* 1560262
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Physiology and Neurobiology at UCONN
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* J. Larry Renfro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2019
* USD 305,170.00

This REU Site award to the University of Connecticut, located in Storrs, CT,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2016-2018. The Department of Physiology and Neurobiology (PNB) will offer
research opportunities to undergraduate sophomores and juniors from non-Ph.D.
granting institutions. The students will participate in graduate level research
projects on physiological and neural systems in animals. The goal is to expose
students to a career in scientific research, and to increase student
applications to graduate programs in basic science. Students are selected on the
basis of their academic record, personal and professional goals described in a
required essay, and letters of recommendation. Interested students, especially
underrepresented minorities, veterans, first-generation college students, and
students with disabilities from institutions with limited research opportunities
are encouraged to apply. REU students will be part of a campus multidisciplinary
REU community consisting of several programs in the physical sciences and
engineering as well as physiology and neurobiology. Students are housed
together, and work with faculty mentors on their own research project.
Professional development and cohort-building activities are planned. Seminars
introduce students to topics such as safe practices in the laboratories, ethical
issues in science, how to apply to graduate school, and how to present research
results effectively. An end-of-program symposium features student platform talks
and poster presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting http://www.pnb.uconn.edu/research-experience-
for-undergraduates-reu-program/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Xinnian Chen at
xinnian.chen@uconn.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Larry Renfro at
larry.renfro@uconn.edu)