* 1560194
* REU Site:  Training Undergraduates in Electrochemical Technologies for Clean Fuels (Biofuels and Hydrogen) Production and Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Sandeep Kumar, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 359,450.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Old Dominion
University (ODU) engages undergraduate students traditionally underrepresented
in STEM fields in hands-on research in the fields of electrochemical clean fuel
production and applications, including solar fuel production, biofuels upgrading
and production, and fuel cell materials and applications. The U.S. pioneered the
development of these technologies, and continues to lead the way from
laboratories to commercial markets. However there is a general lack of
understanding and awareness of these technologies in the public and also among
the stakeholders. This REU Site will help in educating and preparing
undergraduate students in this area and play a role in the development of energy
professionals for a sustainable society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site
offers opportunities for undergraduate students, working with faculty mentors
and industry professionals, to engage in multidisciplinary electrochemical clean
fuel research activities during a 10-week summer program. In addition to active
energy research projects mentored by faculty from the College of Engineering,
students will participate in research seminars, workshops on writing and
communications training, field trips to industries related to clean energy, and
career development activities. Recruitment of REU Site participants will target
12 collaborating institutions which include Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and undergraduate institutions with limited STEM research
activities.