* 1560916
* Territory management in organizations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Polzer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 05/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The main objective of this project is to further scholarly understanding about
the phenomenon of territory management among groups in organizations. Territory
management in organizations is a natural behavior stemming from evolutionary
pressures to reinforce or expand one's own group's territory within an
environment, but can have both beneficial and harmful outcomes in modern day
organizations. While beneficial outcomes of territory management in
organizations can include decision efficacy, team cohesion, and clear
expectations about work, harmful outcomes include lost market share, missed
opportunities, gridlock, and a cycle of relational deterioration among groups.
Little is currently understood about what territory management looks like in
organizations, what the conditions are that lead to harmful versus beneficial
consequences, and how territory management might be reinforced in organizations.
The proposed research uses a mixed method approach to study this phenomenon in
organizations. Two studies will be conducted. The first involves a qualitative
study into the behaviors and forms through which territory management manifests
in organizations, and possible conditions that lead to harmful versus beneficial
effects. The second study will involve a dynamic computation modeling study to
test factors that may reinforce cycles of territory management in organizations.
Findings will be used to help managers identify if a cycle of territory
management among their groups is occurring and possible leverage points they may
have to break the loop of territory management among their groups if necessary.
Further, the proposed research will help future researchers more advantageously
target their resources in conducting research on cross-group conflict over
organizational territories.

Territory management in organizations is a natural behavior stemming from
evolutionary pressures to reinforce or expand one's own group's territory within
an environment, but can have both beneficial and harmful outcomes in modern day
organizations. The current project seeks to better understand this phenomenon in
organizations using a mixed method approach by (1) collecting empirical data to
articulate the behaviors and forms in which territory management between groups
manifest, and to begin linking these behaviors and forms to antecedents and
consequences; (2) formally modeling key theoretical features relevant to
territory management among groups in organizations through a computational model
informed by literature and data from the empirical study; and (3) begin testing
propositions and emergent predictions within the extended theoretical space that
only computational modeling allows (e.g., enabling the exploration of emergent
outcomes arising from individual groups interacting and reacting to one another
and their environment over time). This project will help develop and refine a
conceptual model of territory management and offer a new lens through which to
understand cross-group interactions. A territory management lens has the
potential to synthesize aspects of intergroup conflict, such as group identity,
finite resources, uncertainty and change, legitimacy, and control and autonomy,
into a more parsimonious model. The proposed computational modeling approach
will help to test which variables are fundamental in a system view of territory
management, while the proposed empirical study may help begin to untangle what
types of territory management behaviors may be beneficial or harmful to groups
(and their organizations).