* 1560668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Disconnected and Uninformed:  Dissecting and Dismantling India's Political Gender Gap
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Soledad Prillaman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2017
* USD 18,657.00

General Summary

Despite the growing focus on female empowerment in the developing world, many
women remain largely excluded from the political process and a substantial
gender gap in political participation persists today. Across the globe, women
accounted for only 17% of members of parliament in 2009, up from 10% in 1995.
Evidence suggests that when women are actively engaged in politics, public goods
are allocated differently and development outcomes improve. This project seeks
to understand better why women in developing countries are disengaged from
politics and to identify the mechanisms through which the prevailing political
gender gap is reduced. Contrary to seminal work in the U.S., the PI argues that
low levels of women's political participation are not due to women's lack of
economic resources. Instead this project evaluates two alternative explanations
for women's lack of political participation: limited access to social networks
outside of the household and a lack of exposure to the political system. To
empirically fill this gap in our knowledge and test these hypotheses, the PI
collects and uses both survey and experimental data from India, in coordination
with the NGO Pradan, to identify the determinants of political engagement for
rural women and evaluate whether access to social networks and political
information increase women's political participation.

Technical Summary

This project evaluates two mechanisms aimed at increasing women's political
participation. In doing so, the proposed research will address two principal
questions: 1) Can providing political information and exposure through gender
and politics trainings increase women's political participation? and 2) Can this
political training activate social networks to further increase women's
political participation and combat prevailing social norms limiting women's role
in politics? These questions will be answered through a series of experiments: a
natural experiment using a geographic regression discontinuity (GRD) design to
identify the impact of social networks and a randomized control trial (RCT) to
identify the effect of political exposure and its interactive effect with social
networks. Random assignment of networks will be approximated using a GRD design,
which leverages an arbitrary boundary to identify villages in which Pradan has
operated and mobilized women into small groups. This allows for an estimation of
the average impact of networks on women's political participation. For the RCT,
a randomized gender and politics training intervention with the NGO Pradan, will
provide women with information about the political system and their rights and
entitlements within this system and will be directly exposed to existing
political institutions, with the aim of reducing informational barriers to
political participation. By providing this training on both sides of the GRD
boundary, the RCT further tests the necessity of social networks for women's
political participation and the ability for the gender and politics training to
activate existing social networks and further generate political engagement.