* 1560770
* EAGER: Supporting the NSCI Effort by Evaluating and Disseminating Effective Practices in Partnerships between HPC Centers and Industry
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2017
* William Kramer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The project will identify, document, and analyze effective practices in
establishing public-private partnerships between High Performance Computing
(HPC) centers and industry. With the market analysis firm IDC, the project will
conduct a worldwide in-depth survey of 70-80 example partnerships of HPC centers
of various sizes, in the US and elsewhere, that have been involved in
partnerships with the private-sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
important to our national economic competitiveness because prior studies have
shown that the use of HPC can boost industrial innovation and competitiveness,
benefiting the firms in question and their economies. Additionally, it directly
supports the Presidential executive order 'Creating a National Strategic
Computing Initiative' by addressing one of its key guiding principle to 'foster
public-private collaboration'. In particular, the project outcomes will help HPC
centers, whose existence serve as an important nexus in our nation's HPC
hardware, software, and human investments, improve their innovation and
effectiveness in engaging industry for knowledge transfer and workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the project implementation will
have the following scope and goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Evaluate the nature
and status of existing public-private, HPC-centered partnership
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Collect and analyze practices that have worked
well in individual partnerships and in the aggregate, along with practices that
have not worked well and issues impending greater success, in order to capture
the state-of-the-art and associated best practices in these
partnerships&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Produce and disseminate a quantitative-
qualitative report that can serve as a reference guide and compendium of
effective practices and lessons learned.