* 1560599
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Dynamics of Intergovernmental Lobbying.
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Terry Moe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 14,582.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the U.S., nearly 90,000 local
governments employ 11 million workers and are responsible for delivering
essential public services. Many of these local governments use a portion of
their public funds to hire lobbyists to represent them both before the federal
government and their state capitals. They seek grant money and favorable
policies that will increase their power, autonomy, and institutional
flexibility. However, the interest group literature on lobbying has largely
neglected this phenomenon, and as a result we know little about the causes and
consequences of intergovernmental lobbying. The investigator asks: What explains
variation in lobbying efforts by local governments, and is spending money on
lobbyist representation a good investment? The investigator develops a theory
that intergovernmental lobbying is a way for local governments to compensate for
weak representation by higher-level officials. She uses lobbying expenditure
reports, local political and demographic information, and public finance data to
demonstrate which local governments lobby and what they get as a result of these
lobbying activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator constructs an original
longitudinal dataset on local government lobbying in all 50 states. While local
governments also lobby the federal government, the majority of their efforts are
targeted towards their state capitals, given the unique authority that states
have to restructure local units financially, administratively, and politically.
Although federal lobbying data is readily available as a result of the 1995
Lobbying Disclosure Act, there exists no publically available composite dataset
of state-level lobbying expenditures. This lack of centralized data has become
increasingly problematic as lobbying at the state level has soared over the past
decade, often outpacing national lobbying efforts. Panel data on
intergovernmental lobbying across states will allow the investigator to employ
several strategies to identify the correlates of local government lobbying and
estimate the effects of this behavior. Initial evidence from California using a
fixed effects approach and over a decade of data on city lobbying and finance
shows that cities allocate more money to lobbying when they receive a new state
assembly member, and spending more on lobbying leads cities to secure more
discretionary funding from the state. However, institutional variables at the
state level are likely key to explain variation in local government lobbying
efforts and outcomes. This project contributes to the theoretical literature on
interest groups and fiscal federalism by providing new empirical evidence on the
way in which local governments use intergovernmental lobbying to compete with
each other to provide services for their residents.