* 1560925
* The Biogeography of Invasive Plants in the Continental United States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Bethany Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 11/30/2019
* USD 157,399.00

Invasive plants are species introduced by humans to new parts of the world where
they not only survive but thrive in novel habitats. Although many individual
invasive plants have been studied extensively, basic understanding of the
biogeography of invasive plants as a broader group remains limited. This
research project will analyze and project the geographies of invasive plants in
their non-native ranges within the continental U.S. The investigators will
compare the geographic traits of invasive species to those of non-native species
that are established but are not known to be spreading or negatively affecting
natural systems. Project results will enhance fundamental knowledge of unique
biogeographical patterns of invasive plants in their non-native range; knowledge
that is critical for forecasting invasion risk. The project will provide new
insights regarding how geography influences the factors affecting the spread of
new species into ecosystems in the invaded range, including identifying "hot
spots" of future invasion risk. The investigators will create spatially explicit
invasion risk models for the nation to guide policy and management, and they
will produce state-level "watch lists" of invasive plants likely to become
problematic under potential future climate conditions. The project also will
contribute to improved education in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields through graduate training and expansion of
undergraduate participation in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species
have been identified as one of five prominent threats to global ecosystems by
the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Despite the prominence of the problem,
there is a paucity of basic scientific understanding regarding what sets these
species apart, especially why invasive species are invasive. Considerable effort
has gone into addressing this question through ecological studies, but
relatively few researchers have focused on understanding the geography of
invasive species. Invasive plant research tends to be biased towards a handful
of very well-studied species, which inhibits understand of invasion patterns
more generally. Furthermore, lumping invasive and established species together
conflates the influence of human introduction with the influence of biology on
the geographic distributions of invasions, thereby hindering identification of
patterns characteristic of invasives. This project will focus on evaluating the
validity of answers to two core sets of questions: (1) For non-native plants in
the continental U.S., how does non-native range geography differ for plants that
are established vs. those that are invasive? (2) What is the current geography
of establishment and invasion risk across the U.S., and how might they shift
with changing climatic conditions? The investigators will use occurrence records
for invasive plants compiled from museum and management records to model
potential distribution for all 1,000 invasive plants under current and projected
future climate conditions. This analysis will enable creation of a spatially
explicit model of "hot spots" of future invasion risk across the continental
U.S.