* 1560098
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Nanotechnology Traineeship for Next-Generation Energy, Health, Information, and Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Jason Lee, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2020
* USD 390,550.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site initiates a School of
Engineering-wide program at the University of Connecticut (UConn) to engage
talented minority and community college undergraduate participants in cutting
edge experimental and computational nanotechnology research. The objectives of
this program are to 1) increase the quantity and quality of engineers prepared
to address grand challenges through ethical use of nanoscience; 2) increase the
number of students from underrepresented populations who pursue graduate
education and academic research in nanotechnology-related engineering fields;
and 3) build alliances with minority serving-institutions and programs to enable
a sustainable pipeline of students from underrepresented groups who will become
leaders in nanotechnology-related engineering fields. Students will participate
directly in research with faculty mentors to address grand challenges in fields
critical to domestic economic and societal progress: energy conversion, cell-
drug interactions, nanoelectronics, and advanced manufacturing. The combination
of career mentorship by successful role models and first-hand research
experience is designed to ultimately increase participants' preparedness for
academic and/or scientific research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
Site offers opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in nanotechnology
research during a 10-week summer program, on a range of scientific projects,
including: advanced nanomaterials for thermal and magnetic to electrical energy
conversion, phase change memory, biological response to pharmaco-therapeutic
treatments at the individual cell level, 3D printing of nanoparticle-containing
wearable electronics, and designer ultra-strength metal alloys. A structured
short course series instructed by participating faculty mentors will educate REU
students on a broad range of nanotechnology-related research fields. In addition
to active research, students will participate in a career development seminar
series including the practice of ethical research. Recruitment of REU Site
participants will target minority-serving programs (Ronald E. McNair Post
Baccalaureate Achievement Program, Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation) and community colleges (Cochise College, a Hispanic Serving
Institution with a large veteran population) as well as STEM teachers from
UConn's Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering program (Joule
Fellows).