* 1560196
* REU Site: Earth Science on Volcanic Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Paul Wessel, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2019
* USD 509,273.00

Earth Science on Volcanic Islands (ESVI) is a new Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) Site hosted by the Department of Geology and Geophysics,
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology at the University of Hawaii at
Mânoa. Oceanic island formation, evolution, and sustainability are unifying
themes that a group of 10 undergraduate students will explore during an exciting
9-week program. The Hawaiian Islands, being of volcanic origin, are windows into
the Earth's interior. Built by magma that has ascended roughly a hundred
kilometers to reach the surface, the volcanoes subsequently experience
deformation, erosion, flank collapse and eventually sink below sea level.
Oceanic islands are also sites of intense biological evolution and are
ecological niches in a vast ocean. The University of Hawaii is uniquely
positioned to take advantage of these phenomena and our new program will provide
cutting-edge STEM research opportunities for motivated undergraduate students,
in particular traditionally underrepresented groups such as Native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders, as well as students enrolled at undergraduate institutions
that provide few opportunities to participate in cutting-edge research. During
the first week, students will engage in a series of introductory, daylong crash-
courses on quantitative analysis and modeling tools, which will enhance their
abilities to conduct research. During the next eight weeks, students will work
along-side individual world-class scientists (host mentors) who will guide the
student through a modest yet challenging research project during an eight-week
intense collaboration.

Following the core theme of Earth science on volcanic islands, the student
activities are expected to contribute to various fields of research, but more
importantly, to engage motivated undergraduate students in the process of doing
science and to energize them for future study in STEM-related endeavors. The
research goal of this REU is to advance the knowledge of the formation,
evolution, and sustainability of ocean islands. Specifically, we will examine
the growth and subsequent deformation of volcanic islands using state-of-the-art
tools and methodology from petrology, geochemistry, volcanology, structural
geology, seismology, and geophysics. We will also study the hydrologic pathways
for subaerial and submarine groundwater flow using geochemical tracers, as well
as the biogeochemistry of marine organisms thriving in the proximity of volcanic
islands.