* 1560323
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Security Printing and Anti-Counterfeiting Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Paul May, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 96,669.00

The South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, along with its partner
organizations, the University of South Dakota and South Dakota State University,
will offer an innovative Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) Site
focused on interdisciplinary research dedicated to Security Printing and Anti-
Counterfeiting Technology (SPACT), for a diverse group of undergraduate
students, targeting Tribal Colleges and other institutions with limited STEM
research opportunities. The SPACT research theme is of great societal
importance. Counterfeiting is a growing issue in the U.S., posing serious
economic, safety and national security concerns and impacting a wide variety of
industries (e.g. pharmaceutics, semiconductors). In this REU Site students will
conduct research on transformative anti-counterfeiting technology. SPACT is a
field which demands development in four key areas: advanced materials, advanced
manufacturing/patterning technologies, detection and encryption technology, and
software and database infrastructure. The SPACT REU will implement a unique
undergraduate research program to curb the economic losses and health and safety
risks associated with counterfeiting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objectives
of this 10-week summer REU Site are to: 1) conduct transformative research in a
collaborative, interdisciplinary environment, and 2) provide STEM professional
development opportunities to a diverse group of 10 undergraduate students, each
year for three years. A team of faculty mentors from the three partner
institutions, all with demonstrated experience in mentoring undergraduate
researchers, will implement a program in SPACT by applying research methods from
various fields of science and engineering. Participants will develop
collaborative research skills via carefully designed research projects and
training seminars. Students will participate in a highly integrated professional
development and technical communications program. The faculty, alongside
industry leaders, will deliver training seminars to broaden the student's
existing academic training in the necessary SPACT areas. The long-term goal of
this REU Site is to provide a diverse group of STEM researchers with the
training and skills needed to pursue graduate studies at the highest levels and
to advance the developing field of SPACT.