* 1560138
* REU Site: Research and Education in Multiscale Sensing and Imaging
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Pranav Shrotriya, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,485.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at Iowa State
University, offers state-of-the-art, multi-disciplinary research experiences in
the areas of sensing, actuation and imaging, to diverse and talented cohorts of
undergraduates from institutions with limited or no research opportunities. The
need for advanced sensing and imaging technologies to enhance our nation's
health, homeland, food and energy security has never been more urgent as evident
from the NAE Grand Challenges. Research in sensing and imaging technologies has
an obvious societal impact that appeals to a broad demographic of students. In
addition, the multidisciplinary nature of the research, which merges engineering
concepts with those in the sciences will help attract students from all
engineering and non-engineering disciplines. This REU Site with a focus on
sensing and imaging research will take advantage of shared research interests
and synergistic interactions of the faculty to help increase graduate
enrollment. The student experience will evolve from dependent to independent
status and will enable them to acquire life-long skills that will impact their
contributions to science and engineering and to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this renewal REU Site program
is to provide each undergraduate participant with a ten-week scientifically
rigorous, intellectually demanding, research experience within a highly
collegial environment of collaboration with faculty and other students. The
program focuses on the development of the technical skills and critical-thinking
abilities of the participants and on their exposure to substantive,
representative research investigations related to design and manufacturing of
sensors, actuators and smart materials; state-of-the-art imaging and diagnostic
systems and data driven approaches to sensor/device design and reliability.
Project topics include microfluidic devices, nanomechanical sensors for
biological agents; nanoenergetics imaging, bioprosthetics, nanomaterials
synthesis, and reliability of implantable sensors. The program will also include
weekly seminar series; short courses; communication workshops; interactions with
middle school teachers; organized social and cultural events designed to
complement the research activities; a REU Research Symposium to provide feedback
on student work and exceptional achievement; and training in ethical
implications of engineering that will be conducted by ISU's Bioethics program.
Participants will also be encouraged to present a technical paper/poster at
regional and national conferences within one year of participating in this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.