* 1560007
* REU Site: Engineering and Nanoscience of Materials and Device Applications in Biotechnology and Medicine
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 391,867.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program hosted by the
NanoScience Technology Center (NSTC) at the University of Central Florida (UCF),
entitled, "Engineering and Nanoscience of Materials and Device Applications in
Biotechnology and Medicine", will engage a diverse cohort of students, recruited
from underrepresented groups, in the development of materials and technologies
for application in biotechnology and medicine. The students will gain hands-on
research training in topics such as adoptive cancer immunotherapy and targeted
nanoparticle cancer therapy, engineering of MEMS devices and body-on-a-chip
systems for proteomics research, develop nanofibers for tissue engineering,
engineer smart wound healing patches, and nanomanufacturing of tunable plasmonic
sensors. The REU site will foster intercollegial relationships between faculty
and students with an opportunity to investigate new teaching and training
paradigms. The program further strengthens bridges to community colleges in
Central Florida and minority institutions with limited research capabilities by
promoting the benefits of undergraduate research. This REU experience will
inspire students to pursue careers that produce high quality researchers and
personnel, which will help address the growing need for trained professionals
capable of developing and deploying biotechnology and the next generation of
medicine in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each undergraduate student will
conduct research over a ten week summer experience with a multidisciplinary team
of faculty and students. The program will also include: (1) Introductory Course
in Engineering, Nanoscience and Technology; (2) Mentor and student professional
development, including leadership and diversity; (3) Writing Across the
Curriculum (WAC), scientific writing development for REU students; (4) Seminars,
workshops, group projects to foster interdisciplinary research and learning; (5)
Monitoring, evaluation, and tracking of the students' progress via weekly
discussion groups; and (6) Preparation of students to pursue careers in STEM and
medical areas.