* 1560229
* REU SITE: Data Science Research for Safe, Sustainable and Healthy Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Elke Rundensteiner, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 367,500.00

This Research Undergraduate Experience (REU) program provides students the
opportunity to perform interdisciplinary research in WPI's Department of
Computer Science and in particular in the Data Science program focusing on
societal challenges in cyber security, healthcare, and sustainability - all
interlinked concerns of critical national importance. Cities in the 21st
century, including the City of Worcester and its surrounding communities, are
plagued by many urban challenges from pollution to traffic congestion. This
project will drive the vision of empowering citizens and organizations by
supporting data-driven policy making. We will provide a unique educational
research experience for undergraduate students from under-represented groups by
exposing them to projects through which they tackle critical societal challenges
via data science. By giving students the opportunity to apply their education
toward improving the quality of life for individuals in their community, we will
show them the power of data science in the real world. This will pique their
interest in pursuing further education in this important STEM discipline, thus
contributing to the STEM workforce and the US economic prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are limited undergraduate research opportunities in
Data Science despite its recognition as a critical STEM skill set criteria. The
goal of our REU program is to fill this gap by engaging underrepresented
undergraduate students in data science research in solving the most critical
problems faced by our communities: from cyber-security and safety analytics, to
data-driven healthcare, and sustainability. REU participants will work in
interdisciplinary research teams, mentored by WPI faculty advisors and graduate
students, and have ownership of a project for the duration of their summer. The
students will learn about and apply data science techniques from data mining,
data bases, machine learning, statistical learning, to business intelligence. To
supplement the educational and research skill development of students, a weekly
seminar series on professional development covering topics such as research
inquiry, data interpretation and visualization, scientific writing,
communication skills, to career opportunities afforded by data science will be
held. At the conclusion of the program, students will present their results via
an oral presentation in a conference-like format. By empowering students to
solve pressing problems in their communities via data science, students will be
compelled to seek advanced degrees and promising careers in data science.