* 1560278
* REU Site: PR-CLIMB (Puerto Rico-Chemical Learning in Materials and Biomolecular applications)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Kariluz Davila-Diaz, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 202,082.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the NSF Experimental Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program support a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras
entitled, "PR-CLIMB (Puerto Rico-Chemical Learning in Materials and Biomolecular
applications)" The PR-CLIMB REU Site is developed by Professors Arthur D. Tinoco
and Professor Dalice M. Piñero Cruz who seek to provide undergraduate students a
research experience that capitalizes on the academic and professional strengths
of the university and Puerto Rico at large. As a minority-serving institution,
the site offers a unique experience to a diverse set of students recruited from
2-year and 4-year institutions. In this nine-week program, students engage in
fundamental studies of materials and biomolecules for potential applications in
water purification, energy storage, sensing, drug design, and drug delivery.
Students also are exposed to a variety of techniques in seminars and seven
hands-on workshops that develop their skill sets in the biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals fields. The REU site develops well-rounded students with strong
communication skills who are able to become self-sufficient researchers and
productive citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PR-CLIMB REU Site provides
undergraduate students with high caliber interdisciplinary research experiences
that inspire interest in Chemistry graduate programs and also in the Puerto
Rican biotechnology and pharmaceutical job markets as a viable career
opportunity. To overcome a current economic crisis in Puerto Rico, it is a
priority to provide a first-rate intellectual experience that demonstrates the
quality of the university's resources and the island's job opportunities. Ten
students conduct research in a diverse set of laboratories focusing on
fundamental studies of materials and biomolecules that are engineered for
applications in water purification, energy storage, sensing, drug design, and
drug delivery. Through seven hands-on workshops, students obtain a broad
training on biomolecular synthesis, chemical fractionation, purity assessment,
activity assays, and characterization via spectral, structural, and
electrochemical approaches. Seminars are offered on ethics in research,
strategies for producing high quality research and public presentations, and
funding opportunities for graduate work. In addition, professionals in academia
and industry discuss their respective job fields.