* 1560659
* Doctoral Dissertation:  The Political Effects of Rule-Based Social  Policies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Frances Hagopian, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2017
* USD 18,497.00

General Summary

This project seeks to explain how rule-based social policy can lead to citizen
empowerment. Specifically, this research examines whether the extension of
guaranteed public service access to rural-based citizens severs over time the
relationship between these citizens and rural political leaders who use
clientalistic methods to exert political control. The PI examines the effect of
national policies (like the conditional cash transfer Bolsa Familia program in
Brazil) affect local politics. This research will collect household survey data
on local political attitudes and behavior in Northeast Brazil. The PI collects a
targeted stratified sample of 2,040 people in 30 municipalities in three states
will facilitate controlled comparisons between the beneficiaries and non-
beneficiaries of national rule-based social programs. The data will be analyzed
using a hierarchical regression model to identify (1) whether political
relationships, citizen practices and voting behavior are affected by experiences
with national rule-based social policies, and (2) to what extent this
relationship varies depending on the municipal and state governance context.

Technical Summary

This research seeks to understand whether secure access to social policy can
turn dependent clients into autonomous and active citizens. It is also designed
to help resolve debates about the political effects of rule-based social policy,
the project will provide new evidence, tools and datasets to help policymakers
understand how policies can shape downstream policy demands and help build
effective local democracy. The PI gathers data on citizens' experiences with
government, their autonomy and their voting behavior. The PI collects a targeted
stratified sample of 2,040 people in 30 municipalities in three states in
Northeast Brazil will facilitate controlled comparisons between the
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of national rule-based social programs. This
data collection strategy facilitates controlled comparisons between the
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of national rule-based social programs. List
and conjoint survey experiments are performed to uncover sensitive measures such
as voting motivations, political autonomy and exposure to clientelism.
Inferential leverage will be improved by screening for respondents who are close
to the eligibility thresholds for social policy, and by exploiting the fact that
some respondents are on waiting lists where they are eligible but have not yet
received a benefit. The data will be analyzed using a hierarchical regression
model to identify (1) whether political relationships, citizen practices and
voting behavior are affected by experiences with national rule-based social
policies, and (2) to what extent this relationship varies depending on the
municipal and state governance context.