* 1560501
* Collaborate Research: Construct a General Hilbert Space Multi-dimensional Model
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Zheng Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2020
* USD 236,592.00

This research project will develop and test a new measurement model based on
quantum probability theory called the Hilbert space multi-dimensional model.
With the striking advancement of modern data-collection methods, complex and
massive data sets are generated from various sources and contexts that are
conceptually connected. This promises to provide a better understanding of
complex social and behavioral phenomena, but it also presents significant
challenges for the integration and interpretation of data from multiple sources.
The general Hilbert space multi-dimensional model will improve understanding of
complex social and behavioral phenomena ranging from violations of rational
decision theory to social survey data integration and interpretation. This
project is part of a larger research program to build probabilistic and dynamic
systems for social and behavioral sciences from quantum rather than classical
probability principles. The project will develop and disseminate from public
repositories self-contained software packages for applying and estimating the
general Hilbert space multi-dimensional model in MATLAB, R, and Python.

The investigators will develop and test the general Hilbert space multi-
dimensional model, including the development of the mathematical theory of the
model and related statistical and computational tools for applying the model.
They will rigorously test the model using a large range of experiments. When
large data sets are collected from different contexts or conditions, often they
can be summarized by contingency tables. A critical problem arises, however,
regarding how to integrate and synthesize these tables into a compressed,
coherent, and interpretable representation. A common solution is to try to
construct a joint probability distribution to reproduce the frequency data
observed in the tables. Bayesian causal networks then are often used to reduce
the number of estimated parameters by imposing conditional independence
assumptions. In many cases, however, no such joint distribution exists that can
reproduce the observed tables. The general Hilbert space multi-dimensional model
provides a promising solution to the problems faced by complex and massive data
by constructing a single finite state vector that lies within a low dimensional
Hilbert space and by forming a set of non-commuting measurement operators that
represent the measurements. In this way, the model produces a compressed,
coherent, and interpretable representation of the measured variables that form
the complex collection of data tables even when no standard joint distribution
exists.