* 1560031
* REU Site: Solar Energy Research for the Terawatt Challenge
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Zachary Holman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2019
* USD 314,261.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Solar Energy and
Photovoltaics Research is hosted by Arizona State University (ASU) using the
facilities of the NSF/DOE jointly funded Quantum Energy and Sustainable Solar
Technologies (QESST) Engineering Research Center (ERC). The challenge of
sustainability meeting the world's energy demand-the "terawatt challenge"-has
been described as the defining challenge of this generation. Many of the most
pressing world issues today are fundamentally intertwined with energy, ranging
from climate change to poverty. Photovoltaic (PV) devices are the most promising
sustainable energy source, and have made the transition from lab to fab in the
past decade. Provided that the PV industry maintains its present growth rates,
it can provide all of the new electricity required by the world within a decade,
and it can meet the world's total energy demand by 2050. However, motivated and
innovative engineers in both academia and industry are needed to achieve this
goal. The aim of the REU Site is for undergraduate students to be introduced to
research generally and solar research specifically, to experience how the course
work they are studying can be put into practice to tackle the terawatt
challenge, and to practice how the principles of scientific research can be
applied to any engineering challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers
opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in solar research during a
9-week summer program, on topics that range from fundamental (e.g., new growth
methods for the active layers in III-V multi-junction solar cells) to applied
(e.g., degradation mechanisms in silicon modules in the field). Participants in
the REU program will be immersed in this intellectual melting pot of ongoing
solar research, both strengthening existing projects (e.g., high-mobility
transparent conductive oxides) and being involved in the initiation of others
(e.g., silicon-based tandem solar cells). The REU projects will be designed to
cross traditional disciplinary boundaries-as photovoltaic research is apt to do-
synergistically combining device physics, materials science, chemistry,
electrical engineering, and sustainability. The REU students' laboratory
experience will be enhanced by seminars and workshops that provide them with
access to experts in a wide range of fields including PV research and
development, the social science of energy usage, sustainability, and the solar
energy industry. The program will also include a number of social activities
designed to encourage formal and informal communication skills, collaborative
problem solving and teamwork with colleagues from diverse cultural, geographic,
and demographic backgrounds. Each student will travel to one conference or
workshop to present his or her work. The REU will recruit heavily from the
network of QESST partner institutions, most of which have substantial
populations of students that are under-represented in engineering. Through
research that crosses disciplinary boundaries and a diverse base of mentors,
this REU Site will retain students of all backgrounds in engineering as they
pursue advanced degrees and careers.