* 1560151
* REU Site:   Undergraduate Mathematical Science Research at James Madison University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Brant Jones, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 229,759.00

This award supports an REU program at James Madison University that will host
eight undergraduates for eight-week terms three consecutive summers. The program
supports two cohorts consisting of a group of four students together with a pair
of faculty who have complementary research programs. Over the course of the
summer, each group will progress from teaching/learning new topics in
mathematics or statistics, to developing questions and conjectures, to proving
results as part of an authentic research experience. Since faculty have distinct
but related research interests, they are able to model supportive scientific
collaboration for the students and discuss technical topics from different
points of view. The program will produce original research that is disseminated
in peer-reviewed journal articles and talks at national, regional, and local
professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our faculty are well proportioned
between mathematics, applied mathematics, and statistics. We leverage this
breadth to produce REU problems that lie on the intersection of two domains of
knowledge, in which both faculty members are likely to be able to make
significant contributions. The intradisciplinary nature of the teams supports
the student experience by putting the mentors on similar footing as the students
insofar as each mentor will likely be teaching and learning something new. This
interaction helps lower the barrier for student collaboration and increases
intellectual risk-taking across the entire group, particularly in the initial
stages of research. It also immediately creates a group with a cohesive
intellectual culture for students to interact in, both academically and
socially. Each group of students will complete the summer with a mathematical
research presentation to faculty and peers. They will also be well prepared and
strongly encouraged to present at local, regional and national meetings after
the completion of the program. When projects generate original and interesting
results, students will be involved in the publication process from drafting
technical writing to addressing peer-reviewed referee reports. The program will
recruit and select students from groups that are traditionally underrepresented
in mathematics, as well as from institutions less likely to have resources
available to support research activity.