* 1560596
* I-Corps:  Quick Liquid Layout: Commercialization of Microfluidic Very Large Scale Integration Design Automation Tools
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project represents an initial step toward commercialization of technologies
developed under NSF Award "Design Automation for Microfluidic Large Scale
Integration Laboratories-on-a-Chip." Lab-on-a-Chip (LoC) technology reduces the
time and cost to perform complex biological laboratory experiments through
miniaturization and automation; applications of this technology include medical
diagnostics, point-of-care testing, biomedical research, water quality
management, environmental monitoring, etc. The design automation software will
simplify the process of LoC design, providing benefits such as reduced cost of
design and testing, faster time-to-market, and lower likelihood of human error.
Successful commercialization of these research efforts will enhance scientific
productivity and lower the barrier-to-entry for new users of LoC
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to train the
principal investigator, entrepreneurial lead, and mentor in technological
entrepreneuriship, and to enable them to meet with potential customers for their
technology. The scope of the project involves attending two training sessions in
Washington, D.C., attending weekly webinars, and traveling to visit potential
customers, including academic laboratories in the biological sciences, and
companies in segments such as biotechnology, medicine, healthcare, etc. The
I-Corps team members will leverage these experiences to assess commercial
interest in their microfluidic design automation software along with its
readiness in terms of meeting customer needs. If commercialization is
successful, future users of laboratory-on-a-chip technology will be able to
leverage our software to automatically design their chips, as opposed to current
practice which is to manually lay out the entire architecture by hand.