* 1560093
* REU Site: Physics and Chemistry Research at The College of Wooster
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Susan Lehman, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 287,892.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the Wooster REU site is to
enable undergraduates and faculty to work closely together on original,
publishable research involving a broad range of materials science, physics, and
chemistry projects. Wooster is a liberal arts college long recognized for its
mentored undergraduate research. The faculty have designed on-going research
programs that are both innovative and accessible to undergraduates. Dedicated
and individualized mentoring in the tools, techniques, and process of research
trains and inspires young students to persist in science while contributing to
publishable research. The site specifically targets beginning students, often
having completed just one year of college, and often from institutions where
research opportunities are scarce; it encourages the full participation of women
and underrepresented groups by providing a vibrant supportive environment, and
it has partnered with nearby two-year colleges to recruit students who might
otherwise not major in a science or even complete college. Each student takes
ownership of an individual project, conducts original research, and becomes a
practicing scientist through the research project, oral and poster
presentations, and written reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the Wooster REU site is to provide an environment for
young students to learn the tools and techniques of scientific research while
working closely with a faculty mentor on exciting and publishable research
projects. The research spans a broad range of fields including condensed matter,
granular materials, nanowires, spatiotemporal pattern formation, light-emitting
polymers, quantum optics, nonlinear dynamics, and astrophysics. It uses
experimental, computational, and theoretical techniques. Highlights include
controlling spatio-temporal dynamics with noise and disorder, experimentally
realizing arrays of one-way coupled oscillators, and understanding granular
flows using bead piles. Research projects are intentionally designed so that
even novice undergraduates can make significant scientific contributions. Past
summer research has contributed to 32 scientific papers involving 54
undergraduate coauthors in journals such as Physical Review. Results have been
featured twice on the cover of the American Journal of Physics and in news
stories in Physical Review Focus and Nature News. Student researchers are
trained in research skills including critical thinking, data analysis, and
scientific writing.