* 1560730
* Collaborative Research:  Summer Training Program to Broaden Participation in Graduate Education in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Christine Moser, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 198,200.00

This award funds efforts by Michigan State University and Western Michigan
University in hosting the American Economic Association Summer Training Program.
The goal of the AEASTP is to help talented undergraduate students advance their
technical skills and conduct research in economics in preparation for studies at
the doctoral level. The program is open to all qualified students regardless of
race, ethnicity, or gender. Organizers make special efforts to recruit students
from groups under-represented in the economics profession. The program combines
research experience with intensive coursework and career mentoring in a
residential experience. Instructors in the program include both leading
economists and a cohort of Summer Fellows, graduate students in economics who
serve as mentors for the students. Fellows get training in inclusive teaching
methods and benefit from access to the faculty instructors, who work with both
students and fellows as research mentors. The award will also fund a program
evaluation effort that includes both ongoing efforts and long term
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The road to successful Ph.D. study in economics
can be a rocky one, especially for students coming from minority-serving
institutions and institutions that do not have a strong research focus.
Obstacles include undergraduate economics curricula that are often oriented
towards the most popular student career goal - business - than Ph.D. study, a
lack of familiarity with the application process, and financial limitations. One
consequence is that several important demographic groups are under-represented
on economics faculties in the U.S.. Over the course of this award, hundreds of
students will be able to successfully advance to become mature researchers in
economics and related social sciences. Their experiences will be instrumental in
their later careers in allowing them to use a strong professional network to
help them foster a more inclusive environment in their own teaching and research
efforts. By broadening participation in the economics profession, the program
will have a positive and lasting impact on shaping professional research agendas
in economics and related fields to the benefit of the United States.