* 1560294
* Partial Support for the Core Activities of the Committee on National Statistics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Brian Harris-Kojetin, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 8,043,354.00

Relevant, objective, high-quality, timely, and accessible information produced
by federal statistical agencies is critical for informing decisions by policy
makers for federal, state, and local governments as well as by private
businesses and households. This project will provide partial support for the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Committee on National
Statistics (CNSTAT). The Committee was established as a standing committee in
1972 and works to improve the statistical methods and measures produced by the
diverse array of statistical agencies spread across the federal government and
to help those agencies collaborate with each other to serve the public good.
CNSTAT also contributes to improving the data that are available for economic
and social science research applied to important national needs, such as
understanding the economy, technology and innovation, public health, education,
welfare, and other areas. CNSTAT conducts much of its work through consensus
studies carried out by panels of volunteer experts, which review specific
statistical programs and measures. It also conducts workshops and public
seminars for the benefit of the statistical and research community and updates
every 4 years a volume titled "Principles and Practices for a Federal
Statistical Agency," which helps protect the objectivity and credibility of
federal statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interacting with the federal
statistical and research agencies and the social and economic sciences research
community, CNSTAT will identify priority topics for study involving federal
statistics and statistical methods. For example, CNSTAT studies will help the
Census Bureau design an accurate and cost-effective 2020 census and improve
other nationally important surveys of households and businesses; help the
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics at NSF improve surveys of
the science and engineering workforce and measures of innovation; and help the
Department of Health and Human Services improve data on the elderly and
disadvantaged people. An important ongoing initiative is to foster standards and
methods for using multiple data sources to improve federal statistics by drawing
on data from administrative records and from selected Internet and other non-
traditional data sources in addition to the surveys currently used. The use of
multiple data sources is imperative to hold down costs of federal statistical
programs, improve data quality and timeliness, and maintain relevance and
credibility in an era in which people are less likely to respond to surveys and
there are competing statistics from non-government sources.