* 1560544
* The Spatial Mobility of Communities' Organizational Resources
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 69,510.00

SES-1560544&lt;br/&gt;Joseph Galaskiewicz &lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most scholars who study inequality focus on
household income and wealth. This is obviously important. But families' life
chances are also affected by where they live and how well they are able to
access what they need. Neighborhoods matter. Research has documented how living
in racially segregated communities, areas of concentrated poverty, and areas
which are crime ridden place residents at an extreme disadvantage. Past research
shows the reason for these conditions is there are not organizational resources
in these communities that can provide families basic services, e.g.,
supermarkets, clubs, churches, banks, restaurants,and pharmacies. The purpose of
this research is to understand why establishments locate where they do and if
social factors (e.g., race/ethnicity, social class, crime), market forces (e.g.,
competition, housing prices, consumer demand), or political factors (e.g.,
planning) matter more. Also, because the study period includes the Great
Recession, it is possible to see how extreme conditions impacted neighborhoods'
stocks of organizational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research posits
that residents' well-being is a function of their spatial capital. That is, do
they have the ability to access locally the organizational resources they need?
Access is a function not only of families' financial and cultural capital, but
also their proximity to organizational resources, location in the transportation
grid, control over spatial technologies, and social traits that allow them to
gain access to facilities they seeks. However, this study recognizes the need
for a better understanding of the organizations and their movement across the
metroscape. The research seeks to answer two research questions. First, what
causes establishments to locate where they do in the metropolitan community?
What leads to births and growth? What leads to deaths and decline? The study
focuses on planning and zoning initiatives by government, ecological processes,
e.g., competition among organizations and forms, and community context
particularly crime. Second, what can we learn about neighborhood resilience from
one metropolitan area?s experience with financial meltdown? This project will
collect data which complements ten years of research on tens of thousands of
establishments and their location in the Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale urbanized area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has broader significance, because families'
access to different types of activities is important for children's educational,
emotional, and social development, yet not all children have equal access to
high quality programs, activities, and opportunities. There is a spatial
mismatch between supply and demand. By focusing this research on the supply side
of the market, the investigator hopes to gain a better understanding of
nonprofit, for-profit, and government behaviors. Research outcomes could
potentially inform policy makers on how to motivate providers to locate/stay in
under-served areas or to empower families to advocate for and provide these
services. The research furthers NSF?s mission of supporting basic research and
using that knowledge to improve the human condition. While most recognize that
extreme inequality is not a desirable state, we do not know what to do about it.
While it may not be possible to redistribute wealth equitably, there should be
ways of making organizational resources more spatially accessible so that all
residents have a chance at a healthy, happy, and prosperous life. This research
contributes to the basic knowledge necessary to address these issues. The
research also contributes to several fields of inquiry and hopefully will
stimulate further research in sociology, urban planning, geography, urban
economics, transportation studies, and spatial science (GIS).