* 1560601
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Civic Participation and Insurgent Mobilization in Deeply-Divided Societies
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jason Stone, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 18,900.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nascent insurgent organizations have
routinely benefitted from tapping into the membership networks of activist
associations, recruiting politically aware and committed individuals to swell
their ranks in relatively short order. Yet the relationship between activism and
insurgent mobilization is not well understood. This project seeks to explain how
insurgent movements work to undermine activists' commitment to their
organizations, and why certain civic organizations are more vulnerable to rebel
recruitment drives than are others. It also traces how activists who do leave
peaceful forms of activism for violent rebellion might leverage personal and
professional relationships with other activists and their beneficiaries to bring
greater numbers of individuals into the insurgent fold, thereby transforming the
resources of civic activism into the resources for violent rebellion. In so
doing, this project will provide guidance to activists and policymakers wishing
to protect and promote the development of civil society in deeply-divided
societies at risk of, or already experiencing, violent internal
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on
nine months of in-depth fieldwork comparing Maoist recruitment efforts amongst
ethnic organizations during Nepal's civil war (1996-2006), this research will
assess a number of factors that impact activists' commitment to their
organizations, and thus each organization's relative vulnerability to rebel
recruitment efforts. Relying primarily on semi-structured interview and focus
group testimonies with activists and beneficiaries, as well as with former
insurgents, the project will examine how factors such as the scope and type of
an activist organization's activities, its structure, and the material rewards
of activism impacted activists' commitment to their organizations. It will also
assess how insurgents chose organizations and activists to target for
recruitment, and how they worked to undermine existing commitment. Finally, this
research will trace how initial activist defections to the rebel group may have
triggered cascades of defection through organizational networks as other
activists and beneficiaries sharing ties with early defectors followed suit.