* 1560390
* REU Site: The US/France/Belgium iREU Site in Translational Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Randolph Duran, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites Program of the Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation,
Professor Randolph S. Duran recruits cohorts of students, primarily selected
from the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) in STEM
Program, which has sites nationwide. The students who become members of this
International Research Experiences for Undergraduates (iREU) Site conduct summer
research in France and Belgium. The goal is to provide deep scientific and
cultural immersion learning experiences during which participants obtain
publication-quality results. Strong translational infrastructure, such as
innovation campuses at each location, gives participants exposure to how
research discoveries can lead to start-up companies in this international
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This iREU Site focuses on the chemical aspects of
sophisticated nanoscience and biotechnology, giving students an early experience
at bridging the gap between basic research and emerging applications. The unique
and close interactions among university research, high technology companies, and
national laboratories provide students the opportunities to experience a network
of research not typically available to students at their home institutions. The
facilities, from high-tech scale-up to international user facilities, are also
different from many research universities in the United States. Students with
previous experience and a strong desire to continue in STEM areas are recruited,
with emphasis on NSF-LSAMP Programs nationwide. The international collaborators
show institution commitment by developing a way to credit iREU students with the
equivalent of European Master's degrees, based on performance. Outstanding
facilities and research support at the proposed locations ensure sufficient
resources for participants.