* 1560282
* REU Site: Multi-Scale Systems Bioengineering
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Timothy Allen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 11/30/2019
* USD 361,861.00

The employment of biomedical engineers is projected to grow more than 20% over
the period from 2014-2024, creating a critical need for those who can support
the design, development and production of new devices, systems, and software
used in healthcare. Advances in the biomedical sciences and medicine will
increasingly depend upon the application of rigorous and quantitative
engineering-based approaches to characterize and interrogate biological systems.
This REU Site in Multi-Scale Systems Bioengineering at the University of
Virginia will train ten undergraduate participants per summer in state-of-the-
art systems bioengineering research. While open to a broad national pool of top
students in STEM, the Multi-Scale Systems Bioengineering REU Site will
specifically target talented UGs majoring in STEM fields at institutions with
limited research opportunities in the field of systems bioengineering, with an
emphasis on recruiting students from underrepresented groups. The research
experience and mentorship these REU students will prepare them for work in this
fast-growing and pioneering field that would otherwise be unavailable to them at
their home institutions. Faculty mentors will maintain continuing relationships
with the participants after completing the program, helping to improve the
likelihood that the students will remain in STEM.

The overarching goal is to train a diverse corps of young scientists from a
variety of STEM backgrounds and provide them with the skills, confidence, and
mentorship necessary for successful careers in the exciting area of systems
bioengineering. Students will be matched with faculty mentors for a 10-week
research project, culminating in a paper and public symposium. The students will
participate in collaborative, hands-on, and closely mentored projects in the
areas of: 1) Molecular Pathways and Cellular Modeling and 2)
Tissue-/Organ-/Population-Level Modeling, which will immerse them in a
combination of experimentation and computational analyses. Students will acquire
the practical skills, knowledge, ethical grounding, and communication skills
necessary to be productive in advanced graduate study and be successfully
employed in the modern biotechnology industry. The program will also provide
students with career advising, grounding in research ethics, training in
scientific communication, and ongoing mentorship after completion of the
program.