* 1560184
* REU Site: Summer Program in Chihuahuan Desert Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Jerry Johnson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 257,466.00

This REU Site award to the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), located in El
Paso, TX, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks, during the
summers of 2016- 2018. Research is conducted at UTEP and its Indio Mountains
Research Station along with other Chihuahuan Desert (CD) sites in Texas and New
Mexico. The program focuses on CD biodiversity, with emphasis on studies in
evolution and ecology linked to interests of UTEP Biological Sciences faculty,
who will serve as mentors. Students are expected to do full-time field and lab
research and participate in seminars and workshops, such as responsible conduct
in research, professional communication skills, among others. REU students will
have access to well-equipped labs of mentors and interdepartmental research
facilities. Students are selected based on academic record, research interest
and potential, and faculty recommendations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be mostly
juniors or seniors but exceptional sophomores will be considered. This program
seeks to recruit and excite a population of students poorly represented in
science and with limited opportunities to do research at their home
institutions. Students will be guided through hypothesis driven collaborative
research projects to generate knowledge that may ultimately inform actions for
environmental sustainability and human well-being. Students will present their
research at a UTEP campus-wide summer research symposium and many will be
encouraged to present their research results at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Internal surveys will also be used for feedback on training
sessions. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://science.utep.edu/cdb-reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michael
Moody at mlmoody@utep.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jerry Johnson at
jjohnson@utep.edu).