* 1560329
* REU Site:  Chemistry and Biochemistry Summer Undergraduate Research Experience at Kennesaw State University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Mark Mitchell, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 240,000.00

In this project funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites Program in the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation,
Professors Mitchell, Linenberger, and colleagues of the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry at Kennesaw State University (KSU) reach out to 2-year and
smaller 4-year partner institutions to recruit undergraduate students from
institutions that typically do not have the resources to provide a research
experience to their chemistry or biochemistry students. The targeted
institutions also enroll a diverse population of students. The student
researchers work in the lab one-on-one with faculty research mentors and other
students on projects designed to be accessible to the undergraduates. The
broader impact of the project is to expose a diverse pool of talented students,
who have had limited exposure to scientific research, to the excitement of how
science is done - working on projects that contribute to the understanding of
important problems. All of the students are encouraged to consider a career in
science. Society benefits from citizens who are more aware of the process of
science and the benefits of scientific research.

The summer research experience at KSU offers the undergraduate research
participants (URPs) the opportunity to participate in research that encompasses
a broad range of study in chemistry including biochemistry, analytical
chemistry, chemical education, inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, organic
chemistry, organometallic chemistry, and physical chemistry. The URPs
participate in weekly group meetings with their research mentor and his/her
other research students, in workshops on topics ranging from laboratory safety
to career opportunities. They also participate in an end-of-the-summer research
symposium and in social activities designed to help them assimilate into their
research groups. They form an initial network of colleagues and scientific
associates that can help them in their future careers.