* 1560134
* REU SITE: ASSET: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Advanced Secured Sensor Enabling Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Sitharama Iyengar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

This award is a renewal of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
focused on secured sensor technologies at Florida International University.
Undergraduates will work with faculty on research projects to explore new
technologies and solutions utilizing sensor networking as well as software and
hardware solutions essential to the advancement and practical proliferation of
new technologies. The research theme includes a range of research projects in
software-defined wireless sensor networks, privacy and security of sensor
networks, local computation algorithms, mobile robots and self-configuring non-
cooperative mobile sensors. The research theme presents a basic opportunity for
undergraduates to get involved in research that combines intellectual merit and
technical opportunities with a broad impact such as improving the quality of
people's lives in health, homeland security and transportation. The objective of
the program is to nurture students into computer and communications research
fields through an intense, interdisciplinary, collaborative research environment
and serves as an excellent opportunity for students to participate in many
aspects of a scientific research program through a set of well-planned and
focused activities that will ramp up student research skills and knowledge in
emerging technologies. All activities ensure development of student-faculty and
student-student communication to enhance and accelerate the students' research
skills and learning in the field. The program will spark an interest in
continuing relevant research careers. Successful impact of this project should
build human capacity in computing and communications research and knowledge.

Intellectual Merit: This project brings together fields of sensing, computing
and communications to pioneer new core technologies along with supportive
methods, architectures and tool-kits. This effort is based upon an existing and
highly successful undergraduate research experience site where a diverse group
of undergraduates learn how to conduct research and become better prepared to
pursue graduate studies. The topics are timely and focus on emerging research.

Broader Impact: The goal of this project is to build human capacity in computing
and communications research and knowledge. The program will provide an
unparalleled scientific and cross-cultural experience to motivated
underrepresented undergraduate students. It aims to influence their choices
about further education and future careers and continue to give them confidence
to pursue these choices. With specific recruiting efforts that target
underrepresented groups such as women, minorities and persons with disabilities,
this REU program also aims to increase the size and diversity of the scientific
workforce.