* 1560268
* REU Site: Research Opportunities in Bioinspired Robotics
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Timothy Horiuchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2019
* USD 382,184.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the
University of Maryland (UMD)College Park offers new and exciting summer research
opportunities to diverse and talented cohorts of undergraduates, from
institutions with limited or no research opportunities in the field of
bioinspired robotics (defined as robots that are inspired by natural systems
such as insects, birds, mammals, and reptiles). Bioinspired robots will be used
to target the efforts of first responders after a natural disaster and provide a
number of tasks to assist humans (e.g., carrying extra goods, repairing damaged
goods, building structures, etc.). However, designing, fabricating, and applying
these robots is a long-term scientific and engineering challenge. Each summer,
this REU site will provide 10 undergraduates with resources and opportunities to
begin tackling some of these challenges. The program will collaborate with UMD's
Women in Engineering program and the Center for Minorities in Science and
Engineering to better recruit and assess the impact of this program on women and
underrepresented minority students who traditionally suffer from the "leaky
pipeline" in which percentages of these students decrease as they move up
through the ranks of research positions. This problem will be addressed by
focusing on career and academic development (seminars and graduate student
mentors) in addition to providing a new network of role models through a diverse
mentoring pool. A more diverse group of highly educated researchers in this
critical research field will create a larger workforce to solve the nation's
toughest environmental, technical, and national security
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioinspired robotics offer a truly
interdisciplinary systems research challenge that encompasses biology,
materials, mechanical design, control, sensors and actuators, power, and
electronics. To provide the collaborations necessary to solve some of these
challenges and encourage students toward future research careers, the program
will: 1. Define diverse teams of faculty, graduate student mentors, and
undergraduate researchers. 2. Provide exciting research topics covering many
aspects of bioinspired robotics. 3. Encourage collaboration and discussion
through non-traditional means, including social media forums like Facebook and
informal lunch talks among students. 4. Offer tutorial and professional
development seminars in addition to field trips to local labs. 5. Assess project
success through short-term, long-term, quantitative and qualitative metrics. The
discoveries made during these collaborations will be communicated to the broader
scientific community via publications and presentations.