* 1560037
* REU Site: Software Testing and Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* M.H. Tabrizi, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 359,838.00

This project will establish a three-year REU site in software testing and
analytics at East Carolina University (ECU). It will offer a ten-week research
program for ten undergraduate students during summer semesters. The faculty-
student interaction as well as interaction among students will take different
forms such as meetings, seminars, tutorials, workshop, and field trips. The REU
project will allow a diverse pool of undergraduate students to experience
cutting-edge research experience that will help them to become self reliant in
STEM research. Students will gain valuable research skills that will prepare
them for their future fields of study, and their exposure to the research will
help them to compete for high technology fields in an innovative job market. The
research experience will also motivate them to continue onto graduate studies.
The REU project also will provide students an opportunity to collaborate with
their faculty mentors and student peers across the nation after the summer
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sample research projects cover open research
topics in software testing and analytics. Software Testing and Analysis of
Scientific Software is to investigate the technique for adequately testing
complex scientific software systems. The experimental data generated from the
testing will be analyzed with machine learning tools for improving the test
efficiency and effectiveness. We expect students will master basic principles of
software testing and become skillful in creating test strategies and using tools
for testing scientific software. Fault Detection Effectiveness and MC/DC
Coverage of Combinatorial Test Cases will investigate the integration of
combinatorial testing and MC/DC (modified condition/decision coverage) testing.
Studies such as how logical expressions can be effectively tested, sensitivity
analysis of different partitions of the input domain and factors that may affect
combinatorial-based test generation, and a cross comparison between tests
generated using different combinatorial testing algorithms will be conducted.
Students will receive rigorous training in software testing and software testing
research in this project. Software Analytics for Mobile Domain Specific Language
(DSL) Construction will analyze program analysis results for the improvement of
the development of DSL, and Guided Test Generation for Web Applications will use
program analysis results to derive tests for testing web applications. The two
projects will offer students the opportunity to learn the principles,
applications and experimental study of program analysis.