* 1560750
* Materials &amp; Engineering: Propelling Innovation
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2015,12/31/2016
* Gopal Rao, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2016
* USD 17,280.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;MRS Bulletin, a publication of the Materials
Research Society (MRS), is conducting a half-day session at the 2015 MRS Fall
Meeting in Boston on December 2, 2015 aimed at capturing the unique relationship
between advanced materials and their engineering applications, which are closely
intertwined. This session complements a special issue of MRS Bulletin titled
Materials and Engineering: Propelling Innovation (December 2015 issue). With
support from the Division of Materials Research, this special session will
include two talks by well-known materials experts who have applied materials
research in engineering applications, followed by a panel discussion with six
participants. The discussion will focus on the state-of-the-art in advanced
materials applications and translation of research, and how applications needs
have pushed materials developments. The session emphasizes the importance of
open dialogue between materials scientists involved in research and engineers
who translate these ideas into real world products for the benefit of society.
The discussions will span the broad spectrum of materials and applications. The
larger goal is to promote dialogue between materials researchers and engineers,
and to encourage early career researchers, including graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers, to think about real applications of their research efforts
for the larger benefit to Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The special session at the 2015 MRS Fall Meeting in Boston
complements a special issue of MRS Bulletin titled Materials and Engineering:
Propelling Innovation (December 2015 issue). Materials enable engineering;
engineering applications in turn depend on materials to transform design
concepts and equations into physical entities. This unique relationship
continues to grow with expanding societal demand for new products and processes.
The discussions will focus on the many interactions between materials science
and technology development covering the entire materials cycle in a variety of
applications. The goal is to describe the road traversed in establishing the
relationship between materials and engineering, and to present a spectrum of new
materials with enticing properties and relevant engineering applications. The
session addresses how engineering accentuates the properties of materials, and
how materials inspire innovations in engineering and technology.