* 1560052
* REU Site in Physics and Astronomy: Supporting Undergraduate Research at Geneseo (SURGE)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* James McLean, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2020
* USD 235,445.00

REU Site in Physics and Astronomy: Supporting Undergraduate Research at Geneseo
(SURGE)

SURGE provides an exciting ten-week research experience to a cohort of six to
eight undergraduates each year at the State University of New York at Geneseo, a
nationally recognized center of excellence in physics education. REU students
are integrated into small teams of undergraduate researchers working closely
with a faculty mentor, who nurtures their experimental, analytical, and
communication skills. Students also experience physics in action by visiting
regional facilities, where they interact with practicing physicists. Active
recruitment at community colleges expands research opportunities for
underrepresented students and for those with limited research prospects.
Retention of students in physics, especially women and other underrepresented
groups, is supported by showing them how physics research addresses societally
relevant problems, and also through an online mentoring community that persists
after completion of the summer experience.

Students in SURGE deepen their understanding of physics and astronomy through
direct application of physics concepts to solve intriguing problems using state-
of-the-art instrumentation. They design detection systems for inertial
confinement fusion experiments, develop novel materials science techniques,
analyze observational data on massive stars and on nearby open clusters, employ
scanning probe microscopy, engineer automated positioning systems, and measure
the optical properties of atmospheric aerosols. SURGE also expands knowledge
about the impact of undergraduate research experiences, based on nationally
normed assessments, independent evaluations, and post-experience assessment
surveys.