* 1560013
* REU Site:  STEM  CATS: Creating Academic Teacher Scholars in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Wilhelm, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2022
* USD 360,656.00

The goal of this University of Kentucky REU project is to prepare STEM teachers
by fostering the development of their higher order thinking skills and deep
conceptual STEM understanding based on research-confirmed best practices that
they, themselves will investigate. The project will expose 24 pre-service K-12
STEM teachers to timely problems involving STEM teaching and learning through
original research conducted with eight successful faculty mentors affiliated
with University of Kentucky's STEM Education Department. The project will also
provide experiences that may increase the interest of students from Bluegrass
Community and Technical College in becoming K-12 STEM
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the project pre-service STEM teachers will
participate in authentic inquiry into local educational issues with national and
international implications such as spatial recognition, informal learning, and
mathematics experiences and conceptions. The project will help the students to
cultivate an appreciation of the interplay between society and education and
research, especially concerning the multiple transformative means of fostering
STEM literacy across diverse learner populations. Students will be exposed to
hands-on application of the social-scientific methods that they could eventually
practice in their own STEM classrooms. Students will also be introduced to
broader issues impacting these methods such as how ethics affect testing of
certain hypotheses and how social biases might influence research with respect
to which methodologies are used and how results are reported. Formative
information will be collected each semester from all involved to monitor
progress toward goals and guide program improvements. Summative information will
be comprised of longitudinal outcomes data analysis to determine overall impact.
While quantitative data will be used to discover correlations between students'
sense of efficacy and likelihood of continuing to research (the Research Self-
efficacy Scale and the NSF Biology's Undergraduate Research Student Self-
Assessment), semi-structured interviews will be conducted to discover how
participants, who vary by a variety of factors, respond individually to the
project.