* 1560700
* Land Systems Dynamics, Vulnerability and Adaptation in a Transfrontier Conservation Area
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Joel Hartter, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 324,999.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research project will
provide new knowledge regarding how the environment, institutions, and land use
affect household and community vulnerability. It also will identify potential
leverage points where changes in adaptive capacity will reduce vulnerability.
The project will expand knowledge regarding how feedback from human-environment
interactions affect vulnerability in a region characterized by increasing
environmental uncertainty. The findings from this project will strengthen the
theoretical framework of political ecology by identifying linkages between
household vulnerability and adaptive capacity. The project will have a strong
focus on educational and research capacity building in the study region,
fostering collaboration between U.S. and African institutions and providing a
strong foundation for interdisciplinary education and training of undergraduate
and graduate students. Project results also will promote locally based
collaborative ties with national and international partners to address issues of
land and resource stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand relationships
among vulnerability, resource use, and environmental variability, this project
will study the adaptive capacity of a system to adjust, modify, or change its
characteristics in response to shocks or stress. The research will focus on the
Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area in southern Africa, the largest
internationally managed, terrestrial conservation area in the world. By
examining interactions among environmental variability, resource use, and
household vulnerability, the investigators will determine if, and at what
spatial scale, land-use decisions are best detected on the landscape. The main
goals of this project are to identify the socioecological conditions and
patterns that affect household and community vulnerability and to determine
leverage points that may aid in mitigating how land-use decisions and land-cover
change affect vulnerability. The investigators will combine household surveys
and participatory mapping to characterize how indicators of vulnerability shape
smallholders' land use decisions. Data on the environment, market factors,
government policy and subsidies, culture and ethnicity, and the presence and
intervention of non-governmental organizations will be integrated with remotely
sensed imagery to compare trajectories of land-use and land-cover change with
underlying socioecological drivers. An integrated, quantitative modeling
framework will evaluate the strength of the hypothesized associations among
aspects of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. By advancing the
understanding of vulnerability, this research will identify how vulnerability
influences and is affected by socioeconomic and biophysical drivers at multiple
scales.