* 1560543
* The Long-Term Socioeconomic Dynamics of Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Dolores Koenig, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 230,783.00

Economic growth depends of the development of infrastructures that allow for
enterprise to thrive and innovate. Infrastructural development often
significantly impacts the communities in which it takes place, and
transportation and energy initiatives, for example, can require that these
communities be displaced and resettled. Public confidence in these efforts
depends on the mitigation of uneven development outcomes to these displaced
communities. Scientists know much about the short-term dynamics of displacement
and resettlement. This research would give scientists a rare opportunity to
understand those dynamics over the long-term. In addition, the project would
strengthen collaboration among international communities of scientists, train a
graduate student in methods of scientifically-grounded and empirical data
collection, and contribute data that would be of benefit to public policy
experts concerned with development and resettlement.

Dr. Dolores Koenig of the American University will lead a team of researchers
investigating the long-term dynamics of forced displacement and resettlement
resulting from large infrastructural development projects. The research would
revisit a region for which there is substantial baseline data and analyses: the
Manantali dam in Mali, which displaced large numbers of Senegal River Basin
residents in the late 1980s. The projects asks whether the long-term impacts of
forced displacement and resettlement vary depending on the access that resettled
individuals and their descendants have to economic and social resources. In
collaboration with researchers from the Institut des Sciences Humains in Bamako,
the research team will track household samples from two studies of migrants
conducted in the 1980s, and another larger sample from a study conducted in
1993-94. Date will be gathered at four different sites with varied access to
resources, to test whether livelihood and other decision-making strategies
differ significantly. Data on food security, socioeconomic status, social
organization and kinship, health care and education access, consumption
patterns, and a range of other decision-making practices will be collected
through interviews and other ethnographic data collection techniques. The
project will advance anthropological and other scientific understandings about
economic livelihoods and their sustainability, and the social structures that
sustain livelihoods and access to resources.