* 1560276
* REU Site: Proactive Health Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2020
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 359,990.00

REU Site: Proactive Health Informatics&lt;br/&gt;The Proactive Health
(ProHealth) Informatics Research Experience for Undergraduates site at Indiana
University Bloomington will provide 10 undergraduate students with the
opportunity to conduct research for 10 weeks with world-renown faculty members
in the fields of human computer interaction, pervasive computing, machine
learning, privacy, and technical policy. At least 5 of the undergraduate
students will be from underrepresented groups, including first generation
college students, and students who do not have access to research opportunities.
The undergraduate students will have the opportunity to: (1) learn how to design
and build new mobile or wearable health systems; (2) use the data collected from
these systems to create personalized recommendations; (3) investigate possible
privacy issues from collecting this data and propose solutions to protect one's
privacy; or (4) understand the law implications for collecting, using, and
storing this data. These projects can potentially improve the health of the
broader United States population. Undergraduate researchers will learn how to:
conduct ethical research; document their progress; represent themselves
professionally online; prepare for graduate school; network in professional
settings; appropriately disseminate one's findings through writing and
presentation; and prepare oneself for future career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Proactive Health (ProHealth) Informatics REU
Site is to train undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to become the next
generation of researchers who design, develop, and evaluate intelligent,
pervasive systems that empower lay people to proactively manage their health.
Innovations include the design of new mobile or wearable health systems that
integrate seamlessly into a person's life while providing appropriately shared,
and valuable feedback. To this end, the interdisciplinary ProHealth team will
(1) train undergraduates to conduct cross-cutting computing research; (2)
introduce students to graduate education and research career opportunities
through preparatory workshops and one-on-one mentoring; (3) increase faculty and
graduate student awareness of undergraduate research mentoring through Affinity
Research Group model workshops; (4) provide opportunities for students to
disseminate research results and faculty to disseminate best practices for
mentoring; and (5) inspire middle and high school students to consider computing
through REU panels and shadowing opportunities during computing-related summer
camps.