* 1560939
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Post-Disaster Housing Recovery Integrating Performance Based Engineering and Urban Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Scott Miles, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 220,893.00

Following natural disasters in the United States, federal, state and local
government officials must facilitate the recovery of the functionality and well-
being of the affected communities. The housing sector plays a vital role in
recovery because schools, businesses, neighborhoods and community-based
organizations all rely on residents having healthy living conditions so that
they can remain in the affected region. Existing disaster risk modeling methods
are not able to adequately represent the housing recovery process and its long-
term impacts to communities. This project will address this problem by
developing and applying new data and computer model methods to simulate post-
disaster housing recovery. The computer model will enable policy-makers and
planners to quantify the benefits and tradeoffs associated with possible pre-
and post-disaster housing interventions. They will be able to explore potential
scenarios for various future hazard events towards the goal of enhancing housing
recovery after disasters in the United States. To facilitate technology transfer
to other researchers and disaster risk managers, the computer model and data
from this project will be free, open source, and available over the World Wide
Web. The research will provide training for a doctoral student and an
opportunity to teach undergraduate students from different backgrounds about the
role of science and engineering in improving the resilience of communities to
natural disasters.

We will investigate key questions related to housing recovery using a post-
disaster recovery simulation model that integrates building performance
information and homeowner decision making over space and time. The three main
components of the research are (1) a probabilistic model that computes building
damage using data about loss of functionality, habitability, and repairability
(2) a model that quantifies the influences and uncertainty associated with
homeowners' decisions whether to repair, reoccupy, sell, or abandon damaged
homes based on the extent of damage, demographics, neighborhood conditions, and
utility services and (3) a simulation of post-disaster housing recovery, that
accounts for the influences of building, homeowner, and resource attributes,
such as housing stock and population movement. We will apply the simulation
model to a large urban jurisdiction for the purposes of (a) evaluation, (b)
hypothesis testing, (c) and assessing potential policies and other interventions
for enhancing recovery. The project will further the science in performance-
based engineering and urban modeling to facilitate experiments for examining the
geographic effects of post-disaster residential building functionality and
housing occupancy.