* 1560300
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Program at Clemson University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* William Pennington, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 315,000.00

Professors Pennington and Garcia and their colleagues in the Chemistry
Department of Clemson University host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership
with the NSF Chemistry REU program. This Summer Undergraduate Research Program
(SURP) brings ten participants annually from regional Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), primarily undergraduate institutions, and
two-year technical colleges. Undergraduates perform research in the areas of
advanced materials and chemical biology. In addition, the undergraduates are
provided many opportunities for personal and professional growth and development
through numerous workshops, seminars, and panel discussions on topics ranging
from the fundamentals of instrumentation techniques, research opportunities in
the various disciplines of chemistry, career planning and preparation, and the
role of women and underrepresented groups in the sciences. The recruitment and
selection process targets female and underrepresented minority students who,
despite having academic metrics that limit their opportunities in conventional
REU programs, feature noncognitive factors (positive self-concept, realistic
self-appraisal, long-range goals, system navigation, leadership, and
demonstrated community service) that indicate a strong aptitude for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU students perform research in two high
impact areas: advanced materials and chemical biology to improve the health and
quality of life of our society. Some of the areas of study available to students
include examination of carbon nanotube-peptide composite structures, the
synthesis and characterization of plasmonic nanoparticle assemblies, the
synthesis of proton conducting polymer electrodes with applications to fuel
cells, the development of nanocomposites and biocompatible surfaces, the study
of quantum dots with applications to sensors and imaging, and the development of
peptide-based chiral catalysts. The research training students receive in the
lab, the professional development fostered by the workshops, panel discussions,
and seminars at Clemson University, and the subsequent presentation of their
work at professional conferences contributes to students' ability to
successfully pursue a productive career in chemistry and related sciences.