* 1560483
* REU Site: Wireless Health Research and Education
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Gregory Pottie, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract: REU Site: Wireless Health Research and
Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) Site for Wireless Health Research and Education addresses
the problem of how to enable low-cost monitoring of patients in the community to
ensure the effectiveness of prescribed therapies. Consider the example of
physical rehabilitation. Exercises performed under the supervision of a physical
therapist will be done properly. But once the patient goes home, there is no
assurance that the exercises necessary for recovery are done properly, or at
all. With modern information technology such as smart phones and radio-capable
sensors, it is now possible to deploy systems that are easy for patients to use
that provide such monitoring. Together with processing of the data the sensors
produce, meaningful feedback can be provided to both the patients and their
caregivers on how well they are doing the exercises, and whether they can
progress to the next set. This promises both better care and lower cost in
providing it. This is especially important with the aging of the population, and
the need for additional assistance in achieving independent living for as long
as possible. Students will work on developing new technologies for such
applications during their summer research. Some of the projects initiated will
then be used as the jumping off point for undergraduate and graduate courses in
the following year for many more students to develop them further while also
learning about this emerging field of wireless health. Thus, the research and
educational components are tightly coupled, resulting in training of many
engineers to support the important societal goal of improved and lower cost
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site will impact both
scientific and educational research communities. The intellectual focus of this
proposal is on the development of wireless health experimental equipment and
procedures with the goal of enabling large-scale deployments in the community
for applications including physical rehabilitation, monitoring of chronic
conditions, sports training and promotion of wellness (e.g., through exercise).
Presently, monitoring methods are either costly or require elaborate
calibration; our focus is on robust procedures that are tolerant of equipment
misuse. To this end, tools and procedures produced in the summers will be
further extended in regular courses, including senior design, to harden the
designs through exposure to larger populations. In this way a much larger of
group of undergraduate students will participate in research, with tools that
are refreshed in each academic year. This research will have multiple benefits:
increasing students' skills, knowledge base, and preparation for future study;
and contributing to research breakthroughs with scientific, medical, and social
relevance. The main objective of this Site is to provide high quality research
experiences and professional development to undergraduates, especially women and
underrepresented students. Our recruitment efforts will focus on identifying
students from other institutions, particularly those that may not have access to
research opportunities, to participate in the program. With carefully designed
research projects, participating undergraduates become actively involved in the
research of the Wireless Health Institute, gaining a first-hand experience of
life as a graduate student. This experience (balancing research, professional
development, and networking activities) benefits the undergraduate scholars but
also provides value to participating graduate student and faculty mentors, and
the broader research communities. Moreover, the tools and procedures developed
will each year support 50 undergraduates per year in pursuing research through
regularly scheduled senior design courses. Finally, students in other summer
research programs, particularly from community colleges, participate in our
scaffolding designed to enhance progress to research.