* 1560214
* REU Site: An REU Site on Security for Mobile Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Yesem Kurt-Peker, Columbus State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 230,486.00

This CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new
REU site focused on the security and mobile sensing at Columbus State
University. The REU site will provide 8 undergraduates per summer the
opportunity to work with faculty mentors in state-of-the-art research labs on
projects in the important areas of cybersecurity and mobile sensing. Mobile
computing devices and their associated sensing capabilities and applications are
pervasive in our society. Security of these devices and the data that is
collected through related applications is an important concern to all citizens.
This site will give students an opportunity to explore and delve deeply into an
area of computing that is relevant and timely. The REU Site will benefit from
access to the new Cybersecurity Center at Columbus State University (CSU). CSU
was has also been designed as a Center for Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance Education by the National Security Agency. The students will also
participate in a number of professional development activities and field trips
that will prepare them for future careers as computing professionals in the
field of cybersecurity, an area of critical need for the workforce of the
future. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with
the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by an outstanding
of faculty mentors to guide undergraduates in explorations of problems related
to the security and mobile sensing. The goal of the site is to excite
undergraduates and to provide research experiences to students who might not
otherwise have opportunities for research experiences at their own institutions.
The site will particularly seek to recruit students from groups under-
represented in computing fields The site has the potential to will contribute to
the field of mobile sensing and security through research and implementation of
algorithms, frameworks, and applications for security and privacy, intelligent
data collection and analysis, indoor location methods, and power management
mechanisms for mobile sensor network environments. Computer security and mobile
sensing are fundamental components of many consumer products as well as many
common applications in areas such as healthcare, transportation and traffic
control, home and building automation, environmental monitoring, and energy that
are important in our society. These are all areas which should appeal to
students and actively engage them in projects that are meaningful to the
computing research community and relevant to all citizens.