* 1560384
* REU Site: Research and Training in Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biodesign (B3) for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2019
* USD 318,374.00

The Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biodesign (B3) REU site award to City College
of New York (CCNY), located in New York, NY, will support the training of 9
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-2019. This project is supported
by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences (BIO) and the Division of Chemistry (CHE)in the Directorate
for Mathematics &amp; Physical Sciences (MPS). The B3 research program is
comprised of faculty mentors from five different departments housed together in
the new Center for Discovery and Innovation (CDI) which fosters a strong
collaborative environment. The program features state-of-the-art research
training for students at the interface of biology, chemistry, physics, and
engineering, including the use of advanced techniques in NMR spectroscopy, X-ray
crystallography, and molecular dynamics simulations. Exciting projects available
to students address the structural biology of signaling, DNA damage repair,
engineering of biomimetic assemblies, and the design of novel enzymes. The
B3-REU will primarily train CCNY undergraduates and students from community
colleges at the City University of New York (CUNY) system, but will also accept
applications from other community colleges or schools with limited opportunities
for research. Experimental science will be supplemented with workshops and
seminars, ethics training, STEM career discussions, and field trips to enable
students, especially those from under-represented and underserved groups, to
develop an identity as a scientist that will motivate the pursuit of advanced
degrees and careers in science. Students will submit applications to, and be
admitted by, the program steering committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 27 students, primarily from CCNY and CUNY schools
with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. The program
will broadly impact three areas: 1) attracting and retaining students, including
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups, to STEM pursuits, 2)
providing multi-disciplinary training of students in Biochemistry, Biophysics
and Biodesign, and 3) increasing retention and graduation rates in STEM
disciplines at CCNY and CUNY. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available at https://www.ccny.cuny.edu/engagement/nsf-reu-summer-program-2017 or
by contacting the PI (Dr. David Jeruzalmi dj@ccny.cuny.edu).