* 1560768
* Factors Influencing Changing Meanings of Sovereignty
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Yarimar Bonilla, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 121,798.00

Among many social scientists broadly, sovereignty has frequently been explored
in relation to claims for political independence by one group of people from a
larger entity. But anthropologists have documented many cases where groups of
human beings find other methods for pursuing sovereignty than through the
formation of autonomous nation-states. This project asks what factors influence
human beings to seek sovereignty through means other than political
independence. The project would aid public policy experts in their efforts to
understand and anticipate social movements not only in the United States, where
this research is taking place, but in other parts of the world where sovereignty
claims have taken new form. In addition, the project would strengthen
collaboration among scientists in the mainland U.S. and Puerto Rico, broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences, and train
undergraduate and graduate students in methods of scientifically-grounded and
empirical data collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Yarimar Bonilla of Rutgers
University explores how notions of citizenship and national identity are
reimagined within contexts of shifting and disputed forms of sovereignty. The
research explores the Puerto Rican statehood movement, an important site for
answering this question as the movement has paradoxically gained popularity
among those who have advocated other forms of sovereign status over annexation
and statehood. As an unincorporated territory of the United States, Puerto
Rico's relationship to the United States has long been ambiguous and
misunderstood. Famously described as "foreign in a domestic sense," Puerto Rico
is a space where notions of citizenship nationality are hotly debated. For many
years the island's commonwealth status promised local residents "the best of
both worlds" in the sense of offering US citizenship with a measure of local
sovereignty. However, as the economy has stagnated over the past twenty years
leading to failing infrastructure, a seemingly unpayable public debt, and
historic levels of out-migration (resulting in a larger concentration of Puerto
Ricans in the continental United States than in the Puerto Rican territory), a
growing number of Puerto Ricans currently support political annexation to the
United States. This project will examines how and why a large number of Puerto
Ricans advocate for Puerto Rico to become the 51st state. Utilizing data
collected through archival research, participant observation, surveys, focus
groups and individual interviews, the PI will examine how statehood is imagined
by its advocates and what problems it is deemed capable of solving. The findings
of this research will have broad implications for thinking about the cultural
meanings of citizenship in an era of shifting sovereignty and about the current
landscape of political possibility in the United States and its margins.