* 1560180
* REU Site: Summer Neuroscience Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program at UVM
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Eugene Delay, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 278,728.00

This REU Site award to the University of Vermont (UVM), located in Burlington,
VT, will support the training of 8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2016-2018. The theme of the REU program is neuroscience. Students
will be mentored by faculty participating in UVM's PhD-granting Neuroscience
Graduate Program (NGP) and will conduct research aimed at elucidating the
anatomical, cellular, molecular, and behavioral aspects of neurobiology.
Students will have access to NGP resources, including up-to-date imaging and
molecular facilities. Students can select from a range of innovative projects
that combine the behavioral analysis of genetically altered model organisms with
high resolution imaging of the nervous system. Students will be trained in a
wide range of scientific methodologies that include biochemical analysis, DNA
sequencing and gene expression analysis, quantitative morphology, and behavioral
analysis. Particular emphasis is placed on the teaching of valid experimental
design, statistical analysis and interpretation. Weekly lectures are designed to
highlight seminal experimental studies and studies that have established the
basic concepts of modern neuroscience. Other lectures are focused on issues of
career development and the importance of ethical and responsible scientific
conduct. The end products of the program include student-authored posters that
are presented to the entire UVM community at a poster session. Students are
encouraged to take the posters to their home institution and further scientific
meetings for additional presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that a total of 24 students, many from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program. A diverse cohort of students that
includes minority students underrepresented in STEM as well as underserved
students from diverse social backgrounds and geographical origin will be
actively recruited. Selection of applicants is based primarily on the
applicant's interest in neuroscience and the potential that the program can
enhance the applicant's career, rather than just academic scores. Application is
available online at www.uvm.edu/~nbhspire/?Page=snurf.html.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool, used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences), will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. The results will be used to guide continued program
improvement. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent
via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available
online at http://www.uvm.edu/~nbhspire/?Page-snurf.html (PI Dr. Felix
Eckenstein) or by contacting Mr. Daniel Mills (802-656-0435,
Daniel.Mills@uvm.edu)