* 1560360
* REU Site: Experiential Learning Undergraduate Research Opportunities on Energy and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Leslie Lamberson, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2019
* USD 371,517.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Drexel University
engages undergraduate students in research focused around the critical and
timely engineering challenges on topics related to energy and the environment
utilizing the principles of experiential learning. With concerted recruitment of
underrepresented minorities, women, and those who do not have access to advanced
research facilities at their own educational institutions, this REU Site
promises to open new career paths to some of the best and brightest students in
the nation who might otherwise miss out on these opportunities. The REU Site
addresses two critical needs faced by the nation: 1) effectively developing
human resources in science and engineering, and 2) addressing the scientific
challenges on energy and the environment directly benefiting the ability to
create a better, more sustainable future.

This REU Site offers opportunities for undergraduate students to engage in
energy and environment related research during a 9-week summer program. The REU
will encourage undergraduate students to explore research careers, develop
graduate student educational and mentoring expertise, create collaborations on
many levels, and inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers. The
three main objectives of the Site are: 1) Provide experiential learning research
opportunities to students and their faculty advisors from institutions that do
not typically offer research experiences to undergraduate students, with a
particular emphasis on underrepresented minority groups; 2) Encourage
participants to explore and pursue graduate education and research careers in
cutting edge science and engineering fields; 3) Demonstrate to participants the
benefits of experiential learning through synergy of hands-on research projects,
active discussion and feedback, reflection of pursuits, and awareness of how
their effort fits into the broader scientific and engineering challenges
associated with energy and the environment. In addition to active energy and
environment research projects all within the A.J. Drexel Institute of Energy and
the Environment mentored by faculty from the College of Engineering, students
will participate in research seminars, ethics training, writing and
communications training, field trips to world class research facilities,
educational outreach, and career development activities.