* 1560303
* REU Site: REU in Functional Materials and Manufacturing at University of South Florida
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* John Kuhn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 10/31/2021
* USD 389,906.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the
University of South Florida (USF), offers state-of-the-art, inter-disciplinary
research experiences in functional materials, especially, nanomaterials and
hybrid composite materials, to diverse and talented cohorts of undergraduates,
from institutions with limited or no research opportunities. Functional
materials and structures with novel properties and functionalities continue to
be developed, however much engineering innovation is required to translate them
into products useful to society. The goal of this project is to provide research
opportunities to allow exploration of reproducible, scalable and economically
viable processes using interdisciplinary engineering approaches within the
facilities available at the Functional Materials Research Institute (FMRI), the
location of this project at USF. Examples of research topics are the areas of 2D
nanomaterials, which have potential for large-scale revolutions in
optoelectronics, photocatalysis and photovoltaics, and hybrid composite
materials for additive manufacturing, and potential for the fabrication of a
variety of structures, shapes and sizes from the nano to macro worlds. The
anticipated outcome of this project is a new generation of materials science and
engineering researchers who can put together the interdisciplinary skills and
approaches necessary to translate the large national investments made in the
development of nano and hybrid materials over the past two decades into
products. It is expected that the participants will be motivated towards
graduate school and will develop skills common to methodologies involved in the
process of engineering innovation. Beyond the research opportunities planned for
the participants, activities are planned to promote improved communication and
mentoring skills for the students and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
Site offers undergraduates, in collaboration with USF FMRI faculty and graduate
students, opportunities to conduct research during a 10-week summer program, on
state-of-the-art technologies and advanced research projects on functional
materials. In addition to their research, students will participate in research
seminars, research meetings, and professional development seminars. The seminars
will include topics such as improving written and oral communication skills,
technical presentations, graduate education, career paths, and ethics in science
and engineering. The 10-week program will be co-located with the on-going NSF
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site and the Research Experiences for
High School Students (REHSS) which will leverage synergies between the programs.
The discoveries made during these collaborations will be communicated to the
broader scientific community via publications and presentations.