* 1560948
* Developing Ethical Guidelines and Best Practices for the Use of Volunteered Geographic Information and Remotely Sensed Imagery in Crisis Situations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jessica Wyndham, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 229,952.00

This project will develop ethical principles and guidelines, as well as draft
best practices for the use of remote sensing and volunteered geographic
information (VGI) in crisis situations. Since there are no existing guidelines
or best practices to guide such research, the results of the project will be
transformative for researchers and collaborators in the field. Moreover, it will
have a ripple effect through development of educational materials to prepare
future researchers to understand and give priority to their responsibilities
when conducting collaborative research with non-scientists. Remote sensing and
VGI generate geolocated data used not just by scientists, but also by
practitioners with little scientific training seeking to intervene in crisis
situations, which often unfold in remote and dangerous locations inhabited by
vulnerable populations and may involve human rights abuses, humanitarian and
disaster responses, and threats to cultural heritage during conflict. Hence, the
project will not only promote the ethical and rigorous use of these techniques
for researchers, it will also guide the work of stakeholders outside academia, a
crucial step to reducing risks to populations. Given the global settings in
which crises emerge, this project reaches beyond traditional scholarly audiences
to disseminate research findings and approaches. It will include non-scientist
users and the voices of under-represented groups, such as people in the
developing world and women, in order to diversify discussions on the best ways
to protect on-the-ground researchers, the volunteers of information, and those
threatened by the misuse or careless distribution of geolocated information.

Geographers are well-positioned to develop and apply remote sensing and VGI
approaches to socially important issues. Nevertheless, methodological lapses may
impede further progress. Some methodological issues addressed by this project
include: data provenance; quality control in data collection and analysis;
representativeness of the collected data; and potential data gaps due to factors
such as gender and access to technology. These are core matters for how a
professional discipline establishes standards for assessing the rigor and
accuracy of its methods and instrumentation, and how it applies those methods in
an ethically acceptable manner. While such matters fall into the domain of the
profession, they cannot be understood fully in the present day social context
without dialogue with non-scientist users. Two key research questions explored
by this study include:

1. What standards are needed for the collection, analysis, use and dissemination
of geolocated data during crisis situations? Operating without standards
endangers the safety and security of people on the ground and complicates
efforts to identify appropriate policy and interventions to protect and assist
populations. 2. What are the best means for engaging a diverse set of
geographers and users in developing and disseminating those standards - ethical
principles and guidelines and best practices - so they are accepted and
implemented in studies that use geolocated data in crisis situations?

These and other questions will be addressed through a series of invitational
workshops and solicitations of feedback from stakeholder communities.
Participants will be drawn from the international academic, humanitarian,
cultural heritage, crisis mapping, disaster, and human rights communities.