* 1560223
* REU Site: Astronomical Research and Instrumentation at Texas A&amp;M University
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Marshall, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2020
* USD 387,414.00

Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) will host a summer REU (Research Experiences for
Undergraduates) program in astronomy. Students will complete individual research
projects with a faculty mentor. They will also benefit from interaction with
summer students in 14 other TAMU REU programs, such as the REU Summer Scholars
Program (weekly informal lunch discussions focusing on ethnic minority issues)
and the university-wide summer REU Poster Session. This program will benefit
society by enhancing the education of undergraduates through research and
professional development programs, by involving them in the development of
advanced astronomical instrumentation, and by extending these opportunities to
students from institutions otherwise unable to offer such experiences, which
will be a primary focus of the recruitment efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
summer will begin with a 3-day workshop that will give them a hands-on
introduction to data visualization and computational data analysis. Students
will also have the opportunity to design, construct, test, and deploy a variety
of instruments to be used at astronomical observatories around the world. TAMU
astronomy faculty are involved in most of the current and future large-scale
observational astronomy collaborations. All of the REU students have the
opportunity to spend one week observing at McDonald Observatory in west Texas,
and they will be invited to participate in public outreach activities.