* 1560476
* Multi-Modality Optimal Radiation Treatments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Minsun Kim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 299,919.00

Cancer is one of the leading causes of death in the United States, affecting
many families. Various radiation treatment modalities, such as photons, protons,
and neutrons, are currently used in an effort to eradicate cancer cells while
preserving the functionality of healthy tissue. Each modality has its own
physical and radiobiological strengths as well as weaknesses. Using more than
one modality in treating cancer is motivated by the idea of exploiting the
advantages of different radiation types to overcome the weaknesses that any
single modality suffers, and eventually improving the efficacy of cancer
therapy. Current efforts on finding an optimal, multi-modality treatment
paradigm for a particular cancer type are mostly empirical, and heuristic
searches result in a long and costly period of trial-and-error. This award
supports research to develop an optimization tool that systematically searches
for optimal, multi-modality radiotherapy schemes, which can then be tailored to
particular cancer types as needed. The optimal treatment protocols will provide
guidance in designing trials of new effective and efficient radiation
treatments. If successful, this will lead to longer survival and increase
quality of life for cancer patients. The multi-disciplinary project team will
include students and trainees in different areas including industrial
engineering, applied mathematics, and medical physics, and positively impact
education in science and engineering.

This research utilizes the stochastic control formalism, where the system
consists of the tumor and normal tissue subject to the modality-specific
uncertainty and tumor-specific radiobiological parameters. The time-dependent
beam intensities of multiple radiation types are used as controls, and they
determine the spatiotemporal dose distribution during a treatment course.
Optimal treatment consists of the maximum biologically-effective-dose or
equivalent uniform dose feasible for a given patient's physical and
radiobiological condition, which is positively correlated with clinical
outcomes. The research team will construct the general optimization framework,
apply to specific cancer types using phantom studies, perform numerical
simulations to quantify the potential benefits of an optimal solution over the
conventional treatment schemes that are currently used in practice, and come up
with treatment paradigms that could be tested in future clinical trials.