* 1560920
* Waste Infrastructure, Urban Citizenship, and the Process of Urban Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Rosalind Fredericks, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 139,972.00

Globalizing cities around the world face a myriad of challenges surrounding
economic development, infrastructural upgrades, and the management of public
space. Urban planners often confront competing interests of different
constituent groups in their efforts to balance the need to modernize
infrastructures with fostering of employment for the urban poor. Conversions of
garbage dumps to modern sanitary landfills, for example, may reduce hazards to
public health at the same time they threaten the livelihoods of thousands of
people who rely on waste picking and recycling for survival. The contestations
that take place over the right to the dump cut to the heart of urban citizenship
and the poor's rights to the city and public space. This project will
investigate how various stakeholder groups differently understand and value
waste infrastructures and evaluate the labor implications of upgrades to
sanitation facilities. In so doing, it will advance understanding of the
infrastructure planning process, urban citizenship, and the means through which
the urban poor contest projects that threaten their livelihoods. Research
results will have valuable implications for planners, policymakers, and social
justice advocates addressing the challenges posed by infrastructure
modernization in cities of the Global South. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on a case study of a planned sanitation upgrade that has spawned an
organized protest movement by waste pickers in Dakar, Senegal. Dakar is an ideal
setting for this research because of its long history of peaceful, multi-party
democracy, its long tradition of urban citizenship movements, and recent trends
to "clean up" undesirable places and informal laborers. Dakar's sprawling dump,
Mbeubeuss, is one of the oldest and largest landfills in Africa. Though the
government plan to upgrade the infrastructure has been frustrated over the last
few years by protests, under pressure from its funder the World Bank, efforts
are underway to push the upgrade forward in the next two years. Through
ethnographic research with key stakeholders, including government planners and
waste pickers, the research will examine the planning process during this time
as a window into material struggles around urban citizenship and the rights of
the city's poorest. Extensive interviews, participant observation, and
participatory mapping will be conducted in order to reveal the different spatial
and material relations represented by the two infrastructures, how actors'
contested visions for the dump are embedded in their material practices (e.g.
recycling processes versus office work), and the forms of expert and vernacular
knowledge marshaled by each group. Special attention will be paid to the way
that picker activists contest the authoritative knowledge of planning through
their alternative development discourses and practices of civic science.
Contributing to debates in political infrastructures, geographies of waste,
urban political ecology, and the politics of environmental knowledge, the
research will show the material basis of urban citizenship and lend insight into
strategies for more pro-poor infrastructure planning.