* 1560097
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Program in Multi-scale Biological Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 325,926.00

This REU Site award to Rice University, located in Houston, TX, will support the
training of ten students for ten weeks during the summers of 2016-2018. This REU
site seeks to expose students to the excitement of biological research and the
increasing contributions that different science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) disciplines are making towards a detailed understanding of
biological systems. To achieve this, students will work in labs that draw from
an array of approaches - from classical biochemical and genetic to non-trivial
theoretical modeling that requires computation. The research areas include: (i)
biomolecular structure, function, and evolution, (ii) naturally-occurring
genetic networks, (iii) synthetic genetic and metabolic networks, and (iv)
ecological networks. The participating faculty mentors come from a range of
departments including Biosciences, Bioengineering, Chemical & Biomolecular
Engineering, Chemistry, and Computer Science. In addition to research, students
will participate in workshops that focus on ethics and responsible conduct of
research, professional communication, career opportunities, and the graduate
school application process. In addition to presenting their research at a
capstone poster symposium, students will be provided a creative opportunity to
develop innovative biotechnology proposal ideas by working in collaborative
groups.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will be
recruited nationwide, with an emphasis on students enrolled at proximal
minority-serving institutions, including community colleges and four-year
institutions. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available at
http://ibb.rice.edu/Content.aspx?id=563, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joff
Silberg at joff@rice.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. George Bennett at
gbennett@rice.edu).