* 1560873
* EcoCAR 3:  Advancing STEM Education, Innovation, Diversity and Outreach through Advanced Vehicle Technology Competitions
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 577,144.00

The DOE Advanced Vehicle Technology Competition (AVTC) program provides
opportunity to thousands of students annually to solve our nation's energy and
transportation challenges. The latest AVTC series, EcoCAR 3, tasks 16
universities to re-engineer a Chevrolet Camaro to reduce its environmental
impact while maintaining the performance expected from this iconic American car.
During the four-year program, EcoCAR 3 teams will follow a real-world Vehicle
Development Process that will serve as a roadmap for the engineering process of
designing, building and refining their advanced technology vehicles. The unique
real-world engineering experience provides student engineers with hands-on
research and development with leading-edge automotive propulsion, fuels,
materials and emission-control technologies. Sponsored by the U.S. Department of
Energy, General Motors and more than two dozen other government and industry
leaders, the competition not only produces top engineering talent, but also
accelerates the development and demonstration of innovative, advanced vehicle
technologies that help reduce&lt;br/&gt;our nation's dependence on foreign oil
and enable us to be competitive globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF grant
will support four areas of the EcoCAR 3 competition: the NSF Outstanding Faculty
Advisor Award, the NSF Diversity in Engineering Awards, the NSF Innovation
Initiative grants and awards, and on-site competition expenses. The NSF
Outstanding Faculty Advisor Award recognizes outstanding EcoCAR Faculty Advisors
who have successfully integrated EcoCAR goals, objectives and activities into
the engineering curriculum and fostered a successful automotive engineering
design process into their university engineering programs. The NSF Diversity in
Engineering Awards recognize teams who develop successful recruiting initiatives
directed toward women and underrepresented minorities, demonstrate a culture of
inclusion, and/or establish a positive network that will, in turn, attract a
diverse group of team members. The NSF Innovation Initiative grants and awards
will enable and recognize achievement in innovative research and development
activities in emerging areas such as energy efficiency, vehicle performance,
consumer acceptability or emissions. Support for the competition expenses will
help to enable the annual face-to-face EcoCAR 3 competition that provides the
opportunity for the public demonstration and evaluation of the student-designed
advanced technology vehicles at the conclusion of each of the three academic
years of the EcoCAR 3 program.