* 1560244
* REU Site:  Analyze This: Analytical Chemistry Applied to Interdisciplinary Research
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Greg Michalski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Purdue University entitled, "Analyze This:
Analytical Chemistry Applied to Interdisciplinary Research" that exposes
undergraduate students to how analytical chemistry continues to be one of the
foundations of innovation across the science spectrum. The REU site highlights
the need for analytical chemists in a broad range of fields and aims to satisfy
the needs of science, technology, and chemical industries by training and
mentoring students who are specializing in chemical analysis. The main activity
is student emersion into research labs where the research spans a range of
interdisciplinary fields from environmental chemistry to cancer research and
drug discovery to forensic science. The Monday morning cafes called "The
Business of Chemistry" include informal discussions between REU participants and
Chemistry faculty members who have formed start-up companies based on their
research discoveries. The topics focus on how to bring innovative research to
market and the role of chemists in the private sector. Additional activities
include chemical health and safety, ethics in the sciences, scientific writing
and presentations, resume building, and graduate school preparation. The REU is
open to all, but student recruitment efforts target underrepresented groups by
partnering with six universities that historically serve underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the mentorship of a faculty member and
graduate student, undergraduates complete an independent research project in
analytical chemistry. By participating in the methods of discovery the students
gain in-depth knowledge in their research areas. Students give oral
presentations and participate in poster sessions along with other students in
the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) Program at Purdue
University. Co-authorship in a peer-reviewed research article is a key goal for
the REU student. Through individual research, teamwork, and outreach they gain
an understanding of what is required to succeed in a career in chemistry.