* 1560240
* REU: INFEWS: N/P/H2O: MATERIALS INNOVATION AT THE INTERSECTION OF FOOD-ENERGY-WATER SYSTEMS (MII-FEWS)
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

In this project funded by The Division of Chemistry Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program, Professors Timothy Long and Susan Duncan at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University lead a summer research
program to train future scientists and engineers in innovations at the nexus of
food, energy, and water systems (INFEWS). This interdisciplinary interface
demands fundamental studies and developments in the chemistry of materials. The
scientific broader impacts address the challenges that are rapidly emerging as
our global population reaches 9 billion. Technologies ranging from "smart
farming" to water management and energy utility demand multiphase materials with
tailored structure at the nanoscale. The program has specific recruitment goals
for community college students, students from underrepresented minorities, and
female students. Training students to excel within a global scientific community
occurs in partnership with the University of Trento in
Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program produces enabling polymeric
materials for food distribution, water-efficient crop production, real-time
monitoring devices, and advanced manufacturing to print the next generation of
membranes for water purification and novel synthetic methods to understand
predictable transport and diffusion through materials. Fundamental understanding
of the molecular basis for diffusion and transport of diverse molecules through
nanostructured polymeric membranes and packaging remains paramount. The team
investigates the preparation of multiphase morphologies wherein charged groups
are located in a low glass transition phase in a co-continuous fashion with a
mechanically-durable high glass transition phase to ensure material ductility in
combination with enhanced transport in energy, water, and food applications. The
REU faculty team collectively hypothesizes that the precise tailoring of
macromolecular structure and morphology at the nanoscale enables the
predictability of physical properties and performance of technologies that
influence future availability of sufficient food, energy, and water.
Undergraduate students from Norfolk State University and the University of
Trento are actively involved in these research projects.