* 1560602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Police Militarization on Bureaucratic Behavior and Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Justin Grimmer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2017
* USD 13,327.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Law enforcement is one of the primary
avenues through which citizens interface with government. But aggressive police
tactics and the militarization of local law enforcement agencies have prompted
widespread debate about the nature of police-citizen interactions, how they can
be improved, and their impact citizens' perceptions of government and the social
world. Using novel data on public opinion and police behavior, this project
examines these issues in three parts. The first study tests whether revised
procedures inside police departments improve the quality of police-citizen
interactions. The second study assesses where and how militarized police units
are used by local law enforcement agencies, and the impact of their use on
public perceptions of crime and law enforcement. The third study tests the
generalizability of these findings across other types of government agencies.
Using a series of survey experiments, the investigator evaluates the conditions
under which that actions of government agents beyond law enforcement personnel
impact perceptions of the social problems with which they are
associated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
survey experimental data on public opinion and micro-level data on police
behavior, this project examines several normatively important questions
concerning aggressive police tactics and the militarization of local law
enforcement agencies. The first study uses an interrupted time-series analysis
to test whether revised procedures inside the police department improves the
quality of police-citizen interactions. The second study develops a theory of
the perceptual side effects of government action, while assessing where and how
militarized police units are used by local law enforcement agencies, as well as
their impact on public perceptions. Longitudinal data on S.W.A.T. team
deployments collected via hundreds of public records requests is merged with
local crime and demographic data. The PI also uses survey experiments that
randomly assign individuals to read police news reports that portray officers in
either traditional uniforms or with various levels of militarized clothing and
equipment demonstrate that individuals who see militarized police in a community
are more likely to perceive that crime is worse in that community, and less
likely to support police spending. These findings highlight how the actions of
government agents can impact public perceptions of social problems in
potentially misleading and unintended ways. The third study tests the
generalizability of these findings. Using a series of survey experiments, the PI
examines the conditions under which government agents beyond law enforcement
personnel impact perceptions of the social problems with which they are
associated.