* 1560419
* REU Site: Real-World Research Experiences at the National Weather Center
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2023
* Daphne LaDue, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2023
* USD 899,591.00

Through participation in the National Weather Center (NWC) REU program, 60
United States undergraduate students over a 5-year period will participate in a
potentially life-changing research and career exploration experience.
Participants experience the joy of scientific discovery while conducting
cutting-edge research and learning skills to become scientists. Each student
collaborates with one or more scientists in the weather, climate, and radar
organizations within the University of Oklahoma-Norman's University Research
Campus to conduct research and live the life of a scientist. Participants attend
lectures, participate in workshops to build skills and knowledge relevant to the
job, learn and practice a variety of research methods, and present their
research in both written and oral formats. Past participants' research has
advanced knowledge and understanding in basic and applied research.
Additionally, in this site renewal the grant investigators will leverage ever-
advancing innovations in education to incorporate additional skill-building of
software development and data management practices at the undergraduate level on
top of the comprehensive activity set. The research community in proximity to
this REU Site enthusiastically supports this program, and this renewal will
include new partners in the Radar Innovations Laboratory and South Central
Climate Science Center, allowing the program to include 12 participants each
year. The majority of participants will come from departments with little to no
active STEM research. This REU will have broader impacts at the individual,
local, university, state, national, and international level through the
production of formal and professional conference publications each year while
also producing or improving databases and tools useful beyond the individual
research projects. Participants' research results may be used for National
Weather Service training and emergency management operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this REU site are to 1) recruit and select a
diverse pool of competitive applicants from across the U.S., 2) show
participants the nature of a research career through direct experience and
interactions with scientists, peers, local graduate students, and REU staff, 3)
build participants' self-efficacy in regard to their capability to conduct
research, 4) expose participants to the variety of career options found in and
near Norman, Oklahoma, 5) assist each participant with graduate school and
career decisions and 6) track and network past participants. The learning
objectives will move participants from a pedagogical (dependent) to andragogical
(independent) role. The participants will read, discuss, and comprehend
technical journal articles, build and use computer skills for research and
presentation, lead their own research project (with guidance), learn and apply a
variety of research methods to conduct quality research, learn about additional
research methods through peer presentations, scientific lectures, workshops,
learning contracts, and literature reviews, prepare a print-ready manuscript and
abstract on their work, present their research in written and oral formats to
both the NWC community and to the broader scientific community.