* 1560163
* REU Site: Integrated Development of Bioenergy Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Paul Blum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 416,464.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nebraska, located in Lincoln, Nebraska,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2016- 2019. The program focuses on bioenergy -- the application of molecular and
physiologic principles using microbes, algae and plants to create renewable
sources of energy to promote a sustainable society. The School of Biological
Sciences and the Center for Plant Science Innovation have 15 participating
faculty who will serve as mentors. There are many exciting and interdisciplinary
projects available for students that employ biotechnology, molecular biology,
and biochemistry and/or genetics to understand energy dynamics in model species.
In addition to full time research, students will participate in seminars and
various workshops about research ethics, professionalism, career opportunities
in industry and academia, and the graduate school application process.
Additional features include tours of energy industries and training in technical
writing using a collaborative and student-centered approach. REU students have
access to a Carnegie I-ranked research institution with all its infrastructure
and diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 40
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. The program?s multi-phase recruitment effort consists of
traditional "hard copy" formats, digital-based advertising, and networking with
faculty at diverse institutions, including community colleges. Students are
selected based on their academic record as well as their interest and potential
in research Students are tracked to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of their
research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences), along with institutional tools, will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.unl.edu/summerprogram/research#bioenergy, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Paul Blum at pblum1@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Heriberto Cerutti at
hcerutti1@unl.edu).