* 1560088
* REU Site:   Natural History Research Experiences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2023
* Eugene Hunt, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 932,055.00

The Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), located
in Washington, D.C. will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site during the summers from 2016-2020. The REU program will support 16 students
each summer for 10 weeks, during which students will conduct independent
research and participate in a variety of professional development workshops.
Students will be housed in dorms on the George Washington University campus
which is a short walking distance to the museum. Projects focus on the NMNH's
research strengths in geology, biology, and in anthropology. Students are given
unparalleled access to the collections, facilities, and intellectual resources
of NMNH while they develop a research project in close collaboration with a
museum research scientist. The program is designed to support and prepare
participants for entry into scientific careers by providing structured council
on entering graduate school, designing, conducting and publishing research, and
presenting results to the scientific community and the public. NMNH is committed
to broadening participation and enhancing diversity in natural history
disciplines in order to develop an internationally competitive scientific work
force for the future. In addition, the REU students will themselves serve as
role models for the museum's "Youth Engagement in Science!" program for minority
high school students from the DC-Baltimore area, and they will directly engage
the museum-going public about their research - interacting with thousands of
museum visitors annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will support a total
of 80 students over a five year period while they conduct an independent
research project and participate in a variety of professional develop workshops.
Students will be provided with housing, a stipend and travel expenses to attend
the program. They will also be encouraged to publish results of their research
and to participate in scientific conferences after the program is over. While
these experiences will provide students with technical skills and pathways into
science careers, the training will also encourage the development of critical
thinking and presentation skills that will be valuable in any future career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have a wide range of potential research
mentors and research topics. Within the geosciences, scientists in the
Department of Mineral Sciences focus on the origin and evolution of the Earth
and Solar System with emphasis on the differentiation and chemical evolution of
rocky planets and asteroids, volcanic processes and hazards, environmental/soil
mineralogy, and early solar system processes. Approaches range from
microanalysis of rocks, minerals, and meteorites, to experimental petrology and
volcanology, to space mission-based science. Members of the Department of
Paleobiology explore the dynamics of life on Earth including the history of
climatic, oceanographic and environmental change, the origin and extinction of
taxa, and large-scale evolutionary patterns and processes. Scientists in the
four biological science departments focus on the discovery of Earth's
biodiversity, and on understanding its evolutionary history. Approaches used
range from traditional morphology and taxonomy to the latest in genomics and
next-generation&lt;br/&gt;sequencing. Scholars in anthropology span the sub-
disciplines of archaeology, ethnology, linguistics, and forensic, biological and
physical anthropology of humans and their relatives.