* 1560363
* REU Site: Data Intensive Scientific Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Douglas Thain, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 359,757.00

REU Site: Data Intensive Scientific Computing&lt;br/&gt;Douglas Thain and Kevin
Lannon, University of Notre Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site project will
bring ten undergraduate students to the University of Notre Dame each summer for
three years to perform research projects in scientific computing. These students
will work in collaborative groups including experts in both high performance
computing techniques and scientific fields that rely upon computing. Using
advanced computational systems, the students will work in scientific areas such
a gene sequencing, network visualization, particle physics, and astronomy.
Students will gain experience in working in groups, using computational tools,
and presenting scientific results, which will help to prepare them for entering
a career in computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing has
become an essential component of scientific discovery across the scientific
disciplines. Novel algorithms combined with large scale infrastructure have the
potential to multiply the power of simulation and data analysis tasks by many
orders of magnitude. However, our current educational models are not aligned
toward advancing scientific computing: computer science students have too little
exposure to scientific applications, while physical science students have too
little exposure to computing techniques. To address this, we propose an REU site
in Data Intensive Scientific Computing (DISC) that will bring together
undergraduates in computer science, physical sciences, and other
interdisciplinary majors. Our objective is to train all participants in
collaborative techniques so that they gain experience in both computing
techniques and a physical science domain, as appropriate to their background. To
achieve this, we have assembled a team of faculty from three distinct areas
(computer science, physics, and biological sciences) that have already formed an
active set of collaborations. Resources for the students and faculty involved
will be provided by the Notre Dame Center for Research Computing (CRC) which
provides large scale computing, storage, and communication facilities. Every
participant will have access to a large shared cluster, a high performance
parallel storage system and a data analysis cluster.