* 1560158
* REU Site: Bioarchaeology Research on the Impacts of Colonization on Local Population Health
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Britney Kyle, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2019
* USD 124,762.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education.&lt;br/&gt;This
eight-week international REU Site brings eight undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds to Sicily, Italy for four weeks to collect data from ancient
human skeletons, and back to the United State for four weeks to work in the
research laboratories at the University of Georgia. Students complete
independent research projects relating to the health, activity patterns, diet,
and genetic relatedness of people at the Greek colony and battlefield of Himera
to better understand the biocultural consequences of culture contact in the
past. Globalization is ever-increasing and often resembles colonization with its
spread of ideas and people to developing nations. REU students will learn first-
hand about deep roots and biological dimensions of interactions between diverse
populations. Participants receive specialized field and lab training in
archaeological chemistry, anatomy, research design, and data analysis. Students
will leave the REU with greater technical and analytical skills, better
preparedness for graduate study and professional careers, and heightened
awareness of global issues relating to population contact, inequality, human
conflict, and health transitions. These skills are foundational for improving
global citizenship and stewardship in any career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
promote scientific literacy and global engagement among undergraduates, this
three-year REU Site integrates students as junior partners of the Bioarchaeology
of Mediterranean Colonies Project, a cross-disciplinary, international research
program that has brought undergraduate students to the Mediterranean for the
past three summers. REU students generate new anthropological knowledge related
to human adaptation and the impacts of culture contact in the ancient
Mediterranean. Student projects focus on the more than 12,000 skeletons
unearthed at Himera, which in the 7-5th centuries B.C. was the site of Greek
colonizing efforts and violent battles. Himera represents an early epicenter of
rising ethnic inequality. REU students plan and execute independent research
projects exploring biocultural impacts of culture contact in Greek Sicily,
including changes in diet, activity patterns, health, mobility, and genetic
admixture, using stable isotope biogeochemistry, molecular anthropology,
osteology, paleopathology and statistical analysis. Students collect
bioarchaeological data from human skeletons at Sicily for four weeks, and spend
the remaining four weeks at the University of Georgia (UGA) apprenticed in the
UGA Bioarchaeology and Biochemistry Laboratory, analyzing field specimens. REU
students participate in focused workshops and seminars, and work with dedicated
mentors, receiving hands-on training for research projects. Through these
activities, students (1) learn archaeological and anthropological field and lab
methods, (2) learn from both American and Italian scholars, (3) visit museums
and archaeological sites on Sicily, (4) design, execute, and present independent
research projects that make substantive contributions to anthropology, (5) live
in the city of Palermo, Italy where they will interact with Italian students and
citizens, and (6) remain in close contact with faculty mentors for a full
academic year to publish their results and present at international conferences.
Two PhD student affiliates will gain mentorship training. REU students will
leave better prepared to pursue and succeed in graduate school, excel in STEM
careers, and be more globally engaged citizens.