* 1560889
* CAREER: How Families Motivate Mexican-Origin Adolescents to Pursue Physical Science in High School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Sandra Simpkins, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 186,296.00

The proposed CAREER study uses a comprehensive mixed-methods design to develop
measures of motivational beliefs and family supports for Spanish and English
speaking Mexican-origin youth in high school physical science. The research
examines a three-part model which may provide a deeper understanding of how
Mexican families support youth through their general education strategies,
beliefs about physical science, and science specific behaviors. This approach
incorporates motivation and ecodevelopmental theories while pursuing an
innovative line of research that examines how the contributions of older
siblings and relatives complement or supplement parental support. The study has
four aims which are to (1) to develop reliable, valid measures of Mexican-origin
adolescent motivational beliefs and family supports in relation to high school
chemistry and physics, (2) to test whether family supports predict motivational
beliefs and course enrollment, (3) to test how indicators in Aim 2 vary based on
gender, culture, English language skills and relationship quality, and ( 4) to
examine how family supports strengthen or weaken the relationship between
school-based interactions (teachers and peer support) and the pursuit of
physical science studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spanish and English-speaking
Mexican-origin youth will participate in focus groups to inform the development
of a survey instrument which will be used in a statistical measurement
equivalence study of 300 high school students in fulfillment of Aim 1. One
hundred and fifty Mexican high school students and their families will
participate in a longitudinal study while students progress through grades 9-12
to examine Aims 2- 4. Data to be collected includes information on science
coursework, adolescent motivational beliefs, supports by mothers and older youth
in the family, and family interactions. All materials will be in English and
Spanish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational and research integration plan
uses a three pronged approach which includes mentoring of doctoral students,
teacher outreach, and the evaluation of the ASU Biodesign high school summer
internship program using measures resulting from the research. It is anticipated
that the study findings will provide research-based solutions to some of the
specific behaviors that influence youth motivation in physical sciences.
Specifically, the study will identify youth that might be most affected by an
intervention and the age of maximum benefit, as well as valid, reliable measures
of youths' motivation that can used in interventions to measure outcomes. The
study will also identify family behaviors that may be influenced, including
education strategies for school preparation, beliefs about physical science, and
sciece-specific strategies such as engaging in science activities outside
school. The findings will be broadly disseminated to science teachers, scholars,
and families of Mexican-origin youth. This multi-tiered approach will advance
current scholarship and practice concerning Mexican-origin adolescents' pursuit
of physical science.