* 1560106
* REU Site: Cyber-HealthGIS - Multidisciplinary Research Experiences in Spatial Dynamics of Health
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Daniel Goldberg, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/29/2020
* USD 367,730.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This REU Site
combines the fields of Computing, Geographic Information Science (GIS), and
Health on the Texas A&M University (TAMU) campus in College Station, TX where
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds in Computing, GIS, and Health
work together on collaborative research projects in a newly emerging field
called Cyber-Enabled HealthGIS (Cyber-HealthGIS). Thirty REU students (ten each
year) are engaged in research teams to promote discovery, teaching, and training
through hands-on research and mentoring. Students are mentored and trained in
the basics of research techniques, the responsible conduct of research, the need
for diversity in research, and research designs and methods. The REU Site
students collaboratively pose, execute, and evaluate research projects resulting
in research advances in Cyber-HealthGIS. Through this approach, students learn
research and problem-solving outside of their own discipline, and gain
independence and confidence in their own ability to undertake research. This
program will advance the new field of Cyber-HealthGIS by building theory,
methods, and approaches which will lead to joint faculty-student publications in
research journals, seminars, and conferences, and student presentations of their
own research. This program fills a critical US workforce gap by creating a
generation of students trained for and interested in research and scientific
careers in Cyber-HealthGIS, a rapidly advancing field with the potential to
improve human health and well-being. The student projects and example prototypes
developed through this program will be made freely available to help foster
innovation and development in the Cyber-HealthGIS industry.

In this REU Site, the ideas from each student's academic/disciplinary domain is
integrated to form a cohesive, achievable research goal under the umbrella of
the core research themes of this project, which include (1) Outbreak
surveillance through the combination of authoritative and social media data; (2)
High-resolution chronic disease risk mapping with citizen-derived perceptions of
community; and (3) Continuous time-enabled scalable outbreak planning. Students
work closely with faculty mentors to pose the research question, develop
testable hypotheses, obtain the necessary data, organize appropriate methods,
engineer an approach, perform experiments, and undertake an evaluation of the
results. This project will make freely available examples of prototype
applications, thereby advancing the capabilities of Cyber-HealthGIS research
through the development and release of free and open source (FOSS) code for the
systems and example data sets used in the student research and experiments.