* 1560810
* CAREER:Perceptual Narrowing and Cortical Development in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/10/2015,06/30/2018
* Lisa Scott, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 202,503.00

Before six months of age, infants readily perceive differences between faces
within both familiar (e.g., own-race) and unfamiliar (e.g., other-race) groups.
Importantly, by 9 months of age, they have lost ability for perceiving
differences between other-race faces. This loss in perceptual ability is called
"perceptual narrowing" and is theoretically driven by the experiences infants
have interacting with some groups of people more than others. With funding from
the National Science Foundation, Dr. Lisa Scott, working at the University of
Massachusetts, is carrying out research to understand how perceptual experience
and brain maturation interact during infancy to result in brain and face
recognition specialization. During a brief period of infancy, perceptual biases
are formed, apparently, leading to long-lasting deficits in face recognition and
identification of individuals within unfamiliar or less frequently encountered
groups. Recent research suggests that perceptual narrowing arises when infants
do not learn to associate individual names, such as "Sue" or "Bob," with people
of other races. Faces from racial groups with which infants do not interact,
faces that remain nameless, are perceived as one undifferentiated category. Dr.
Scott is investigating how different perceptual experiences influence the
development of underlying brain regions responsible for face perception and face
processing biases, which lead to difficulties identifying and remembering people
within another race and to difficulties perceiving and interpreting social and
emotional face information. Dr. Scott hypothesizes that learning the names of
faces or objects at the individual level rather than at the category level leads
to qualitatively distinct brain representations and more discriminative
behavioral responses. She expects that perceptual narrowing is driven primarily
by experience and not brain maturation. In her studies, infants and their
families receive books with labeled images of faces and objects, and the
families are asked to read these books to their infants for three months. Infant
learning is examined by measuring whether or not infants of different ages can
differentiate between trained and new images never seen before, and by using eye
tracking to measure where they focus on the images. Brain activity is recorded
before and after training to determine whether learning names influences neural
responses to faces and objects. Dr. Scott predicts that learning the names of
faces also results in enhanced development of face processing beyond face
recognition, including emotion and gaze perception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
much is known about brain maturation within the first year of life, less is
known about how experience and learning affect specialized neural responses and
abilities. The results of this project are expected to lead to a better
understanding of how infants tune their perceptual systems in an ever-changing
world, and how specific early experiences influence later perceptual abilities.
The outcome of this research is expected to have implications in the area of
developmental disorders such as Autism, and in the understanding of social
interactions and social biases. Understanding the development of face
recognition can help explain relationships between race perception and social
prejudice. The results can be used to inform parents, educators, and policy
makers about perceptual learning and the role of experience on the developing
brain. Cognitive neuroscience methods are becoming increasingly important tools
in infant development research, so the next generation of scientists need
expertise with these techniques. Dr. Scott is implementing a summer research
experience program that aims to introduce high school, undergraduate, graduate,
and post-doctoral students to scientific inquiry in cognitive neuroscience and
methods used to study brain development. This program aims to assist aspiring
young scientists in developing their academic and career goals, facilitate and
encourage students to form mentoring relationships and networks, and teach
students about the importance of community outreach, education, and the
responsible dissemination and communication of research findings.