* 1560579
* I-Corps:  Clean Water by Nature
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2015,02/28/2017
* Norma Alcantar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Water quality and scarcity have been labeled "the defining crises of the 21st
century" and are the main drivers behind the challenges and increasing
regulations that limit the projected growth of the water industry over the
coming decades. International reports agree that global water consumption
doubles every 20 years. Modern water treatment technologies based on the active
sludge method have significant disadvantages, including limitations on heavy
metal removal and significant reliance on chemicals. Because of the urgent
crisis in water quality and scarcity, greener and more cost-effective
technologies are in demand. This NSF I-Corps team project will study the market
prospects of technologies based on research that had elucidated the action
mechanisms involved in removing contaminants from water using natural materials
such as mucilage from cactus plants that are surface active. Cactus mucilage,
the gooey part of cactus plants, is composed of flexible molecules capable of
removing water pollutants. Different extraction methodologies can lead to
different fractions of the cactus mucilage that are effective at removing water
pollutants by engulfing heavy metals, flocculating sediments, coagulating
bacteria, and dispersing heavy organic molecules such as those found in crude
oils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desire to treat polluted and waste water to a
level suitable for beneficial reuse plays an increasing role in market growth.
The technologies based on cactus mucilage have the potential to treat
ground/surface water, well water, and waste water to EPA maximum contaminant
level (MCL) standards. These technologies also provide an eco-friendly
alternative for cleaning oil contamination. They also can serve as a disaster
recovery mechanism to provide mobile treatment units and emergency water
purification kits. These technologies are natural, biodegradable, compostable,
and provide affordable methods of water purification using cactus extracts that
will stem the tide of water bottle proliferation, and will advance the
filtration market by reducing the large, unfriendly carbon and plastic
environmental footprints.