* 1560962
* Urban Water Provisioning Systems and Household Water Security
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Wendy Jepson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 11/30/2020
* USD 254,082.00

Water security remains a major challenge for rapidly growing urban areas of the
developing world and impoverished areas in developed countries where unregulated
and informal domestic water provisioning practices persist despite increases in
household access to piped water. Urban water provision is an assemblage of water
vendors, networked pipes, plastic jugs, standpipes, water meters, rainwater and
greywater collection tanks, and water trucks that convey and manage domestic
water provision to help households cope and meet needs of everyday life. This
project examines how and why urban households obtain water through these hybrid
infrastructure systems and tests their efficacy in terms of household water
security, defined as reliable, adequate and affordable water for a healthy life,
using a scaled metric developed by the investigator. The project will be
conducted in metropolitan Fortaleza, Brazil, where domestic water provision
reflects typical configurations of water provision in the developing world.
Research outcomes will provide meaningful insights as to the benefits and
limitations of hybrid water-provisioning systems and inform development
interventions, technological innovations for water provision, and infrastructure
investments. Investigators will create a publicly available online portal to
disseminate project information and photos, research findings, and a
computational tool to standardize the household water security metric for cross-
regional comparisons, allowing researchers to examine impacts of household water
insecurity on diverse areas such as public health and water infrastructure
planning. The project will also deepen research networks between Brazilian and
US researchers, broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science
through its research design, and contribute to the development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce by training one computer science undergraduate and
one geography graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of regulated
and unregulated water provisioning systems begs the question of its efficacy for
human development and water security: Do hybrid urban water systems increase or
decrease household water security? What particular configuration of formal and
informal technologies and practices enhances or reduces household water
security? How do different hybrid water-provisioning systems compare in terms of
household water security? The major social scientific contribution of this
project is to answer these questions by employing a mix of qualitative
(observation; open-ended and semi-structured interviews), participatory
(photovoice), and quantitative (survey) methods. The investigator will describe
and develop a typology of water provision, assess how households interact with
the existing systems, and measure household-level water security in selected
urban communities. The household water security metric calculated from the
survey data can be used to statistically test and model the relationship of
water insecurity to several factors, including water-provisioning type, income,
education, and health. This project will provide new empirical data to engage
larger theoretical debates on the benefits of coexistence, the efficacy of
centralized, piped water networks as the modern ideal of water provision, and
urban water governance, more broadly.