* 1560375
* REU Site: Sensing, Monitoring, and Detection - From Molecules to Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Konstantinos Kavallieratos, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 300,266.00

Professors Kavallieratos and Miksovska and colleagues in the Chemistry &
Biochemistry Department at Florida International University (FIU) host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that supports research
projects for nine students during a 10-week summer research session. Chemical
sensing is the interdisciplinary theme that links this cohort. Students are
mentored in team-oriented summer projects, participate in seminars and
workshops, present their work within and outside their scientific teams in
widely-attended venues at the FIU campus, and are encouraged to pursue a career
in research and discovery. The broader impacts are addressed scientifically
through the wide range of applications that are impacted by the various sensor-
related projects. In addition, there is a strong emphasis on the recruitment of
significant percentages of women and students from underrepresented groups.
Partnerships with minority serving institutions and two Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) programs are in place to meet the recruitment
goals.

This REU sites focus on chemical sensing combines cutting-edge research
interests with wide, real-life applicability. Within the interdisciplinary area
of sensing, the students participate in projects across
analytical/environmental, biological, inorganic, organic, physical/theoretical,
nuclear/radiochemistry, and forensic chemistry. The summer projects are designed
to give the students flexibility and initiative, and to excite beginning
researchers with the vision of becoming independent investigators. As the major
public research university in South Florida, FIU attracts, retains, and
graduates large numbers of students from minority groups. The REU site is
expected to expand the opportunities available at FIU to underrepresented
students outside FIU who attend colleges with little research infrastructure.