* 1560933
* SusChEM: Redox and mineral controls maximizing Phosphorus mobility and bioavailability
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Gregory Druschel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2021
* USD 326,468.00

Understanding phosphorus (P) behavior in the environment is critical to society,
as P often plays a central role in promoting productive agriculture as a
fertilizer. Yet phosphorus is also a contaminant in aquatic environments, where
human-derived enrichment of P in water and sediment can promote harmful algal
blooms. Worldwide reserves of P are limited, especially in the U.S., and
sustaining agricultural production will require the recovery and recycling of P.
The protection of water resources is also an increasingly critical area of
concern to promote sustainable clean drinking water, healthy fisheries, and
economically vital recreational resources. These issues require improved
understanding of how P is, and can be, mobilized in different geological and
engineered settings. P interaction with other elements, especially iron,
manganese, and carbon, often controls P mobility, and understanding this
interaction is therefore key to developing strategies for more sustainable
agriculture and water quality. This research program's goal is to develop a
conceptual framework of the environmental conditions that maximize phosphorus
mobility in sediment-water systems. The project will integrate with NSF-EPSCoR
program investigating lake water quality. Research on these topics will be
integrated with outreach opportunities to teach local schoolchildren and
stakeholders about responsible nutrient management and how to better protect
water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorus is generally partitioned in
sediment-water systems between mineral, dissolved, and organic pools.
Determining the response times for different pools of P species to changing
redox conditions is a major hurdle in understanding the drivers of phosphorus
mobility and bioavailability in sediment-water systems. Static models describing
P partitioning and mobility between these pools are voluminous but do not
capture key factors. The redox conditions near the sediment-water interface
(SWI) are a critical control on the reactivity of P and associated redox-active
elements (Fe, Mn, S, N especially) in shallow freshwater and marine systems, and
can fluctuate on diel, seasonal, and more chaotic event-based timescales. The
central hypothesis of this project is that the mobility of specific P pools is
maximized by changes in redox conditions at the SWI over short (minutes to
hours) time spans, and that the duration and severity of these redox
oscillations drives the partitioning and behavior of P (and Fe) species over
time near the SWI. To test this requires a comprehensive investigation of P
speciation and mobility that couples field and laboratory approaches designed to
elucidate the drivers and dynamics of this complex system. Analysis of the
specific P pools and related elements will utilize advanced techniques to
examine the partitioning of different P forms in different pools under changing
redox conditions. Specifically, high-resolution in-situ monitoring of natural
and manipulated SWI redox dynamics using environmental voltammetric techniques,
combined with a suite of targeted analyses to describe the redox-driven
evolution of sediment-water P pools including: 1) sediment P mineralogical
composition and extractability, 2) P and Fe speciation, and 3) enzyme digestion
and NMR techniques to determine organic P speciation will provide the data
needed to develop a molecular-based and temporally constrained model of P
speciation and mobility in sediment-water systems.