* 1560389
* REU Site: Synergistic Studies of Honey Bees in the Republic of Turkey
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Charles Abramson, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 422,060.00

This REU Site award to the University of Central Oklahoma (UCO), located in
Edmond, Oklahoma, will support the training of eight students for eight weeks
during the summers of 2016-2019. This award is supported by both the Division of
Biological Infrastructure within the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Office of International Science and Engineering. Research will be in the
Republic of Turkey at Middle East Technical University (Ankara) and Uluda√∞
University (Bursa). Students will be selected based upon criteria that includes
an essay as to why participation in the project will be important to the
student's career. The program focuses on the honey bee as a model organism to
study pollination dynamics in variable environments, behavioral ecology and
comparative psychology, and behavioral and physiological responses to stress.
The program begins with a mini-course at UCO that includes Responsible Conduct
in Research training. An excursion through northwestern Turkey will acclimate
students to research methodology and the customs of the region before groups
travel to the campuses at Ankara and Bursa. The program concludes at UCO with
group presentations and reflection.

It is anticipated that a total of 32 students, primarily from schools or
backgrounds with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program.
Students will not only engage directly in team-based, cutting-edge research but
will also have the opportunity to present their results at a national scientific
conference. The program's international setting, including experiences
throughout the Republic of Turkey, provides an opportunity to learn from a
geographic region of great historical significance to human civilization;
students will develop enduring professional relationships with faculty and
students at the host institutions. Research findings will address global issues,
including the causes and effects of Colony Collapse Disorder.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths and be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting http://www.uco.edu/cms/reu/, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. John Barthell at jbarthell@uco.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Charles
Abramson at charles.abramson@okstate.edu).