* 1560658
* Facility Support: Accelerator Mass Spectrometry at PRIME Lab
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,02/28/2023
* Paul Muzikar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 3,695,034.00

The Purdue Rare Isotope Measurement Laboratory (PRIME Lab) is a national, multi-
user facility dedicated to the measurement of cosmogenic radionuclides using
accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). This award will provide management and
operations support for this facility. Significant geologic processes occur over
a wide variety of time-scales. Catastrophic changes, large debris flows or
floods, occur over short time-scales but other changes, such as long-term
erosion of landscape or glacial cycles occur over longer time-scales, thousands
to millions of years. These changes nonetheless play a dominant role in
landscape evolution and directly impact the welfare of human populations world-
wide. Measuring the rates of these processes and reconstructing a chronology for
them is a challenge and geoscientists employ a number of tools to extract this
information from the geologic archive. Cosmic-ray produced nuclides, especially
those measured by accelerator mass spectrometry, are now routinely used to
obtain chronologies and determine erosion rates for significant geologic
processes. In the last decade these nuclides have been used to reconstruct
glacial chronologies, which in turn provides a record of past climates. They
have also been used to show linkages between tectonic activity and erosion
rates. The pursuit of these studies has involved PhD students and researchers
from dozens of universities within the US. At PRIME Lab they not only learn how
to perform the physical and chemical preparation of samples, but they also
participate in the measurement of their samples on the PRIME Lab accelerator
mass spectrometry system. The interaction between students, faculty, and
professional staff at PRIME facilitates interaction with geologists, chemists,
and physicists, providing a near unique opportunity to expand the educational
opportunity beyond the focus of the research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With continued NSF support, PRIME Lab will continue
utilizing the unique capabilities of a larger accelerator for the benefit of the
geoscience community. Given the limited number of multi-isotope facilities in
the US, we anticipate growth in the number of measurements (and sample
preparation) required by the geoscience community. In addition to more routine
measurements, we are the only laboratory in the US positioned to advance the
state-of-the-art using a gas-filled-magnet. We have already demonstrated the
efficacy of the instrumentation for 10Be, 26Al, and 36Cl, especially 26Al. For
the next five years, PRIME Lab will continue to advance the application of
cosmogenic nuclides in the geosciences through increased productivity of
routinely measured nuclides and by the development of new measurement
technologies and applications harnessing these advances.