* 1560779
* Atom Probe Tomography (APT) Workshop for Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Alberto Perez-Huerta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2016
* USD 46,997.00

This award will provide funding to organize a workshop centered on atom-probe
tomography for geoscientists. Atom-probe tomography is the highest spatial
resolution analytical technique in existence for the characterization of
materials. However, atom-probe tomography is practically unknown to the
geosciences community despite offering clear benefits to researchers in Earth
Sciences. The aim of the workshop is to establish an open forum for the
discussion of the potential uses and benefits of this technique, while providing
information to colleagues from a geological perspective. Besides the invitation
of senior researchers, an additional goal of this workshop is the participation
of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of this technique relies
in the possibility of combining a 3D material reconstruction with chemical
composition, including isotopes, at atomic scale with a near part-per-million
analytical sensitivity. Recent advances in field emission microscopy and the
atom probe technique have allowed the preliminary analysis of geological
materials. First results from the APT application to minerals have provided
significant geochemical information at a spatial resolution that is not achieved
with any current methodology. Thus, atom-probe tomography is emerging as a
powerful technique that can revolutionize research in geochemistry and re-shape
our understanding of geological processes from the nanoscale to the continental
scale.