* 1560698
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach to Performance Modeling and Optimization of Big-data Scientific Workflows
* CSE,CNS
* 08/28/2015,08/31/2018
* Chase Wu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,000.00

Next-generation e-science is producing colossal amounts of data, commonly known
as Big Data, on the order of terabyte at present and petabyte or even exabyte in
the predictable future. These scientific applications typically feature data-
and network-intensive workflows comprised of computing modules with intricate
inter-module dependencies. Application users oftentimes need to manually
configure their computing workflows in distributed environments in an ad-hoc
manner, which significantly limits the productivity of scientists and constrains
the utilization of resources.

The end-to-end performance of big data scientific workflows depends on both the
mapping scheme that determines module assignment and the scheduling policy that
determines resource allocation. These two aspects of a workflow-based research
process are traditionally treated as two separate topics, and the interactions
between them have not been fully explored. As the scale and complexity of
scientific workflows and network environments rapidly increase, each individual
aspect of performance optimization has limited success. This research is an in-
depth investigation into workflow execution dynamics in resource sharing
environments to explore the interactions between workflow mapping and node
scheduling on a unified application-support platform. The idea is to build a
three-layer workflow optimization architecture that seamlessly integrates three
interrelated components based on rigorous algorithmic design, theoretical
dynamics analysis, and real network implementation, deployment, and evaluation.
The successful completion of this project will provide a solid mathematical
foundation for the analysis and control of system dynamics of big data
scientific workflows, produce a suite of cooperative mapping and scheduling
optimization solutions to facilitate scientific collaborations, and add an
additional level of intelligence to existing workflow engines widely adopted in
the current grid and cloud computing middleware. The resulting workflow
optimization solutions will benefit a broad spectrum of workflow-based
scientific applications