* 1560812
* RUI: Utilizing Collaborative Event Ethnography to Understand Global Environmental Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Catherine Corson, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 10/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

This project uses an innovative methodology called collaborative event
ethnography to advance understanding of contemporary global environmental
governance. Focusing on a case study of the 2016 World Conservation Congress,
the project examines how notions of the "green economy", such as those inscribed
in the UNEP-led Green Economy Initiative, are shaping global environmental
conservation practices. As part of a coordinated effort among researchers from
multiple universities, countries, and disciplines, the project strengthens
multi-national research, training, and teaching partnerships in producing
policy-relevant scientific research. It integrates research and education
through cascade mentoring, which includes senior and junior scholars and
graduate and undergraduate students, from two liberal arts colleges and a large
research university in the development of innovative methodology and theory-
building in global environmental governance. Through rigorous theoretical and
methodological training for graduate and undergraduate students, the project
helps them to develop the skills and knowledge to apply geographic concepts and
methods to pressing global environmental issues, while simultaneously exposing
them to potential careers in environmental research and policy. By illuminating
the complexities of how actors influence global environmental governance, it
reveals avenues for redressing seemingly intractable environmental crises and
global inequality at a critical historical moment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project challenges state-centric understandings of global environmental
governance and advances new theories about how contemporary governance occurs.
It augments traditional field-based studies of conservation with ethnographic
data in order to trace how paradigm shifts occur in global conservation
politics. Specifically, the project analyzes how global conservation governance
transpires across multiple institutional sites by focusing on international
conferences as key venues in which diverse actors, who are normally dispersed in
time and space, convene to negotiate. It attends to the types of strategies that
diverse actors use and the ways in which conference norms, structures, forms of
acceptable knowledge and measurement shape the ways in which these actors
interact and influence negotiations, revealing how and why certain actors are
better able than others to catalyze paradigm shifts. Ultimately, it documents
how paradigm shifts occur not only through official discourse, policy and law,
but also through more informal, everyday interactions among public, private and
non-profit actors.