* 1560213
* REU Site:   Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Coastal Biology on Florida's First Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* James Gelsleichter, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2019
* USD 306,624.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site program at the University of North Florida (UNF) which is located in
Jacksonville, Florida. A total of 10 undergraduates will participate in the
10-week program each summer for three years. The theme of the program, which is
hosted by the UNF Department of Biology, is focused on Coastal Biology,
particularly threats to the biological resources of the north Florida coast.
Coastal ecosystems represent some of the most biologically productive areas on
Earth, but are also some of the most affected by human activity. Wide
fluctuations in environmental conditions also occur frequently in coastal
ecosystems. These factors influence all aspects of the biology of coastal
organisms, from their molecular biology and genetics to the growth and survival
of their populations. Students will have the opportunity to conduct independent
research on a range of subjects related to coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the program is to enhance
the training and career development of early stage (rising Sophomores/Juniors)
undergraduates who have not had significant research experience by engaging them
in research related to the coastal ocean environment. Students will be recruited
nationwide and from a variety of urban universities, including Edward Waters
College (EWC). They will be paired with biologists from UNF or the collaborating
institution Guana Tolomato Matanzas National Estuarine Research Reserve to
conduct mentored research projects on major threats to coastal biological
resources in North Florida. Students will develop short research proposals on
their project which will be presented to faculty mentors and other REU
participants in an oral format. In the final week, students will present the
results of their studies in a poster session that is open to the UNF community.
Students will also be encouraged to present their research findings at
professional conferences and/or in manuscripts submitted to professional
journals. Additional career guidance on topics such as designing research
posters, scientific writing, finding and applying to graduate schools, and
presenting scientific information to a public audience will be provided in
workshops. Students will attend regular research seminars by UNF faculty,
graduate students and scientists from other institutions.