* 1560684
* I-Corps: A Novel, Eco-Friendly Essential Oil-based Pesticide for Organic Use
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Kramer Winingham, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

While the rise of the organic food market is well documented, organic farmers
have struggled to find an effective, certified organic bio-pesticide. For
example, organic onions farmers in California are losing up to 20% of their
annual yield to nematodes. Nematicides are particularly of interest to growers
and turf grass managers because commercially available nematicides are being
phased out by the EPA due to their non target toxicity. This I-Corps team has
developed a patent pending eco-friendly,organic, plant essential oil-based bio-
pesticide (NMX)that has been demonstrated to be an effective and safe plant
fungicide, bactericide, nematicide, and insecticide. NMX has been tested in
laboratory, greenhouse, and field trials, both in Mexico and the USA, on a
variety of plants, including tomatoes, chile, jalapeno, bell pepper and
turfgrass. Currently NMX is being tested on representative insects, is being
registered with the EPA as a biopesticide and is registered with the EPA
biopesticide division as a biochemical. Due to the unique organic formulation of
NMX and its ability to control a broad range of pests, NMX has the potential of
being a major disruptor in the pesticide market. The product has a broad target
market, including organic agriculture, golf course industry, athletic field
management and homeowner landscapes. In addition, end users will have the value
added benefits associated with an organic and sustainable product. Additional
research is needed to further comprehend the marketability and market demand of
NMX.

The goal of this project is to commercialize an effective ecofriendly pesticide
that will reduce the use of harmful synthetic pesticides. The application of NMX
as a fungicide and bactericide to control common agricultural and home landscape
pests has been developed to the point of alpha prototype, having already
performed extensive laboratory, greenhouse and field tests. Similarly, the team
has demonstrated the efficacy of NMX against nematodes and found the range of
concentrations that protect turf grass while killing nematodes. The development
of NMX as an insecticide is in the proof of concept stage, having performed a
few field tests against insect thrips on onion. Pertinent to commercialization,
the team is in the process of getting NMX registered as a biopesticide with the
EPA. Before additional validation and efficacy tests are set up and performed on
nematodes and insects, the team must validate the NMX technology in the market.
In order to obtain this market validation the team will participate in the NSF
I-CORPS program and perform one hundred customer interviews in the organic
agriculture, turfgrass management, and home landscape market sectors. The team
intends to travel to the East and West coasts to interview customers, focusing
on California and Florida(golf courses and organic farms, (the New England
States (organic dairies and golf course), and Northern New Mexico(organic
dairies).