* 1560266
* REU Site: Summer Research Experience for Undergraduates in Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Peter Persans, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 311,955.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This is a ten-week summer residential research
participation experience that engages undergraduate students in full-time active
research collaborations with faculty, research professionals, and graduate
students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. A selection of research projects
in Physics and Applied Physics spanning from energy applications to fundamental
science is provided. In addition to their own research area, students will be
exposed to a variety of research topics and methodologies through regular
research seminars and student presentations. Further breadth will be developed
through visits to nearby research facilities. Students will gain experience in
presenting their results by making oral and written presentations throughout the
summer. This project impacts the research and development competitiveness of the
United States by recruiting excellent students into STEM research fields and by
training these students to perform leading-edge research in technologically
important fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This is a ten-week
summer residential research participation experience that engages undergraduate
students in full-time active research collaborations with faculty, research
professionals, and graduate students at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Undergraduate students are both mentored individually by research faculty and
engage in group professional development activities. Research projects are
cutting-edge in Physics and Applied Physics and include particle and galactic
astrophysics, computational physics, nano- and low-dimensional materials,
photonics and ultrafast optics, geophysics, complex systems, educational
physics, and the chemistry, optoelectronics, and physics of solar energy
conversion. In addition to their own research area, students will be exposed to
a variety of research topics and methodologies through a series of research
seminars and student presentations. Further breadth will be developed through
visits to nearby research facilities. To assist in their professional
development, students also participate in tutorials on ethics, applying to
graduate school, scientific writing and giving scientific presentations.
Students gain experience in presenting their results by making oral and written
presentations throughout the summer. This project impacts the research and
development competitiveness of the United States by recruiting excellent
students into STEM research fields and by training these students to perform
leading-edge research in technologically important fields.