* 1560987
* Medical Decision-Making and Network Assembly Mechanisms in Inpatient Surgical Care
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* John Hollingsworth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 06/30/2019
* USD 349,305.00

Inpatient surgical care largely relies on teamwork. A single patient will see
many doctors and other care providers over the course of pre- and postoperative
care. The surgery itself also involves multiple surgeons and other caregivers.
The relationships that develop as physicians work together during the surgical
care process create teamwork networks that have important implications for the
quality and efficiency of care. This research will observe and interview
physicians, nurses, and other caregivers about their work and the treatment
decisions that they make around inpatient surgical procedures. This information
will be used to systematically examine how collaborative networks evolve and
change in hospitals. This research will inform efforts to improve the quality
and reduce the costs of surgical care while providing new insights into
important social science questions about how these kinds of networks form and
grow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades social scientific research on
networks has undergone a dramatic transformation as new data and methods have
enabled a shift toward dynamic analysis. At the same time, work in the fields of
organizational theory, economic, and cultural sociology has emphasized the
contingent and situational nature of relationships, structures, and their
effects. While networks of various sorts have been shown to influence individual
and collective outcomes in a wide range of substantive areas, the linkages
between micro network dynamics, macro network structures, and their effects have
yet to be fully specified. This research will take important steps toward
explaining the formation and effects of a substantively important class of
networks by examining the ways in which organizational arrangements, individual
choices, and existing relationships shape physicians' treatment decisions and
ultimately the health of larger patient populations in individual hospitals and
broader healthcare markets. This mechanism-based approach to understanding how
physician relationships form, reproduce, and change in particular organizations
and treatment situations integrates work on the collective dynamics of large-
scale networks with theories that emphasize the organizational and institutional
contexts in which relationships emerge, gain meaning, and exert their effects.
The theoretically anchored, observational, and interview-based field work that
we propose herein seeks to clarify the complicated processes by which networks
evolve while identifying specific mechanisms, scope conditions, and
contingencies that span individual preferences, structural pressures, and
organizational constraints or opportunities.