* 1560908
* Autonomous Ice Mass Balance Buoys for an Arctic Observing Network: A Continuation Proposal
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Donald Perovich, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 04/30/2020
* USD 800,409.00

Changes in the extent and thickness of the Arctic Ocean?s sea ice cover are
among the most pronounced indicators of our warming global temperatures. In
order to improve predictions that enable us to anticipate and plan for future
change in ice cover on seasonal to decadal time scales, we need to understand
the processes driving the observed change. An area of particular interest is the
temperature-driven mass balance of the ice cover. The mass balance is the
balance between the amount of ice growth in the winter and the amount of melt in
the summer. Mass balance is a key climate change indicator since it combines the
impact of heating and cooling at the top and bottom of the ice. If there is net
warming over time, then there will be thinning of the ice. Conversely, net
cooling leads to thicker ice. The objective of our project is to contribute to
the Arctic Observing Network by maintaining a network of autonomous ice mass
balance (IMB) buoys, installed in the drift ice of the Arctic Ocean. The
observations from these buoys enable us to explore what changes in sea ice
thickness are taking place and how these changes occur, thereby improving our
understanding of this complex and important component of the global environment.
Broader Impacts include contributing to Dartmouth College?s Women in Science
Program and an ?adopt a buoy? program for middle school students.

The primary objectives of our project are to: 1) procure and deploy a minimum of
5 IMB buoys per year, to increase network coverage, and 2) process and archive
the data from these buoys to ensure that they are fully, freely, openly, and
immediately accessible to all researchers and interested users. A key to
achieving the first objective is an advancement in buoy technology, creating a
version of the IMB that costs less to produce, is easier to deploy, and is
designed for deployment in the increasingly prevalent seasonal sea ice cover. We
will continue to strategically deploy the IMBs in coordination with
complementary atmospheric and oceanographic instruments to optimize the
observations throughout the Arctic Ocean. We will also continue to build on our
strong national and international collaborations, to maximize the extent of the
IMB network across the Arctic Basin and to minimize the logistic costs
associated with deployment. The end result will be an integrated atmosphere-ice-
ocean observing array providing a comprehensive description of the response of
the ice cover to atmospheric and oceanic forcing.