* 1560871
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Critical Conservation of Paleontological Collections at the NCSM: A Platform to Engage Underserved Students in Citizen Science
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Lindsay Zanno, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 492,520.00

The North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences (NCSM), the largest natural
science museum in the Southeast, maintains a regionally significant and globally
unique fossil collection that is growing in number, reputation, visibility, and
usage. These paleontological specimens are currently housed in metal-sheathed
wooden cabinetry that is structurally unsound, off-gases acidic byproducts of
decay, and possesses deteriorated felted door-gaskets that prevent an air-tight
seal. Such conditions pose an immediate security and conservation risk to NCMS
fossil specimens, particularly to scientifically significant holdings that are
deteriorating from pyrite disease. This project will rehouse the NCSM
paleontological holdings into museum-grade steel cabinets with archival
materials following best practices in specimen conservation. The project will
also introduce underserved public school students to citizen science where they
will improve open-access natural history specimen data via measurements and 3D
models and will integrate deeply with multiple existing NCSM programmatic
efforts including a youth science communication opportunity to document and
broadcast the project in action to public school audiences.

Rehousing will greatly increase the security, value, and long-term research and
educational viability of the NCSM Paleontological Collection, which includes
significant holdings in Ediacaran invertebrates, Cretaceous - Cenozoic
echinoids, and one of the most extensive collections of Late Triassic
vertebrates from eastern North America. The Paleontological Collection is an
active resource for research and education, including public university courses
taught annually by museum staff either inside the museum's on-exhibition
Paleontology Research Lab or in the collections area. These activities regularly
engage graduate and undergraduate students, and museum visitors with specimen-
based paleontological research. NCSM receives about 1 million visitors each year
and is free to the public, engaging culturally and socio-economically diverse
audiences. This project capitalizes on specimen rehousing to broadly impact
existing NCSM programs as well as create new STEM opportunities targeted for
pre-professionals at multiple levels (underserved 9-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students). Initiatives include the launch of a new citizen science
program - Junior Curator: Fossil Collections - designed to increase open-access
morphological data from NCSM paleontological specimens and engage local
underserved students. Other goals are aimed at garnering community engagement
with natural history collections by broadcasting a behind-the-scenes peek at
collections care via live, scientist-to-classroom connections within the North
Carolina Public School System; new content creation via NCSM's digital media
production program TeenTV; monthly presentations in the NCSM's free Daily Planet
Theater; and established NCSM social media platforms (e.g., multiple blog sites,
Twitter, and live expedition websites.) Planned professional deliverables
include iDigBio webinars. Results can be viewed at
(collections.naturalsciences.org). This project will also support NCSM's
demonstrated commitment to increasing accessibility of the Paleontological
Collection as an external research resource. All paleontology collections at
NCSM were recently registered with GRBIO and Earth Cube, and can be accessed via
the Museum's website, The Gobal Biodiversity Information Facility, VertNet
(invertebrate and vertebrate paleontology collections only) and iDigBio
(idigbio.org).