* 1560637
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: Local Political Contexts and Immigrant Integration
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Margit Tavits, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,225.00

General Summary:

Why are immigrants better able to integrate - economically, socially, and
politically - in some locations than others? Why do natives oppose or support
immigrants more in some locations than others? Upon arriving in new countries,
immigrants' experiences vary greatly across both space and time. In some cases,
immigrants are able to thrive in their new location, succeeding economically
while peacefully coexisting with nationals. Yet in other cases, immigrants are
lodged in perpetual poverty and have strained relations with nationals. One
important determinant of successful integration is the context in which
immigrants settle. The PI contends that locations governed by anti-immigrant
parties will hinder immigrants' successful immigration. The PI argues further
that highly homogenous immigrant communities foster anti-immigrant attitudes.
The PI tests these arguments by leveraging the random assignment of refugees to
localities in Denmark together with a survey experiment on the effects of
diversity. Overall, this study intends to bring important light to how society
can best overcome the challenges presented by immigration in the coming years.

Technical Summary:

This project will ascertain the role of local political contexts in both
immigrant integration and the development of anti-immigrant attitudes among
natives. The PI argues that locations governed by anti-immigrant parties will
hinder immigrants' successful immigration. The PI argues further that highly
homogenous immigrant communities foster anti-immigrant attitudes. These
arguments will be tested by leveraging a quasi-experiment in refugee location
that occurred in Denmark. The quasi-experiment comes in the form of the Spatial
Dispersion Policy of 1986-1998, in which refugees were assigned to
municipalities around Denmark. Combined with micro data from government
registers, this will allow the PI to test the expectations described above.
Second, this project will investigate the role of local-level diversity among
immigrants as a determinant of native opposition to immigration. This argument
will be tested with a survey experiments in Denmark. Respondents will be
randomly selected to view a vignette about either a high or low diversity
immigrant community and then asked their opinion about immigrants and
immigration. Reported opinions between the high and low diversity groups will be
compared to evaluate the theoretical expectation. Overall, this study intends to
bring important light to how society can best overcome the challenges presented
by immigration in the coming years.