* 1560383
* REU Site: Application of Microscopy and Microanalysis in Multidisciplinary Research
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jun Jiao, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 297,857.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Portland State University (PSU) continues its
operation of a multidiscipline research experience for undergraduate site, the
only site of its kind in the greater Portland region. This site has been
successfully operating for the past fifteen years and has achieved a high level
of participation from women and minorities. The objective of the REU site will
continue to focus on inspiring undergraduate students with an emphasis on women,
minorities, and US Armed Forces veterans to pursue careers in science and
engineering by exposing them to hands-on research opportunities. In addition,
the new recruitment will include participants who show great interest in
research, but are underachieving academically. It is highly expected that this
REU site will enable such students to develop their talents and progress towards
their career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The REU site at
PSU ties diverse research projects together under the overarching theme of
electron microscopy for multidisciplinary applications. Through a concentrated
summer program, the participants will obtain technical training, conduct
independent research, visit local high-tech industries, and present their
research at an REU symposium. The activities will begin with a training week
including workshops on laboratory safety, library database searches, and
graduate school applications. Also offered is an intensive short course that
trains students in using scanning electron microscope or focused ion beam
microscope for material and device characterization. Students will then use
these acquired skills in research projects offered by faculty mentors from the
departments of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Geology. It is highly anticipated
that REU participants will leave the summer program with a quintessential skill
(electron and ion microscopy) applicable to all disciplines and a broader
perspective of the impact of research experience on their high education and
career choices.