* 1560388
* REU Site: Enabling Analysis and Design of Complex Biological Systems through Data Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Kyongbum Lee, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 348,797.00

This REU Site award to Tufts University, located in Medford, MA, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019. This
project is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), the Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (ACI) in the Directorate of Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CISE), and the Division of Engineering Education and Centers
(EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG). This REU Site will develop data
science approaches to analyze and design complex biological systems. Because of
the interdisciplinary nature of the program, faculty mentors are drawn from
multiple departments across life sciences, engineering, and computing sciences,
including Chemical and Biological Engineering, Microbiology, Electrical and
Computer engineering, and Computer Science. Research projects deal with the
collection, analysis, and modeling of biological data sets to understand or
design a system of interest, ranging from microbial communities to bioreactors.
The research activities are supported through workshops providing a hands-on
introduction to modern data analysis, modeling, and visualization tools.
Students will be provided training in responsible conduct of research and ethics
through seminars and group discussions led by faculty mentors. Participants will
be recruited nationally among rising juniors and seniors majoring in an
engineering or life science discipline. Applicants will be selected by a faculty
committee of the PI and Co-PI, workshop leaders, and mentors.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. The students will learn about different STEM learning
styles of K-12 students, and be presented opportunities to engage in K-12
outreach.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences) will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://engineering.tufts.edu/research/reu.htm, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Kyongbum Lee at kyongbum.lee@tufts.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Daniel Ryder at
daniel.ryder@tufts.edu)