* 1560536
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Security and Rights through the Advocacy of Women's  Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Cecelia Lynch, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2017
* USD 18,900.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many women in post-conflict areas play a
transformative role in formal and informal security, but they also must navigate
the politics of UN Security Council resolutions regarding women's participation
in post-conflict peacebuilding, national policies addressing women's security,
and the politics and financial pressures of transnational NGOs. While there has
been much interest in women's victimization and peacebuilding efforts, little
attention has been directed to understanding how women holistically manage and
advocate for their security in their communities. This project explores how
individual and organizational narratives form a part of or potentially subvert
dominant international discourses on women's roles and experiences in conflict
as well as the relationship between women and peace. By prioritizing women's
knowledge of their own security needs, this study contributes to efforts to
improve U.S. foreign policy goals of women "as equal partners in preventing
conflict and building peace." Ultimately, this study advances an understanding
of how and to what extent international gender norms affect national policies
and local implementation strategies, as well as how international policy-making
in gender mainstreaming is fundamentally different from other types of security
policy efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project addresses how local and
national women's organizations in post-conflict areas of West Africa work to
advocate for women's security. To do so, this study uses participant observation
and interviews in Guinea and Mali (building on prior research in Cote d'Ivoire)
to reveal how international resolutions impact local actions and also whether
and how local women's priorities can shape international policies. Analyzing
policies on women's security and the discourses that sustain them through
macro-, meso-, and micro-level lenses will reveal how local and regional women's
community organizations define their security goals and priorities, translate
and localize the international agendas of the UN Security Council and
transnational NGOs as well as the national agendas of governments, and work with
local women to achieve peace and security. By examining the conflicts in Guinea
and Mali, this project will develop a framework of how to understand women's
needs in their communities and in national peacebuilding and reconstruction
projects, underscoring that historical, political, and cultural contexts are
important in developing successful, appropriate security policies.