* 1560513
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Informal Foundation of Authoritarian Resilience
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Dali Yang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 18,900.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The political durability and economic
accomplishments of authoritarian regimes under the single-party government have
long interested social scientists and policymakers, especially since these
regimes lack the liberal institutionalism that scholars typically associate with
development and good governance. This project seeks to cast a new perspective on
single-party government resilience by probing the informal dimension of the
system. More specifically, it focuses on how networks of patron-client relations
structure political interactions among party elites and shape the broader
patterns of political and economic development at both the national and
subnational levels. Contrary to the conventional wisdom that views informal,
clientelistic relations as primarily a cause for corruption, political
instability and economic decay, this project argues that they actually
contribute to the single-party government's resilience by serving as a key
organizational mechanism that mobilizes, incentivizes, and coordinates actors in
a system where the formal institutions are poorly equipped to perform such
functions. Using China as the case of interest, this project contributes to a
growing body of research on the role of informal institutions in political and
economic governance. The project also offers new data and methods for
reconstructing the social world of Chinese political elites since the 1990s.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to cast a new perspective on single-party government resilience by probing the
informal dimension of the system. The research project seeks to systematically
measure the presence of informal networks among Chinese elites and evaluate
their impacts on the following four dimensions: (1) political
institutionalization, (2) economic development, (3) policy implementation, and
(4) anticorruption enforcement. The main quantitative evidence is drawn from an
original biographical database of over 4,000 politicians at city, provincial,
and national levels since early 1990s. The project develops new automated
algorithms for identifying patron-client ties by linking lower-level officials
with political superiors who oversaw their major promotions in the past, and
leverages carefully chosen natural experiments to estimate the causal effects of
informal networks. To supplement the quantitative analyses, the PI will also
conduct in-depth interviews with serving and retired officials in both central
and local governments, and collects additional historical and archival materials
during his fieldwork in China.