* 1560674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State Power, Road Development and Internal Violence
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Dan Reiter, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,640.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
question: Under what conditions do increases in the presence and territorial
reach of a state's security forces increase popular support for the state? Many
academics and policymakers argue that insurgencies thrive in areas where the
state is absent. The conventional wisdom is that increasing the presence of
state security forces in these resistive areas improves the legitimacy of the
regime and serve to shift popular support in the state's favor. However, the
empirical evidence concerning the effects of state power and territorial reach
is decidedly mixed. The PI argues that the interaction between state coercive
power and the social dynamics surrounding noncombatant support influence how
increases in state presence affect many civil conflict dynamic and popular
support in particular. If insurgents leverage a shared ethnicity identity to
mobilize popular support, the encroachment of state security forces will
validate the group's mobilization narrative, decreasing support for the state.
However, when insurgents use appeals to a common ideology in their mobilization
narratives, an increased presence of state security forces can effectively deter
the population from supporting an insurgent movement. These two types of
insurgent conflicts condition the relationship between the presence of security
forces and support of the state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages a unique rural road
development program the government of India enacted in 2000, while the state
currently faces ethnically motivated insurgent groups in central India. This
project extends to the central Indian state of Bihar a survey measuring (1)
how/if rural road development projects increase the presence of state security
forces in troubled areas and (2) if this increased presence affects the balance
of popular support. An initial survey in the state of Assam (conducted during
the summer of 2015) provided support for the hypothesis that in ethnic conflicts
state presence decreases popular support. In the current study, the survey will
assess whether increases in the frequency of military and police patrols
increase popular support for the state in ideological conflict. This project
surveys households in villages across conflict-affected districts. These
villages had an equal probability of receiving the treatment of road
construction. Half the villages received the treatment, while half did not. To
avoid social desirability bias, the PI uses item-count questions as well as
elite interviews. The PI then uses these data in a Coarsened Exact Matching
research design to show (1) that road development increases the frequency in
which the state patrols an area, and (2) that this increased presence works to
drive down support for the state in ethnically-motivated conflicts and increases
popular support in ideologically-driven conflicts. In doing so, this project
provides an important test of these increasingly important counterinsurgent
tactics and strategies.