* 1560096
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary REU in the Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Cherie Dotson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 317,562.00

This REU Site award to the University of Michigan (UM) located in Ann Arbor, MI,
will support the training of 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of
2016-2018. This project is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences (MPS). The program will expose students to the nature of
interdisciplinary research within the framework of protein structure-function
studies. Participants will be engaged in experimental training and independent
investigation in the areas of biochemistry, biophysics, bioinformatics,
cheminformatics, molecular biology and plant biology. In addition to the
research experience, students will participate in weekly seminars focused on
ethics in research, scientific communication, graduate school admissions and
scientific career options as well as various cohort building activities.
Students will be recruited from across the Nation via email postings, website
listings and announcements at conferences, and networking with faculty at
diverse institutions. Undergraduate students, who are US citizens or permanent
residents, majoring in a STEM discipline are eligible for participation. Special
consideration will be given to students from community colleges and to those
with no previous research experience. Individuals who are from underrepresented
ethnic/racial groups and those who are from institutions with limited research
opportunities are encouraged to apply. All participants will receive housing,
meal and travel allowances and a stipend. Applications will be accepted from
early December - March 1st. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total
of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will
be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The
student centered REU program and enrichment activities have been designed to
develop key skills and attitudes, and it is anticipated that the experience will
promote persistence in the STEM disciplines at the undergraduate, graduate and
post-graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Annual tracking surveys will be sent to
program alumni to determine their level of engagement in the STEM disciplines.
More information about the program is available by visiting:
http://pharmacy.umich.edu/reu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Cherie Dotson at
crdotson@umich.edu) or the Co-PI (Dr. Ronald Woodard at rww@umich.edu).