* 1560305
* REU site: Developing entrepreneurs in energy storage, catalysis, and biofuels
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Adam Melvin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2019
* USD 335,759.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Louisiana State
University (LSU)engages undergraduate students traditionally underrepresented in
STEM fields in energy related research with a focus on entrepreneurship and the
mechanisms whereby advances in basic science are transitioned to practice. The
research focus of the REU program will be structured around a common energy
theme with sub-topics including energy storage, catalysis, and biofuels. A
unique aspect of this REU Site is that the students will be challenged to
consider strategies to advance and transform their research past the laboratory
phase to real world implementation via the program's focus on industry and
entrepreneurship. LSU is located in the heart of petrochemical country and has
developed relationships with many of the top petroleum and chemical companies in
the world. PhD engineers from several of these companies will mentor the REU
students on the importance of high quality research in industry and the types of
careers available. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers opportunities for
undergraduate students to engage in energy related research during a 10-week
summer program, on a range of projects, including: cycling new battery materials
and characterizing electrolytes; quantifying and enhancing lipid production from
algae; and characterizing new catalysis used to generate alcohols from syngas.
In addition to active energy research projects mentored by faculty from the
Colleges of Engineering and Science, students will participate in research
seminars, ethics training, writing and communications training, field trips to
world class research facilities, entrepreneurial activities, and career
development activities. Recruitment of REU Site participants will target
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and undergraduate
institutions without significant graduate STEM programs.