* 1560689
* I-Corps:  Laser-Stimulated Phosphor Technology for Next-Generation Solid-State Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Tal Margalith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Lighting is a crucial component in a number of applications, and as such it is
the number one source of electricity use in the commercial and industrial
markets. The number of installed lamps in these applications is only about half
of that used in residences, but the amount of electricity used by these high-
power lights is three times as high. These customers are operating high-power
lamps for an extended period of time daily - using large amounts of energy for
lighting and searching for an energy-efficient alternative. Target applications
where there is a high potential for energy savings by implementing energy
efficient lighting technology include parking, roadway, and sports lighting;
high-mast lighting in seaports, airports, and stadiums; warehouse lighting;
indoor agricultural lighting; and hazardous area and underwater illumination.
These applications require a far-reaching directional light source, where the
present innovation may achieve this with high energy efficiency and low cost.
This project aims to advance solid-state white lighting technology through
increasing energy efficiency and decreasing cost. The proposed innovation relies
on laser-stimulated phosphor technology to create an energy-efficient, high-
power light source. Commercialization of this innovation could lead to the next
generation of ultra-efficient and smart light sources, surpassing the
limitations of current lighting technologies and drastically increasing the
availability and uptake of energy-efficient light sources in the high-power
market, in turn, reducing&lt;br/&gt;global energy consumption and helping to
preserve our environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
evaluate the commercial feasibility of laser-stimulated phosphor technology for
solid-state white lighting. Specifically, the proposed project will perform
customer discovery research within the high-power lighting market, resulting in
a commercialization plan and market focus; and will develop an optical
simulation model based on laser-phosphor interactions to be used as the basis
for further design and optimization to inform future prototyping efforts. The
fundamental research conducted previously has showed that laser-stimulated
phosphor emission is a viable alternative to produce high-quality white light.
The next steps in commercializing this innovation involve identifying the market
segments with the greatest need, and adapting our technology to fit those needs
through innovative optical designs. Exploration and optimization of optical
designs will therefore be the focus of this project. By exploring potential
design schemes,the capabilities of this technology can be more fully understood
and quantified. Optical modeling will be used to create and optimize designs,
understand optical interactions, simulate illumination,and quantify potential
performance capabilities. This will be done using the LightTools Illumination
Design Software, a 3D optical engineering and design software product that
supports virtual prototyping, simulation, optimization, and photorealistic
renderings of illumination applications. Proper use of the simulation software
to produce accurate results requires an understanding of the materials involved
and their optical properties. The goal of the current project will be to develop
a working simulation model that accurately simulates the optical interactions
and resulting photometrics, agreeing with experimental data. This will include
single laser models, using a blue or near-ultraviolet laser diode in combination
with various phosphor compositions and matrix composites. Once an accurate model
is established that agrees with experimental data, further optimization and
designs can be explored that will inform future prototyping efforts. The
technology demonstration at the end of this project will be an accurate model
that will serve as the basis for further research in laser-stimulated phosphor
technology, both within the goals of commercializing this current innovation and
for future research efforts in this area.