* 1560210
* REU Site: Computing and Geoscience in the Coastal Carolina Region
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Sathish Kumar, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2020
* USD 324,783.00

Problems in Geoscience relevant to the coastal regions and climate change span a
broad spectrum of disciplines: oceanography, atmospheric science, geology,
computer science, data science, chemistry, engineering, and biology. Solutions
to these problems can have strong socioeconomic impacts. Advances in computing
and big data analytics are essential in obtaining these solutions, allowing us
to make appropriate assessment of resources in light of future issues related to
climate change. These solutions likewise require broad thinking that can only be
afforded by promoting diversity. However, Geoscience has historically produced
the lowest number of minority doctorates in STEM and has been one of the least
diverse disciplines. Similarly, gender inequality has continued to plague
Computer Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site provides opportunities for
undergraduates to conduct research projects that integrate computing and
geoscience to advance on-going research activities related to coastal zones,
climate variability, and big data analysis. For example, research activities by
REU students will help seek ways to improve climate forecasting, better
understand physical processes in the coastal zones, increase national
preparedness for climate change, understand the nexus between food, energy and
water and mitigate the impacts of natural disasters. To promote interest and
increase diversity in Geoscience and Computer Science, underrepresented students
will be recruited from South Carolina, nearby states, and the Southeastern U.S.
region, especially those attending all-women and historically black colleges and
universities with limited research opportunities. The REU site's goals are (1)
to increase the percentage of women and other underrepresented students in
graduate programs and careers in Computer Science and Geoscience, (2) to provide
meaningful research experiences in computing intensive research topics of
societal relevance, and (3) to provide a supportive environment for students to
improve their research, critical-thinking, problem-solving and communication
skills.