* 1560837
* Boulder School for Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Steven Girvin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,695,000.00

NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the Boulder School for
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics. The annual summer school held on the
University of Colorado campus in Boulder, Colorado provides education for
advanced graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working in condensed matter
physics, materials science and related fields. The goal of the School is to
bridge the gap between graduate training and research by providing advanced
graduate students and beginning postdoctoral researchers access to specialized
training not readily available through graduate programs at any one institution.
The School is also intended to foster a sense of community among junior
researchers. Through online resources that are broadly available, the School is
an educational resource for the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boulder Schools
typically run for four weeks in July each year and utilize facilities provided
by the University of Colorado. Each school has about sixty students and twenty
lecturers. Lectures expose the students to a wide range of subjects in forefront
condensed matter and materials physics; topics that are often not available at
students' home institutions. Members of underrepresented groups are always in
attendance, as well as a number of international students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The School plays an important role in the condensed matter
and materials physics community. Through a diverse and evolving set of lectures,
posted on the School's website, and webcast and video-recorded, it contributes
to the community well beyond student participants attending the School.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer school also presents one or two public
lectures for the Denver area community. Schools also expose local teachers
participating in NSF's Research Experience for Teachers program and high school
students to modern materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the Boulder School for Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics. The annual summer school held on the University of
Colorado campus in Boulder, Colorado provides education for advanced graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows working in condensed matter physics, materials
science, and related fields. It contributes to the frontier education of new
generations of talented scientists interested in condensed matter and materials
science. This is annually accomplished through four weeks of structured
lectures, tutorials, discussions, poster sessions and student-run seminars. Its
innovative and pedagogical lectures provide graduate education unavailable in
any single university department. The goal of the School is to bridge the gap
between graduate training and research by providing advanced graduate students
and beginning postdoctoral researchers access to specialized training. A
School's impact lasts well past its duration, forging scientific relationships
and collaborations that continue well into students' scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;Boulder Schools typically run for four weeks in July each
year and utilize facilities provided by the University of Colorado. Each school
has about sixty students and twenty lecturers. Lectures expose the students to a
wide range of subjects in forefront condensed matter and materials physics;
topics that are often not available at students' home institutions. Members of
underrepresented groups are always in attendance, as well as a number of
international students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned Boulder Schools supported
under this award include "Frustrated and Disordered Systems" (2017), "Quantum
Information Science" (2018), and "Cold Atomic and Molecular Gases" (2019). The
School's Advisory Board and the condensed matter and materials science community
will determine future timely and topical schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Boulder School plays an important role in the condensed matter and materials
physics community. Through a diverse and evolving set of lectures, posted on the
School's website, and webcast and video-recorded, it contributes to the
community well beyond student participants attending the School.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer school also presents one or two public
lectures for the Boulder/Denver area community. These are extremely popular and
consistently well attended. Schools also expose local teachers participating in
a Research Experience for Teachers program and high school students to modern
materials science.