* 1560200
* REU Site: Integrated Science For Society (IS2)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Kenneth Burch, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 343,816.00

This REU Site award to Boston College, located in Boston, MA, will support the
training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017 - 2019. This
project is supported by the Divisions of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) and
Chemistry (CHE). Projects will generally pair students from different
disciplines to collaborate on solving fundamental science problems with an
impact on society. These include understanding the growth of neurons, generating
clean energy from water, identifying proteins responsible for infectious
disease, developing nano-structures for the brain, and making interfaces for
quantum computation. These projects include mentors from the physics, chemistry,
biology, mathematics, and psychology departments. The program will include
training in user facilities, graduate school preparation, and oral/written
communication. Potential participants should submit an application
electronically including: a resume, college transcript, two letters of
recommendation, and indication of research interests, career goals, prior
experience, and preferred project. Participant selection will be conducted by
the PI and Co-PI in consultation with faculty mentors. Emphasis will be placed
on students interested in integrated science with an impact on society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated the program will train a total of 30,
primarily underrepresented minority and first generation college students from
schools with limited research opportunities. The REU will provide training by
technical staff in user facilities, scientific communication, and will include
student seminars with feedback and preparation for taking the GRE. Students will
thus receive professional and scientific skills training, including
opportunities to present their research at professional conferences. Combined
with networkng activities and suite living, these experiences will give students
a sense of belonging in STEM, along with individual and scientific
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for
Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Participants will be tracked after the program in order to determine
student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email
sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://reu.bc.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Burch at
ks.burch@bc.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Lowery at laura.lowery@bc.edu).