* 1560478
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in UAV Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Fang Tang, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 01/31/2020
* USD 380,001.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at California
State Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP), offers state-of-the-art, multi-
disciplinary research experiences in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
technologies, engineering, and computer science to diverse and talented cohorts
of undergraduates, particularly women and Hispanic students, from 2 and 4 year
institutions with limited or no research opportunities. UAV's have the potential
of replacing manned aircraft for dull, dirty, and dangerous missions. In
addition, UAV's are less expensive than manned aircraft and pose no risk to
human operators. Military applications include intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance (ISR), battlefield damage assessment, and force protection.
Civilian applications include remote sensing, scientific research, search and
rescue missions, border patrol, surveillance of disaster-affected areas, aerial
photography, aerial mapping for geotechnical survey, vegetation growth analysis,
crop dusting, and precision agriculture. The UAV industry is the fastest growing
sector of the aerospace industry. However, there is a lack of professionals
entering the workforce for UAV related jobs. This REU program is designed to
increase students' interest in UAV technologies by means of first-hand
experience on UAV research with direct mentorship by faculty advisors from
various departments within the CPP Colleges of Engineering and Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site offers undergraduates, in collaboration with
CPP faculty and graduate students, opportunities to conduct research during a
10-week summer program, on state-of-the-art technologies and advanced research
projects in UAV flight dynamic and control, computer vision, artificial
intelligence, embedded systems, and robotics. In addition to their research,
students will participate in weekly research seminars, research meetings, and
professional development seminars. The seminars will include topics such as
literature review, writing a scientific paper, improving written and oral
communication skills, technical presentations, graduate education, career paths,
resume building, and ethics in science and engineering. The 10-week program will
also include outreach activity. The students will give presentations on UAV
technologies, engineering, and computer science to K-12 students at local
schools. This will enhance students' communication skills, allow them to see the
broader implications of their research, and see how they can positively impact
society through research. The discoveries made during these collaborations will
be communicated to the broader scientific community via publications and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.