* 1560656
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Political Parties, Societal Linkages and Developing Stable Ties with Voters
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Thad Dunning, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 23,530.00

General Summary

This project offers a new explanation of how voters become partisans. The PI
examines the different trajectories of new parties and asks why some are able to
take root in society, establish stable ties with voters quickly, and
successfully compete in elections over time, while others fail to do so. Most
prior research focuses on parties' direct appeals to voters. This research also
explains success in terms of different types of direct appeals to groups that
organize around social cleavages. Stable ties between a party and societal
organizations may also attach organization members to that party and socialize
them into identifying with it. The PI argues that organizational linkages can
yield more stable voter-party ties and support bases. The PI test his argument
using a multi-method strategy. This research contributes to our understanding of
how traditionally marginalized groups are incorporated into the electoral arena
through parties.

Technical Summary

This project examines the different trajectories of new parties and asks why
some are able to take root in society, establish stable ties with voters
quickly, and successfully compete in elections over time, while others fail to
do so. Most prior research focuses on parties' direct appeals to voters. This
research also explains success in terms of different types of direct appeals to
groups that organize around social cleavages. Stable ties between a party and
societal organizations may also attach organization members to that party and
socialize them into identifying with it. The PI argues that organizational
linkages can yield more stable voter-party ties and support bases. The PI test
his argument using a multi-method strategy, integrating conjoint experiments on
the microfoundations of party support, comparative case studies of new parties
in Bolivia, Ecuador, and Mexico, statistical analysis of survey data; and
ecological inference leveraging a new data set. This project advances our
understanding of new parties and contributes to efforts to promote sustained
representation that is accountable to broad population segments.