* 1561768
* Capacity building: Understanding American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian student outcomes in the STEM education research literature
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Kathy DeerInWater, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 03/31/2020
* USD 89,699.00

This project will result in a literature review of studies of American Indian,
Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian and STEM education and learning as well as
studies that include Indigenous populations as part of a larger underrepresented
racial and ethnic minority group. The ultimate educational significance of this
project is to identify practical strategies to address the extreme dearth of
Native Americans in STEM education and careers. The outcomes of this project
will set the stage for future programming to foster the participation of
American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian in STEM education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of this project is to understand
how the STEM experiences and retention of American Indian, Alaskan Native, and
Native Hawaiian populations can be best understood within the broader
underrepresented minority discussion. To do this, the investigators will conduct
a secondary literature review aiming to identify common themes. This literature
review will lead to a workshop of experts in STEM education and Indigenous
populations. The workshop participants will discuss the current state of
research, identifying themes and gaps in the research in order to develop an
action plan to guide future research as well as provide best practices for
American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian educational organizations
like the American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES).