* 1561844
* Connective Stereospecific Generation of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Paul Blakemore, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Paul Blakemore in the Department of Chemistry, Oregon
State University (OSU). Professor Blakemore and his students are exploring a new
method for the preparation of alkenes, a class of carbon-based molecules. These
substances are of value to many fields including medicine, agriculture, and
engineering. Alkenes can exist in either of two geometrical forms. It is
essential to control which form of an alkene is prepared because the two types
have different physical and biological properties. The chemical reactions
developed at OSU enable either geometrical form of an alkene to be made
selectively. This research advances the education of students spanning levels of
experience from high school, to undergraduate, to graduate, and post-doctoral.
In addition, Professor Blakemore foster the participation of students from
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research introduces a new approach for
stereocontrolled alkene synthesis based on eliminative cross-coupling of
enantioenriched sp3-hybridized carbenoids. By contrast to traditional strategies
for alkene synthesis, which cannot wholly control stereochemistry, the method
developed in this research does not rely on differentiated substituents to bias
generation of one isomer over the other. Rather, interplay between pre-existing
absolute stereochemical features within the carbenoid subunits is exploited to
steer formation of the carbon-carbon double bond toward the desired
stereoisomer. To explore the scope of this new method while demonstrating its
relevance to society, complex alkene containing bioactive compounds are prepared
alongside simpler models. These include a P-glycoprotein stimulator (a potential
therapeutic for Alzeheimer's disease), vitamin D3 (a secosteroid with multiple
applications), and pumiliotoxin 251D (an alkaloid with sodium ion channel
activity). The next generation of scientists is nurtured. High school students
participating in statewide summer internship programs are hosted within
Professor Blakemore's laboratory.