* 1561723
* Helping Parents to See Mathematics Ability as Malleable: Implications for Children's Mathematics Learning
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Eva Pomerantz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,895,863.00

Many people believe that mathematics ability is a fixed trait. However, research
indicates instead that mathematics ability is malleable, that it can be improved
with effort and persistence, a belief system known as "growth mindset". There
has been much attention to enhancing children's mathematics learning in the
classroom. Although this is critical, it does not take into account that
children spend a large proportion of their time outside of school, frequently
with at least one of their parents. Consequently, parents are an important but
underutilized resource in the effort to improve children's mathematics learning.
It is clear that parents' practices play a role in the development of children's
mathematics skills, but little is known about how to optimize parenting
practices. This research project will study how growth mindsets about
mathematics ability can lead to parenting practices that enhance children's
mathematics learning. A central endeavor of the project will be to test the
efficacy of helping parents to hold a growth mindset. Along with the research
findings, the project will also translate to a cost- and time-efficient
intervention that can be implement in a variety of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the impact of the
intervention on parents' mindsets, their ensuing parenting practices related to
mathematics learning, and the impact of those practices on children's motivation
and achievement in mathematics. The project will employ an experimental
intervention in which parents and children are followed over time using a
variety of assessments (e.g., observations, daily reports, and standardized
tests). The research will test the extent to which exposing parents to
information that mathematics ability is malleable leads to a growth mindset,
thereby optimizing parenting practices around mathematics with enduring benefits
for children's mathematics learning. Given demographic disparities in children's
mathematics achievement, a socioeconomically diverse group of European American
and African American families will be recruited. This design will permit study
of the extent to which the growth mindset induction along with the scaffolding
activities can reduce socioeconomic and ethnic disparities. A major innovation
of the project is that it will examine whether scaffolding activities (e.g.,
mathematics games and books) support parents in implementing their growth
mindsets in a variety of situations in which they interact with children around
mathematics on a daily basis.