* 1561429
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Unlocking the Fossil Cabinet: Improving Conservation and Accessibility of Invertebrate Paleontology Collections at the Natural History Museum of
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Austin Hendy, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 224,243.00

An award is made to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (NHM) that
will support the curation, digitization, and accessibility of specimens and data
held in the Invertebrate Paleontology Collection (LACMIP), with three distinct
and essential ojbectives. First, historic collections of Pliocene-Pleistocene
age fossils require extensive physical curation in order to be incorporated into
an ongoing cataloguing and imaging initiative. Second, extensive collections of
Cretaceous fossils from California will be properly curated and digitized for
the first time. Third, within these holdings is an important private collection
of Cretaceous and Miocene age fossils acquired by LACMIP, which will be curated
and made accessible to researchers. Once properly housed, catalogued and
photographed, all three collections will provide critical reference specimens
for understanding past climatic, biogeographic, and environmental changes in the
Western United States. The project will also allow continued growth of a program
that provides hands-on training of student interns from nearby under-served
universities and community colleges and STEM educators from local schools.
Ultimately, the physical curation of more than 1.2 million specimens are
improved, and the addition of 156,000 specimen records and 1,300 images will
make the collections more accessible and useful for research.

The collections that will benefit from this award span much of the last 90
million years of geological history, environmental change, and evolution in
California, and include representatives of most major invertebrate groups. This
award will secure the future of these collections, increase their physical and
digital accessibility, and for the first time, make them publically available
for teaching, research, and outreach. More than 1.1 million Pliocene-Pleistocene
fossils collected during the 1870s-1930s will be moved to archival trays and
vials to permit their digitization. Nearly 126,000 Cretaceous fossils collected
from California over the last 80 years will undergo substantial curatorial
improvement, including rehousing, cataloguing, and digital imaging. A collection
of some 30,000 specimens and associated stratigraphic data assembled from local
Miocene and Cretaceous rocks will be unpacked and made accessible in new
cabinets, housed in archival materials, and digitized. All data resulting from
digitization of these collections will be archived in KE-EMu, a collections
management system that integrates all of the NHM's biological, historical, and
anthropological collections. Specimen records and digital images will also be
fully integrated into existing data networks (e.g., iDigBio, GBIF, and the
PBDB). The project will make these significant collections readily available to
the public, thus providing a stimulus for research and resources for education.
The resulting data will substantially increase accessible information about
Cretaceous, Miocene, Pliocene and Pleistocene invertebrate biodiversity of the
Eastern Pacific. Such data fills an existing gap, and will be of broad research
value to paleontologists and malacologists in studies of environmental and
climatic change, biogeography and paleoecology, and for systematic and molecular
biologists. Specimen records and images will be discoverable from the LACMIP on-
line portal (collections.nhm.org) and the national resource for Advancing
Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (www.idigbio.org).