* 1561751
* Aspire-II - From Teacher Task Design to Generalizable Knowledge of Student Learning: A Comprehensive Study of Learning Progression Use
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Derek Briggs, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,210,066.00

The EHR Core Research program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that will generate foundational knowledge in the field. While learning
progressions have shown promise as supports for teachers as they design
formative assessments, as well as suggested new approaches for modeling student
learning, the field is still only at the beginning stages of understanding how
learning progressions can inform and enhance student learning. This research is
needed because studies show that although formative assessment may support
student learning, formative assessment practices are not easy for teachers to
learn. Through this effort up to 72 high school biology, chemistry and physics
teachers will participate in professional learning communities to help them
become more effective in using learning progression-centered formative
assessment in their classrooms. This project will build on prior studies by
helping teachers in setting learning goals, measuring student progress toward
those goals, and providing feedback to improve students' performance. It will
also extend an ongoing research-practice partnership between a university-based
educational research team and a school district that are both committed to
improving science education for its population of socioeconomically,
linguistically, and ethnically diverse students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goals will be to investigate how teachers: (1) Engage with different
types of learning progressions in different content domains to inform formative
assessment design in professional learning communities; (2) Enact learning
progression-based formative assessment tasks with students; (3) Measure the
effect of learning progression-centered professional development on student
learning, as well as the mediators of this effect; and will also (4) Model
student learning and the extent to which assessment results support the
hypotheses represented in learning progressions. The study will employ
complementary qualitative and quantitative methods and follow a year of design-
based implementation research with a quasi-experimental study of teachers
participating in research-team facilitated professional learning communities
focused on learning progressions. Evidence pertaining to teacher professional
learning will be gathered through the triangulation of data from front-to-back
analyses of teacher participation in professional learning communities,
structured interviews, classroom observations, and analysis of formative
assessment tasks. Student learning will be tracked through pre-post diagnostic
assessments linked to learning progressions teachers use in their professional
learning communities. Results from this work will advance knowledge about theory
building through tools and resources along with evidence of their effectiveness,
design criteria to guide formation of effective teacher collaboration around
formative assessment design in professional learning communities, and model
approaches for student performance relative to learning progressions. These end
products will also provide instruments to help schools and districts collect
evidence in real-time of professional learning community function and formative
assessment task quality.