* 1561178
* I-Corps:  3D Organ on a Chip
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Shyni Varghese, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team has developed a method to create small tissue mimics of human
organs within a microfluidics chip. Using this technology, we aim to create
multiple chips, each representing a different organ system, to create an
artificial "human-on-a-chip" platform to assess the organ specific and systemic
effect of drug candidates without having to test these compounds in the human
body. Currently, pharmaceutical companies spend billions of dollars and a few
decades in drug development process, which effectively reduces thousands of
candidates to one successful compound that can be put into the market.
Initially, these candidates are tested on cells that are plated on plastic
dishes, which do not resemble the conditions that would be faced by cells in the
body. As a direct result, too many candidates advance from this stage into the
costly and more time consuming preclinical animal studies, driving up the cost
of drug development significantly. This team believes that the proposed organ-
on-a-chip system, which not only recreates the structural features of native
tissue, but also mimics the perfusion of blood in the body, will screen out drug
candidates before progressing towards animal models. In addition, these chips
will provide a more relevant perspective to the inner workings of biological
systems on an organ level, allowing us to "de-risk" promising candidates by
eliminating the poor performers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the proposed
technology for generating organ-on-a-chips, the team has successfully created
proof-of-concept prototypes of the heart-and tumor-on-a-chip platforms.
Initially, the heart-on-a-chip platform has been chosen to showcase the proposed
technology and address the need for assessing cardiac toxicity, which is a major
concern for pharmaceutical companies. In the tumor-on-a-chip platform, the team
has integrated different cell types found in the tumor microenvironment to mimic
the progression of cancer. By providing a physiological relevant mixture of
cells, the proposed system will provide the ability for pharmaceutical companies
to assess the specificity of targeted cancer therapeutics, which have now become
the norm in the treatment of oncology. For both platforms, one common goal is to
provide further evidence of the relevance of our devices for drug testing
purposes. To this end, the team will form partnerships with pharmaceutical
companies to tap into their drug candidate libraries which have been tested
prior to establish their efficacy and toxicity. The team will demonstrate the
proposed platform's ability to recapitulate these drug specific results, which
will allow them to build credibility amongst potential customers.