* 1561448
* CSBR: Natural History: Rehabilitation and Revitalization of the Purdue Entomological Research Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Eugenio Nearns, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 506,040.00

The Purdue Entomological Research Collection (PERC), an active research unit
within the Department of Entomology at Purdue University, houses the largest and
most important collection of arthropods in Indiana, estimated at about two
million specimens. Over the last 120 years, the PERC has acquired numerous
historical insect collections of great significance to the entomology community,
including thousands of unique reference specimens, and a world-class collection
of aquatic insects. This project will update the existing storage systems in the
collection to ensure they are preserved for future research and education. In
addition, specimen images and associated data will be stored in an online
database freely available to the public. Training will be provided on proper
preservation of entomological specimens and natural history collections to
junior researchers, and undergraduate students, as well as underrepresented
groups. This project will raise awareness of the importance of insects and
natural history collections through various public engagement activities,
aquatic ecosystem workshops, and rural community youth programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PERC's holdings include the world's largest and most
comprehensive collection of mayflies (Ephemeroptera), as well as several
important historical collections, including damselflies and dragonflies
(Odonata), aquatic beetles (Coleoptera), and North American bees (Hymenoptera).
The PERC also serves as a repository for various Indiana Survey projects and
other voucher material, and houses over 2,200 primary and secondary type
specimens. Despite the importance of its holdings, the PERC has remained
underutilized by, and in some cases inaccessible to, scientists, students, and
water managers outside of Purdue. This project will address these problems by
updating the curatorial standards and expanding the specimen database. Specific
goals include transferring improperly stored specimens into modern drawers and
cabinets, integration of recently collected specimens for molecular work,
updating the current slide storage system, reorganizing and ethanol-preserved
collections. PERC specimen data will be shared and made available online through
iDigBio (www.idigbio.org); PERC's mayfly data will also be made available
through the Mayfly Central website (www.entm.purdue.edu/mayfly/). Additional
information can be found at the official PERC website
(www.entm.purdue.edu/perc/).