* 1561280
* CSBR: Natural History:  Making a large impact on a small herbarium:  Integration of un-accessioned and orphaned specimens to secure and promote wider use of the collection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* John Schenk, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,798.00

Herbaria are irreplaceable repositories of botanical diversity that catalog the
occurrence of plants in the past and present. These collections serve as a
foundation in plant science and science policy, especially those serving rural
communities. In this setting, herbaria are especially important data sources
because land managers require information on native and introduced species, as
well as the effects of rapidly changing species assemblages. While serving the
larger scientific community, regional herbaria also serve local residents,
farmers, private and government policy makers, and land managers more
specifically and thoroughly. It is therefore vital that herbaria accurately
represent the past and present plant diversity. The Georgia Southern University
(GSU) Herbarium holds 21,127 catalogued specimens and is housed in a state-of-
the-art building. However, an estimated 26,500 vascular plant specimens (55.6%
of the collection) are unorganized and in need of curation and integration to
fulfill their scientific value and use. Most of this un-accessioned material
comes from the Georgian Coastal Plain, a relatively poorly sampled region that
harbors many rare and endangered species. This award will allow GSU to integrate
two recently acquired orphaned collections and other backlogged specimens,
doubling the GSU Herbarium's holdings and assure the security of an invaluable
scientific collection for future generations. Through this project, these
specimens will be mounted onto herbarium sheets and data about the collections
will be digitized, which will improve and secure the collection for research and
education over the long-term. Furthermore, the facility will be updated with the
necessary tools to provide researchers and students access to the most
comprehensive collection of plant diversity in the region through loans, visits,
and online databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GSU Herbarium has 21,127
accessioned specimens, but an estimated 26,500 specimens documenting the
regional diversity of southeastern Georgian Coastal Plain, including rare
species, collections from sparsely sampled areas, and the orphaned Youth Museum
of Savannah Herbarium and the Flora of Fort Stewart, are inaccessible for
research and education. This impedes efforts to integrate contemporary
collections, reorganize the collection, integrate nomenclatural changes, and
other educational outreach initiatives, generating an urgent need to process the
backlogged collection. The project will integrate un-accessioned specimens into
the main collection by transferring collection book information into label data.
Specimens will be mounted and filed, and the label data uploaded into existing
online database repositories to increase their dissemination and use. In
addition, reorganization and nomenclatural updates will secure the collection
for future use and facilitate access. The award will greatly enhance and secure
a unique, historically significant collection that documents the exceptional
plant diversity of the Coastal Plain. Active-learning modules will be created to
engage high school and freshman college students, while integrating STEM
education. The award will further allow the Herbarium to engage and train GSU's
diverse student community by participating in a mentored learning environment
and gain experience crucial to pursuing STEM careers by actively assisting in
curatorial practices. Results can be viewed on the GSU Herbarium's website
(sites.google.com/a/georgiasouthern.edu/gasherbarium/home) and data will be
shared and made available through iDigBio (www. idigbio.org).