* 1561759
* CSBR: Ownership Transfer: Transfer of Orphaned Kettleman Hills Collection from San Francisco State University to the University of California Museum of Paleontology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Patricia Holroyd, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 108,279.00

Paleontology collections represent a rare, irreplaceable resource for
understanding Earth history. The University of California Museum of Paleontology
(UCMP) has one of the largest and most actively used fossil collections in the
country. This project secures a unique and endangered collection of two to five
million year old marine invertebrate and rare marine and land vertebrate fossils
by transferring them from San Francisco State University (SFSU) to UCMP where
the specimens will be curated and digitally cataloged, preserving the data for
future generations. Students and faculty at San Francisco State University over
the course of 40 years collected these fossils with precise, high quality
geographic and geologic information from multiple geologic formations from the
Kettleman Hills of Central California. The collection has been virtually unknown
to the scientific community and it contains more than 100 genera and 200 species
of bivalve and gastropod mollusks, and fewer varieties of echinoids, bryozoans,
corals, and brachiopods, with rarer fish, reptiles, and marine and terrestrial
mammals. In addition to providing web-accessible digital specimen records, the
data and images of fossils from the collection will be incorporated into
education modules and virtual field trips posted on UCMP websites and the
project will provide important training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students.

The focus of the project is the physical transfer, rehousing, and digital
cataloging of a unique, endangered collection of Pliocene-Pleistocene-aged
fossils from the Etchegoin, San Joaquin, and Tulare formations in the Kettleman
Hills of Central California. The Pliocene-Pleistocene marine fossil record in
California records important global environmental and sea level changes and
specific drivers operating over the last five million years include climate,
glacial-interglacial cycles, and local plate tectonic movements. Fossils of this
age and related faunas are the subject of ongoing study by researchers who
actively use UCMP collections. The effort will, for the first time, enable
researchers to make use of this irreplaceable collection by providing physical
access to the fossils and electronic access to the accompanying locality data.
Results of the project will be accessible online (www.ucmp.berkeley.edu) and
digitized collections data and images will be shared via iDigBio
(www.idigbio.org) and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(www.gbif.org).