* 1561839
* Nanomanufacturing of 3D Networks of 2D Materials for High Materials Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials are a new class of materials that
have shown attractive material properties with potential applications in light-
conversion and information technologies. For example, 2D materials are extremely
flexible due to their membrane-like thin structure, they interact with light
very strongly, and their surfaces are good for sensing molecules and gases. They
are currently grown in small quantities only on flat surfaces with poor optical
performance which greatly limit their potential. Their successful integration
into real-life applications, however, requires new scalable manufacturing
technologies capable of producing high quality and high performance 2D materials
in large quantities. This award will pave the way to manufacture three-
dimensional (3D) networks of 2D materials by conformably coating 2D layers onto
3D substrates by scalable and cost-effective nanomanufacturing techniques. This
project will allow large scale manufacturing of 2D material fibers and enable
many new applications of atomically thin materials. Additionally, this project
includes educational outreach, with a strong emphasis on bringing an
understanding of nanoscience and 2D materials to the general public through free
open house events and other activities. It will also give hands-on research
opportunities to underrepresented groups and minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pound-for-pound atomically thin 2D materials, such as
MoS2, have the potential to generate three-orders of magnitude energy compared
to conventional materials such as Si or GaAs. However, when they are grown in
planar form, their optical performance greatly suffers from their extreme
thinness. This award tackles this problem from a nanomanufacturing point of view
by constructing 3D networks of 2D materials. Deposition of 2D materials in 3D
geometry has distinct advantages over planar ones as their total surface area,
material quantity, and optical performance (absorption and emission) can be
increased significantly. However, no systematic studies exist to date on the
nanomanufacturing of 3D networks of 2D materials. The research team aims to
close the knowledge gap by coating individual electrospun nanofibers with 2D
sheets using a cost-effective, reliable, and scalable electrospinning process.
Electrospinning is used to produce polymeric alumina nanofibers, which are then
crystallized by thermal annealing into desired crystalline phases for successful
2D deposition. Lastly, 2D materials are deposited using a scalable chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) process. Material performance of manufactured networks
will be tested and techniques will be combined into traditional CVD and
electrospinning techniques to realize 2D systems for practical applications.