* 1561155
* Collaborative Research: ArguLex -  Applying Automated Analysis to a Learning Progression for Argumentation.
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mary Anne Sydlik, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 117,986.00

Argumentation is fundamental to both science and science education. This
perspective is reflected in the Next Generation Science Standards where
argumentation is presented as one of eight fundamental science and engineering
practices through which students learn both the core ideas of science and the
crosscutting concepts of science. Argumentation, however, is not measured well
using standard multiple choice items. An alternative that is well suited to
measuring argumentation skills is the assessment of student written work; but
this approach is both expensive and time consuming. This research project
addresses this issue through research into using language technology to automate
the scoring of student written work to assess their argumentation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies lexical analysis and machine
learning technologies to develop an efficient, valid, reliable and automated
measure of middle school students' abilities to engage in scientific
argumentation. The project will build upon prior work that developed high
quality assessments for a learning progression for argumentation. However, these
assessments are time and resource intensive to score. But when used with
automated approaches, such assessments will allow measurement of argumentation
to be taken to scale with rapid formative feedback, and will be an invaluable
resource for STEM teachers, researchers, and teacher educators. The project
brings together BSCS researchers who have experience measuring argumentation;
Michigan State University's Automated Analysis of Constructed Response research
group which provides expertise across a range of scientific disciplines refining
analysis for formative educational purposes; Stanford University which provides
expertise in learning progressions for argumentation in science; and Western
Michigan University which serves as an external evaluator.