* 1561542
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Middle Grades Mathematics Teachers' Curricular Reasoning
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Lisa Kasmer, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 295,523.00

Teachers are crucial to improving mathematics instruction in the US.
Improvements in understanding teachers' knowledge about mathematics for teaching
have led to improvements in teacher education and professional development.
However, there are gaps in the understanding of mathematics knowledge for
teaching, including how teachers reason about curriculum. Because curricular
resources, including textbooks, continue to be important resources and tools for
teachers, understanding how teachers reason about curriculum are important to
improve teachers' knowledge and instructional practice. This collaborative
project with the University of Nevada Las Vegas, Brigham Young University,
University of Arkansas, and Grand Valley State University, will study middle
grade mathematics teachers' curricular reasoning and develop a taxonomy that can
be used by curriculum developers, teacher educators and professional developers
to help in the development of productive curricular reasoning for teachers. This
research is funded by the EHR Core Research Program, which emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three stage
study will begin with adaptation, development, and pilots of the interview and
observation protocols with eight teachers to verify that these instruments are
valid and reliable. The second stage focuses on developing the curricular
reasoning taxonomy by collecting analyzing interview and observation data from
12 grade 8 mathematics teachers in four states. These teachers will be using
novel curriculum materials to teach geometry transformations during their
regular classroom instruction. During this stage, the project will develop an
initial taxonomy of teachers' curricular reasoning as they plan and enact these
lessons. In the third stage, the researchers will verify and refine the
curricular reasoning taxonomy by collecting interview and observation data from
20-40 grade 8 mathematics teachers in four states with a variety of teaching
backgrounds.