* 1561687
* Pathways to S&amp;E Professions: Investigating Persistence and Career Choice for Bachelor's and Master's Graduates
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2024
* Hal Salzman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,470,217.00

Science and engineering education and career trajectories will be examined in a
mixed methods research study, using large, administrative datasets and
fieldwork, in a collaboration of Rutgers University New Brunswick with the
University of Michigan. This study of the critical choice points in the career
trajectories of undergraduate and master's students in science and engineering
will provide insight to researchers and educators about key factors that bring
students into STEM pathways and some to leave STEM. Researchers will use
nationally-representative survey data, longitudinal administrative data from
major research universities and interviews in universities and firms to focus on
the role of high impact events (e.g., research and work experiences, advising,
particular courses) on career decisions as well as demand side factors that
affect science and engineering career entry and persistence. Fieldwork in firms
and colleges will examine how firms are structuring bioscience and engineering
jobs and careers and how that affects students' career choices and initial
career trajectories. An important contribution of the research, to fundamental
education and career pathway knowledge, is developing and testing a
comprehensive model of significant factors that affect students' choice of STEM
careers. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The
ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is
based on triangulating across survey and administrative datasets and fieldwork
to provide a full assessment of student trajectories, high-impact events with
particular but not exclusive focus on the undergraduate research experience.
Three major research analyses will inform STEM education and workforce
investments by examining in depth: (1) key decision points and high-impact
events that influence student pathways through S&amp;E majors and careers, (2)
the impact of undergraduate research employment on college completion and entry
into S&amp;E careers, and (3) how the structure of work in S&amp;E firms
influences career choices and persistence. The research builds on the normative
theories in career counseling (e.g., of interest matching) and labor market
studies that focus on the marginal responses to changes in wage rates and
employment opportunities; this empirical analysis will advance current knowledge
to comprehensively examine multiple factors and contingent decision points. By
triangulating across qualitative and quantitative approaches and using detailed
longitudinal data, the study will also examine differential impacts and outcomes
by demographic group, major, and career field, to provide a full assessment of
student trajectories and high-impact events. The longitudinal data and the
fieldwork of both supply (graduates) and demand (employers) will allow modeling
of the education to career trajectories and differential impacts using
propensity score matching and novel instrumental variables strategies to
identify causal effects in S&amp;E education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in three areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation, and workforce development.