* 1561269
* CSBR: Natural History: Digitized Images from the Cornell University Insect Collection Support D.I.Y. Entomological Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* James Liebherr, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 313,100.00

Characters used to differentiate the vast diversity of insect species are often
available only in primary taxonomic publications, making the specific criteria
used for recognizing species difficult to access by individuals outside major
research institutions. This is especially true for North American moths
(Lepidoptera), within which many species lack scientific names. Natural history
collections contain substantial amounts of untapped information concerning North
American biodiversity that is largely unavailable to non-scientists. The digital
revolution that is allowing the integration of photographic images and
associated information permits the availability of information on species
diversity along with the criteria used to separate species to anyone with
internet access. Moreover, the end-user of such information can make important
contributions to the knowledge of our fauna if they are given appropriate
information on methods used to characterize species.

The Cornell University Insect Collection (CUIC) includes a major North American
moth collection, with extensive representation of moth species from much of the
United States, especially the mountain forest habitats of the American
southwest. The CUIC Lepidoptera holdings total 1.7 million specimens and are
currently stored as four separate, parallel collections. These specimens will be
integrated into a single comprehensive moth collection reflecting modern
classification and up-to-date nomenclature. The currently parallel collections,
housed under cramped and partially unsafe storage conditions, will be rehoused
in expanded cabinetry incorporating archival storage materials, ensuring long-
term preservation of the specimens and full access to all material by
researchers. These tasks will be conducted by undergraduate student employees
who will receive training in curation and insect taxonomy. Approximately 8700
adult specimens representing at least 2800 species of North American moths will
be photographed along with their associated microscope slide-mounted genitalic
preparations. These images with associated label data will be uploaded onto the
NSF supported Morphbank website, making all images and information available for
moth identification or taxonomic description. Approximately 1500 of the
specimens in this special collection have never been assigned to a known,
described species, supporting their status as representatives of undescribed,
cryptic species. An M.S. graduate student will conduct thesis research that
emphasizes the use of moth anatomical characters for species discrimination and
description. This student will also develop short educational videos that
explain various aspects of moth taxonomy, including how to collect moths, how to
dissect moths, and how to identify and interpret the morphological characters
used for moth identification and taxonomic description. These videos will target
knowledgeable amateurs of all ages, thereby integrating the substantial
community of citizen scientists into a larger effort to understand our moth
fauna. The adult and genitalic moth images will be made available at Morphbank
(www.morphbank.net) and shared with iDigBio (www.idigbio.org). The internet
videos as well as the moth images will be linked to the Cornell University
Insect Collection website (cuic.entomology.cornell.edu).