* 1561524
* Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference III
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Colin Adams, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2017
* USD 39,350.00

This proposal is to fund the Undergraduate Knot Theory Conference 2016 to bring
together undergraduates and undergraduate faculty interested in knot theory, to
be held at Denison University from July 31 to August 2, 2016 as a satellite
conference to "2016 MathFest" which will take place in Columbus, OH. Knot theory
is a field very amenable to research by undergraduates. There are a variety of
REU programs with a knot theory component. Moreover, there are many faculty
members who would like to involve their students in undergraduate research in
knot theory. This conference will bring together experts in knot theory with
undergraduates who are either currently participating in knot theory REUs,
undergraduates who have participated in knot theory research, current graduate
students who participated as undergraduates in knot theory research, and perhaps
most importantly, faculty who either have involved undergraduates in knot theory
research or who would like to involve undergraduates.

As a centerpiece, the organizers plan to have a collective problem session to
give participants numerous ideas for future research directions. This conference
will provide an opportunity for students to experience a mathematics research
conference that is specifically designed and directed toward them. Moreover, the
conference will establish a supportive network of students and faculty with an
interest in knot theory research, thus furthering the involvement of students in
the field of mathematics. The conference URL is www.denison.edu/unknot.