* 1561833
* Automatic grammar engineering for endangered languages based on cross-linguistic resources
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Emily Bender, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 01/31/2021
* USD 429,864.00

Grammar engineering is the process of creating computer models of the grammar of
languages, including how words are formed from smaller meaningful parts, how
words are put together into sentences, and how the meaning of sentences is built
based on their structure and the meaning of their parts. This project is
automatically creating computational grammars by combining computational
techniques developed for well-studied languages, data collected and annotated by
field linguists and a cross-linguistic grammar resource (the LinGO Grammar
Matrix). Computational grammars enrich the results of language documentation
because they can be used to automatically create further annotations (of word
structure, sentence structure and meaning). Text annotated in this way can be
searched both for word forms or structures of interest as well as for examples
which fall outside of current hypotheses, helping linguists more rapidly zero in
on the data of interest. Broader impacts include the training of graduate
students and the development of computational tools of potential use to groups
ranging from linguists to endangered or low resource language communities.



The AGGREGATION Project aims to bring the benefits of grammar engineering to the
urgent task of documenting endangered languages. In Phase II, the AGGREGATION
Project will pursue two related sets of goals: (1) Expanding the coverage of the
cross-linguistic resource and the resulting computational grammars and (2)
creating interfaces to realize the potential of the grammars, the annotations
they produce, and the intermediate outputs of our grammar creation system as
analytical tools for field linguists. The overall system and its interfaces are
general tools, meant to bring the power of computational processing to field
linguists. In order to ensure their broad applicability, the tools will be
developed using three languages from different language families and different
parts of the world as case studies: Chintang (a Kiranti language of Nepal),
Matsigenka (an Arawak language of Peru), and Abui (an Alor-Pantar language of
Indonesia). This project is supported by NSF's Robust Intelligence Program in
CISE.