* 1561960
* Characterization, Modeling, and Prediction of Fatigue Damage Under Variable Amplitude Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Chelidze, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2020
* USD 308,502.00

Fatigue is an omnipresent problem in structural systems subjected to vibrations,
and can lead to catastrophic failures, injuries, and loss of life. Quantitative
prognostication of fatigue damage is still a largely unresolved and critical
problem of engineering practice. This award supports fundamental research
establishing the connection between material fatigue and structural dynamics.
Such a link enables fatigue damage modeling and prediction and is an
indispensable component of effective structural health monitoring and condition-
based maintenance technologies. Successful achievement of the project objectives
will enhance safety and performance of critical infrastructure and machinery,
and will provide wide-ranging benefits to the U.S. economy and society. The
project has a multidisciplinary nature incorporating material science, dynamical
systems modeling, fatigue testing, and nonlinear time series analysis. The
research approach and the project findings will also enrich engineering
education and broaden participation of underrepresented groups in cross-
disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of fatigue
mechanisms at the micro-scale is not sufficient to provide information
applicable to macro-scale fatigue life estimation. Furthermore, existing models
and analyses of the dynamic behavior of damaged structures do not directly yield
insight into fatigue mechanisms or fatigue prediction. This award will support
the study of fatigue evolution across its different stages, its interaction with
structural dynamics and loads, and the effect of loads on fatigue dynamics. A
combination of analytical, numerical, and experimental studies will be conducted
to investigate the interaction between fatigue accumulation and structural
oscillations. The findings will be employed for practical fatigue life
prediction under variable amplitude loading conditions. The project will
formulate a modeling approach that permits the exploitation of nonlinear load
characteristics for fatigue life prediction. The resulting damage model and
method for fatigue life prediction - using new, physically meaningful, and easy
to estimate load metrics - will be instrumental in designing against fatigue,
and enabling effective fatigue prognostication.