* 1561743
* CSBR: Natural History: Development of the Arkansas Center for Biodiversity Collections to advance biodiversity research and education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stanley Trauth, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 478,094.00

CSBR: Natural History: Development of the Arkansas Center for Biodiversity
Collections to advance biodiversity research and
education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural history collections have played a central
role in research, education, and outreach at Arkansas State University (A-State)
for nearly 70 years. Housing more than 500,000 specimens, the combined
collections at A-State represent an important record of regional biodiversity
from the Interior Highlands, Mississippi Alluvial Plain, and Crowley's Ridge
ecoregions of the southeastern United States. These collections are threatened
by overcrowding, resulting in inefficient and limited use, and specimen
degradation in some cases. This project unifies the eight collections at A-State
into common spaces with new shelving, cabinetry, and a singular database under
the newly formed Arkansas Center for Biodiversity Collections (ACBC). Improved
access to the ACBC will increase opportunities to engage students in
understanding the importance and utility of natural history collections, as well
as enhance research opportunities for A-State students and the broader
scientific community. Additionally, students of the A-State Natural History
Collections Curation Club (NHC3) will work with curators to develop natural
history displays and K-12 class field trip tours including biodiversity and
specimen workshops to educate the underserved student populations in the region.
Through active undergraduate and graduate student involvement, the ACBC will
link research-grade natural history collections to the general public,
particularly K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACBC mission is to provide
a unified, accessible specimen repository and research center for the State of
Arkansas, including the Interior Highlands, Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain,
and Crowley's Ridge ecoregions. This geographical region is a major center of
endemism for numerous taxonomic groups in eastern North America, and one that
has seen drastic landscape modifications over the past 100 years. A large
proportion of the collections at A-State cover these unique and diverse
ecosystems and represent long-term records that pre-date or document biota
during habitat transforming activities or disease spread (e.g., white-nose
syndrome in bats) in the region. These collections, therefore, serve as base-
line data points for ongoing and future changing conditions. Additionally, this
project will preserve and curate voucher specimens and make available important
data to the scientific community for small- and large-scale research (e.g.,
ecological, taxonomic, biogeographic, or applied global change research).
Specific project goals are to: 1) alleviate overcrowding and increase room for
growth through installation of high-density storage systems and new cabinetry;
2) secure collections through improved storage media and labeling; 3) complete
the digitization of specimen data and provide public access to all collection
data; and 4) develop a significant outreach program by providing collections-
based workshops and tours of ACBC displays and collections. Development of a
website for the ACBC (acbc.astate.edu) will highlight collection activities and
the current Specify web portal (specify.astate.edu) will be expanded to include
ASUMZ specimen data in addition to updated herbarium specimen data. Finally, the
complete ACBC database will be interfaced with iDigBio (www.idigbio.org) and
other publicly accessible data portals (i.e., VertNet, SERNEC, and GBIF).