* 1561566
* RAPID: American's Perceptions of China
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* John Aldrich, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,105.00

In August, 2015, the Chinese RMB was devalued, which came as something of
surprise to the international financial community and led to dramatic volatility
in many markets, including the Chinese. Prior to this devaluation, an experiment
was included on the 2014 CCES (Cooperative Congressional Election Survey) that
had as its treatment two short vignettes in the guise of news stories (one
positive, one negative) about how the Chinese government was managing its
currency. Soon after the 2015, this same experiment was repeated using a similar
sample. Given the rumored upcoming devaluation of the RMB and the focus of the
presidential election on Chinese trade, the same experiment will be repeated as
a module of the 2016 CCES. This study will allow the study of how framing of an
issue, experimentally, affects how people understand and evaluate China in a
variety of ways. It also allows us to examine different conditions under which
people react and how these conditions impact their reactions. This includes the
previous experiments prior to a devaluation and soon after a devaluation and now
during a presidential election cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is two-fold. First, there is the original, direct idea, of
having the opportunity to study how the framing of an issue, experimentally (and
now, with full control condition), affects how people understand and evaluate
China in a variety of ways. The second idea is to repeat a survey and an
experiment about Chinese currency and its possible management before the
respondents could realistically know that the Chinese might actually do so, but
could only guess, and guess during a congressional election, with a variety of
claims in the "air" about China. We then repeat it while there is news coverage
available that is close to the experimental treatment, per se, and then repeat
it again (it is assumed) once that coverage is well past, but when in the middle
of presidential election campaign (and thus are likely to get mostly a
presidential level set of messages about China from the two parties, rather than
a more diffuse and not so nationally focused). Rarely, is there such an
opportunity to have a before, during, after trial. Rarely do we also have the
opportunity to address how framing might work, given different background
information in the actual political environment. The broader impact of the study
will be an extension of the understanding of how Americans view the "rising of
China," as it becomes ever more newsworthy. And, in particular, the ability to
see how malleable perceptions and evaluations are, as they are buffeted about by
real events in China, by domestic politics, and by the framing of news coverage.