* 1561897
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Production of Metal-Organic Molecular Sieves with Optimized Gas Transport Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Hae-Kwon Jeong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2020
* USD 267,000.00

Metal-organic molecular sieves are advanced sponge-like materials that possess
internal cavities on the molecular scale and exhibit large total pore volume and
surface area. The precisely defined pore sizes and surface openings in these
molecular sponges only allow molecules of specific size, which is tunable, to be
transported through them. It is these unique properties of metal-organic
molecular sieves that find their uses in a wide range of applications including
separations, catalysis, sensors, drug delivery, and sustainable energy
technologies. Currently, these molecular sponges are made using precipitation
from a solution. These methods are too expensive for wide commercial uses,
primarily because they are not readily scalable. Here, the work aims to develop
a new, large-scale production technology based on a scalable spray-drying
technique to drastically reduce the fabrication costs and to improve transport
properties of these materials. The spray-drying technique will allow controlling
and optimizing the pore aperture sizes and pore architecture of nanoporous
molecular sponges for such advanced applications. A novel measurement technique
will be used to study microscale gas transport in these materials. These studies
will be performed to guide the design of molecular sieves optimized with respect
to their transport properties. The interdisciplinary nature of the project,
spanning material design/synthesis in combination with the advanced transport
studies, provide a rich research experience for high school, undergraduate and
graduate students involved in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
the researched work is the development of an advanced scalable process for the
designed construction of multi-functional/multi-structured nanoporous hybrid
metal-organic framework materials and their composites exhibiting the desired
transport properties. This goal will be achieved by completing the following
three main objectives: 1) to develop aerosol-assisted (i.e., spray-drying) soft
chemistry as a new paradigm for the large-scale synthesis of metal-organic
frameworks by gaining a fundamental understanding of physico-chemical processes
involved in aerosol-assisted soft chemistry, 2) to design and engineer MOF
particles with unique microstructures and functionalities, and 3) to establish
the relationship between structural and transport properties as well as the
related catalytic performance of the resulting new materials through detailed
studies of microscopic transport by a recently developed nuclear magnetic
resonance technique. This fundamental research will lead to a set of design
rules for the commercially-viable synthesis of multi-functional metal-organic
framework materials and their composites with unique microstructures optimized
for molecular transport and related catalytic performance.