* 1561925
* Analyzing Fifty Years of Conversations in Kawaiisu, an endangered language of California
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Jocelyn Ahlers, Kawaiisu Language and Cultural Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 284,259.00

Just as archeologists have methods to analyze material objects to better
understand human history and culture, linguists have methods to analyze
recordings and manuscripts to better understand the relationship between
different languages or how a single language has changed throughout time. As
populations stop speaking them, languages, especially unwritten ones, become
even more fragile than physical sites and all knowledge held within may easily
be lost. This is true of endangered languages all over the world including
Kawaiisu, a Uto-Aztecan language of Kern County, California, where just two
Native American elder speakers remain. The Native American Languages Act, passed
by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique
status and importance of Native American languages. This project will involve a
linguist, Kawaiisu second language speakers, and the elder speakers to
transcribe, translate, and analyze recordings covering fifty years of Kawaiisu
speech. The broader impacts of this include broadening participation as Native
American citizen scientists research their heritage language, as well as the
implementation of an exemplary partnership between academic linguists and Native
American communities. The resulting analyzed Kawaiisu materials will be publicly
accessible and will generate data of scholarly interest to linguists and to
other disciplines that depend on language-related material (i.e., anthropology,
history, geography) in their research.

Fortunately, technology has left a record of the sounds of Kawaiisu. The oldest
audio recordings, made in 1958 by Sheldon Klein, clearly present the cadence,
sounds, and linguistic patterns of 60 years ago, when Kawaiisu was in more
regular use. Later Klein recordings from the 1980s are the bridge between these
older ways of speaking and later usage in fluent conversations video-recorded at
culturally significant sites by the Kawaiisu Language and Cultural Center
between 2011 and 2015. Less than 10 percent have been translated. Kawaiisu is
Uto-Aztecan language family, which has played an important role in many areas of
linguistics, including linguistic classification, historical reconstruction,
typology and theoretical linguistics. Despite this importance, there are still
many questions about the family, including Kawaiisu and its place in the Numic
branch of the family. This project will augment scientific knowledge of Kawaiisu
and its relatives.

Researchers will investigate language change via this newly annotated
documentation. The conversational data spans a critical period in history when
major shifts were occurring within indigenous communities, as well as throughout
California and the United States. The involvement of Kawaiisu team members
ensures that the knowledge gained will remain with the community as they
mobilize data in their linguistic and cultural revitalization programs.
Recordings and transcriptions will be archived at the California Language
Archive at the University of California, Berkeley, where they will be accessible
to other researchers and the general public.