* 1561334
* III: AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enabling Phylogenetic Inference for Modern Data Sets
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Frederick Matsen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2021
* USD 343,807.00

Many important subjects in biological and biomedical research require a robust
means of phylogenetic tree inference: for models of viral transmission, for gene
function inference, and for assessment of genetic diversity in the human
microbiome, to name a few. These applications also depend on a rigorous means of
assessing tree inference uncertainty; the Bayesian framework provides a
principled means of assessing and integrating out this uncertainty. The
currently available Bayesian algorithmic tools are not capable of performing
inferences on large modern data sets, which also may be continually changing as
new sequencing results become available. In particular, state-of-the-art methods
are almost exclusively based on random-walk Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
using uniformly selected local moves, even though most of these local moves will
substantially worsen even a mediocre tree. Convergence problems with this
approach are well documented, and thus current methods are limited to around
1000 sequences, a number much smaller than the size of microbial and immune data
sets relevant to modern biomedicine. In addition, all current methods require
inference to be started from scratch each time the sequence data changes. The
broader impacts of this work will extend in three directions: enabling novel
applications of Bayesian phylogenetics, stimulating new areas of computer
science research, and attracting new talent to the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of phylogenetics, in particular
Bayesian phylogenetics, are being significantly held back by computational
limitations. High-throughput sequencing technologies can return millions of
sequences for studies of the human microbiome, viruses, oceanic microbes and
antibody-making B Cells but theses cannot be handled with current methods. The
models also need to be more realistic, without assumptions of independent
interactions. Understanding the shape of multidimensional phylogenetic
likelihood surfaces in detail might help to improve the topology. The teams will
also investigate when an optimal tree on a taxon sets contains the optimal tree
on a taxon subset. These will help to expand the approach to phylogenetic
inference. These algorithmic insights will be incorporated into publicly
available inference packages with a goal to provide inference on an order of
magnitude more taxa than currently possible.