* 1561648
* CSBR: Natural History: Engaging Our Future to Preserve Our Past: Curation and Preservation of Historically Significant Collections Through Student Participation at the Rancho Santa
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Lucinda McDade, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 346,030.00

Student Engagement in the Preservation of Historically Significant Collections
at Rancho Santa Botanic Garden

Natural history collections offer a lens into the past and a means to envision
the future. Collections are especially important in predicting biodiversity
change with shifts in climate and land use. The Herbarium at Rancho Santa Ana
Botanic Garden (RSABG) houses more than 1.2 million specimens and is heavily
utilized for research, education, and public outreach. From multiple sources,
the Herbarium acquired 30,000 plant specimens collected by ten significant 20th
century botanists. 70% of these were collected from 15 of 34 designated world
biodiversity hotspots; 30% represents the California Floristic Province
biodiversity hotspot. These specimens are in critical need of curation owing to
poor storage conditions. Several specimens have been identified as critical for
describing and naming species new to science. Curation of these collections will
provide physical access to collections currently unavailable for study, promote
discovery of species new to science, and yield new distribution and phenology
data. Importantly, curation will ensure critically needed preservation.
Digitization efforts will provide access of this rich source of specimen data to
researchers, students, and the public. Integral to the project are activities
involving the participation of graduate students, undergraduates, and high
school students. Notably, RSABG will expand on a successful undergraduate
internship program by engaging underserved youth from the Greater Los Angeles
metropolitan area. Especially targeted are at-risk and transitional aged youth
at the high school level, who will be trained in a six-week summer junior intern
program. All interns will participate in five workshops that will serve to
connect students to collections, natural history, and biodiversity. An exhibit
at RSABG will highlight the activities and student participation in the project.

As herbaria serve expanding needs for research, education, and conservation
management, it is critical that collections of historic, taxonomic, and
geographic significance are curated and digitized, ensuring their availability
for research through investments in their long-term security. Through various
sources, the Herbarium at Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden acquired 30,000
vascular plant specimens of historic, taxonomic, and geographic importance
representing the collections of ten significant botanists of the 20th century.
These specimens are in danger of deterioration, owing to unsatisfactory past and
current storage conditions (e.g., non-archival newspapers). Thus, these
collections are in critical need of curation and improved storage to secure them
for posterity. Several specimens have been identified as type material that was
thought to have been lost. The principal objective of this three-year project is
to curate and digitize these specimens through student participation. A large
cadre of students at different levels in their academic career will participate
in all aspects of the project, including specimen preparation, databasing,
imaging, and georeferencing. Specimen data will become available for more than
18,000 species of vascular plants in ~350 families. All data resulting from this
project will be shared with iDigBio, GBIF, the Consortium of California
Herbaria, and the RSABG Herbarium web portal. Additional information about
RSABG, its outreach activities, and the results of this project is available at
http://www.rsabg.org.