* 1561286
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Comparison and Explanation of Multiple Strategies (CEMS) to Improve Algebra Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Bethany Rittle-Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 10/31/2020
* USD 570,083.00

The project focuses on a Comparison and Explanation of Multiple Strategies
(CEMS) approach for Algebra I. The instructional approach focuses on having
students compare strategies and explain their thinking. The investigators will
modify the current materials, the instructional approach, and the professional
development approach based on prior research. The curriculum development will
include supplementary materials for linear equations, systems of equations,
quadratics and factoring, and graphing. These are core concepts for Algebra I
courses nationwide. The goal of the proposed work is to first streamline the
materials and improve the resources available for. They will also focus on the
central role of explanation and discussion in the learning process. The research
will focus on how teachers incorporate comparison, explanation and discussion
into their teaching, how this impacts students' algebra knowledge, and how
effective the approach is relative to business-as-usual instruction. The results
of the research will inform teaching and learning for a central course in the
mathematics curriculum since it is foundational to students' later mathematics
learning. The approach also examines the entire classroom system including both
students' knowledge and learning and teachers' development and implementation.
This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
first refine the CEMS Algebra materials and then document the feasibility of
their implementation and the effects on student learning. The project takes a
holistic approach by incorporating materials for teaching, professional
development, and the study of teaching practice. The work will expand theories
of algebra learning to include both conceptual and procedural learning. It will
include detailed analysis about fidelity of implementation to understand how
instructional differences influence students' knowledge. The first phase of the
study (refining the materials) includes implementation in classrooms, teacher
professional development, collection of lesson videos, and the development of
student assessments for each unit. The second phase of the study compares the
effects of the treatment to the business-as-usual with one district. The
teachers from year 1 will serve as the treatment group in year 2 and a
comparison group of teachers will be selected. Data collection and analysis will
focus on fidelity of implementation and assessments of students' learning. Year
3 will be similar to year 2 but expand to a second school district and include
more teachers.