* 1561390
* CSBR: Natural History: Stabilization and Accessibility of the National Water-Quality Assessment Macroinvertebrate Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Andrew Short, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 452,348.00

Aquatic insects and other invertebrates that live in rivers and streams help us
gauge the quality and health of our Nation's waters. Healthy waters support a
higher variety of species and water resource managers use measures of species
diversity, along with chemical analyses, to assess whether a body of water is
polluted or not. For almost 25 years, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
collected over 1 million aquatic macroinvertebrates from 2,300 streams and
rivers across the United States and used these samples to establish baseline
reference conditions of water quality. This collection serves as a valuable
resource for contemporary information and future research on biodiversity, water
quality assessment and management, and aquatic ecology. The collection was
donated to the University of Minnesota by the USGS to ensure its continued
existence, as it was slated for disposal in spite of its historical and
contemporary importance and its excellent condition, diversity of species, and
geographic coverage. This award facilitates the addition of this collection to
the University's existing insect collection. Also, information associated with
the specimens, such as where and when they were collected, will be databased and
made available for use by researchers, educators, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted specimens were originally housed at
the USGS facility in Denver, Colorado, prior to their transfer to the University
of Minnesota. The University of Minnesota has demonstrated support and
commitment to this project by providing physical space to house the specimens
and cabinets for archival storage. This award facilitates goals of the project
are now to unpack, reorganize, database, and physically integrate the material
into the University of Minnesota Insect Collection. The University will
implement a new databasing application, with a user-friendly interface, so that
information associated with the specimens can be accessed for research and
education. A full-time curatorial associate, assisted by undergraduate students,
will carry out most of the work. In addition, a Master's level graduate student
will be supported by the project to assist with project management and specimen
curation, and will also receive advanced training in collections management,
biodiversity assessment, and aquatic insect taxonomy. Results of the project and
access to the database will be made available through the University of
Minnesota Insect Collection website at http://insectcollection.umn.edu/.