* 1561232
* Workshop on the Impacts of Space Weather on Economic Vitality and National Security; College Park, Maryland
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2016
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 10/31/2016
* USD 30,000.00

Workshop on the Impacts of Space Weather on Economic Vitality and National
Security&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to organize, and provide travel
support for a two-day workshop to develop community input on an actionable plan
for the comprehensive analysis of the economic, infrastructural, and military
impacts of space weather. Understanding the vulnerability of critical societal
infrastructures to space weather and the cascading effects, which are produced
by damage or disruption of these infrastructures, is now a national priority.
This workshop will provide a venue for discussing how to develop comprehensive
assessments of vulnerabilities necessary for constructing an optimized
architecture for future forecast (and warning) capabilities, and mitigation
strategies, as well as how to identify and close the gaps in our scientific
knowledge, modeling capability, and measurement ability that hinder this
development. The workshop is highly interdisciplinary with the invited
participants drawn from academia, industry and government - all the sectors
critical to the development of an effective strategy. Attention will be given to
diversity in the workshop participants by recruiting underrepresented minorities
where possible. Student participation is planned in setting up and running the
workshop, the collection of content and the construction of the associated
report following the workshop, as well as its dissemination. The venue is the
Samuel Riggs Alumni Center at the University of Maryland College Park during
October 22-23, 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is a joint effort by the
University of Maryland and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory.
The steering committee is comprised of knowledgeable experts from universities,
federal centers, and agencies. The dates for the workshop were selected so that
it directly follows the Space Weather Enterprise Forum in Washington, DC
providing not only the latest information for consideration in the workshop but
a rich source of experts who are traveling to attend the forum and thus are
temporarily located in close proximity to the workshop venue. Participation is
by invitation only to keep the size manageable, ensure that all important
sectors are present, and maintain a true workshop environment. An important
outcome of the workshop will be a report on the priorities and critical
requirements identified for reducing vulnerability to space weather, which will
be widely disseminated and available on the workshop website as well as from the
organizers of the workshop. In addition, the workshop is intended to foster
collaboration across academia, industry and government on space weather issues,
and promote an active forum among science, technology, economic, policy and
security communities.