* 1561706
* CSBR: Natural History: Securing, Expanding, and Making Accessible the Roosevelt Wild Life Collections at the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Quentin Wheeler, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 491,705.00

1561706: CSBR: Natural History: Securing, Expanding, and Making Accessible the
Roosevelt Wild Life Collections at the SUNY College of Environmental Science and
Forestry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Roosevelt Wild Life Collections (RWLC) at the
State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry
(SUNY-ESF), named for and endorsed by President Theodore Roosevelt, is an active
repository of research specimens documenting North American (particularly
northeastern) biodiversity. It is also a collection that is central to one of
the most heavily subscribed graduate and undergraduate organismal biology
education programs in the United States. This project will secure and make
accessible the RWLC bird, mammal and parasite specimens in modern space-saving
cabinetry within a new, centrally located campus collections center. This center
will catalyze a campus-wide initiative that connects SUNY-ESF students from
underrepresented groups, as "Collections Ambassadors," to research, education,
and leadership in environmental biology. A graduate student (Collections
Assistant) will be trained in curatorial techniques and will make high-
resolution images web-accessible in order to share them with Syracuse inner city
high school students and ignite excitement about nature by viewing it up-close.
These collections and natural science educational connections will be important
for students' career development. The public will be able to tour and view the
collections through large windows onto the collections research space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our nation's biodiversity declines, societal need for
natural history collections increases. However, the foundation for collections
accessibility and future expansion is security. Many of RWLC vertebrate
specimens date to the 1800s and early 1900s and current cabinetry is not much
younger. Under present conditions, specimens are inaccessible due to
overcrowding in inadequate and poorly sealing cabinets, pests, and lack of
digitization. This project leverages a state award to finish a large climate-
controlled space within an existing new building, which will house growing and
heavily used collections and facilitate their digitization. The collections move
will involve quantitative assessment, stabilization, and integrated pest
management of specimens, as well as curation and data management training of
Collections Ambassadors (undergraduate interns) and the Collections Assistant.
As part of the reorganization, specimens will be re-arranged and digitized. The
new drawers of digitized specimens and modern specimen arrangement will be the
basis for collections-based research for generations of SUNY-ESF's emerging
environmental leaders. Many of the RWLC's specimens are from New York's "forever
wild" Adirondack Park, beloved by the RWLC's namesake President Theodore
Roosevelt. Project results will be made available on the web (www.esf.edu/rwls/)
and digitized specimen data will be shared with iDigBio (www.idigbio.org).