* 1561755
* Leaf-level to Canopy NOx and Ozone Exchanges at University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) during PHotochemistry, Emissions, and Transport (PROPHET) 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 370,630.00

This project is part of a summer field study to gain a better understanding of
reactive chemistry in the atmosphere of a forested environment. In this project,
the exchange of nitrogen compounds at the leaf-level will be investigated to
better predict the production of ozone, secondary organic aerosols and the
cycling of nitrogen between the atmosphere and the biosphere. Improving the
understanding of reactive chemistry in forest environments will improve
projections of how future changes in forest succession and climate might affect
the future composition of the atmosphere.

The specific objectives of this study are to: (1) determine leaf exchanges of
NO, NO2, NOy, and ozone for the dominant tree species at the University of
Michigan Biological Station's (UMBS) Program for Research on Oxidants:
PHotochemistry, Emissions, and Transport (PROPHET) site; (2) determine the
dependency of the leaf-level gas exchanges on the physiological and
environmental factors including photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, light,
temperature, and humidity; (3) determine the dependency of the leaf-level gas
exchanges on the ambient NOx and ozone mixing ratio; (4) Investigate potential
connections between leaf-level NOx exchanges and emission of biogenic volatile
organic carbon; (5) re-examine nocturnal and daytime below-canopy turbulent
transport representation in the Multi-layer Canopy Chemical Exchange (MLC-CHEM)
model using high resolution temperature gradient measurements; and (6)
incorporate, revisit, and further improve the modeling of the UMBS forest
oxidation.