* 1561404
* Collaborative Research: Domain-General and Domain-Specific Training to Improve Children's Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Susanne Jaeggi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2020
* USD 749,960.00

This project, a collaboration between researchers at the University of Maryland
and the University of California-Irvine, will test the benefits of training
activities for improving the mathematical achievement of kindergartners from
low-income backgrounds using newly-developed tablet computer games. The gap in
mathematical proficiency between children from different socioeconomic
backgrounds is present before children enter elementary school, and it
progressively widens over the course of schooling. Importantly, these early
differences in mathematical knowledge predict the rate of growth in mathematics
learning and achievement as late as high school. The investigators will examine
improvements in children's numerical knowledge as well as improvements in
working memory. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which
supports fundamental research that advances the research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines how interventions targeted
towards improving children's numerical knowledge (domain-specific skills) or
their working memory (domain-general skills) might promote their mathematical
achievement. The interventions will involve playing game-like activities on
tablet computers over the course of several sessions. The main focus will be on
children from low-income backgrounds who are most at risk for poor scholastic
achievement due to their deficits in early mathematical skills and working
memory capacity. Specifically, the project will 1) examine improvements in low-
income children's conceptual and procedural numerical knowledge (domain specific
skills) as well as improvements in working memory and executive control (domain
general skills) by targeting either numerical knowledge or working memory in
isolation, 2) examine the additive effects of a combined domain-specific and
domain-general approach, 3) examine the longevity of any effects by follow-up
testing participants several months after training completion, and 4) examine
individual differences in the benefits of the training activities to determine
whether preexisting abilities mediate and moderate training outcomes, and to
examine whether specific interventions are more beneficial for a certain
subpopulation of children than others. The findings should shed light on the
underlying mechanisms of the development of mathematical skills, and advance the
field's understanding of how different cognitive systems are differentially
affected by specific interventions. This knowledge has implications for the
development and implementation of evidence-based interventions.