* 1561337
* EAGER:   Variant Graph-based Genome Annotation and Analyses for Plant Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Mark Yandell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* thomas okita
* 02/28/2017
* USD 297,264.00

Advances in next-generation sequencing have opened up additional avenues of
investigation due to the reduction in costs and the bioinformatic tools and
functional resources available. That said, there is still a critical need for
advancing sequence visualization tools to aid in sequence analysis. This EAGER
project will develop a new type of genome representation - a Variant Graph which
provides an innovative way to visualize and identify variants in genome
sequences across related populations within a species. If successfully
implemented, a Variant Graph will provide a novel means to leverage next
generation sequencing data to create more accurate gene models. In addition, a
fully Variant Graph based MAKER-P genome annotation pipeline will provide a leap
forwards in genome-annotation and project management by providing a means for
simultaneously annotating and managing genome sequences generated from multiple
plant cultivars through Gramene (www.gramene.org) and CyVerse (formerly the
iPlant Collaborative; www.cyverse.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to take advantage of the wealth of sequence assemblies available for
plants to (1) create and deploy a Variant Graph for crop plants using genome
sequences available for maize and rice through the Gramene database; (2)
leverage MAKER-P to create the first genome-annotation pipeline capable of
exploiting the full potential of the Variant Graph to improve the annotations of
the maize and rice reference assemblies; and, (3) deploy a cutting-edge Variant
Graph based variant-calling pipeline within Gramene. The project will provide
interdisciplinary research training in software development and applications for
plant biology and genomics for a postdoctoral associate. All software developed
as part of this project will be open source and available for academic use.