* 1561070
* Clarifying the Functional Form of the Personality-Performance Relationship Using More Appropriate Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Nathan Carter, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 214,347.00

The association between desirable personality traits and job performance has
long been assumed to be positive such that higher levels of these traits lead to
better performance. This assumption has driven both theory and practice in the
areas of employee selection, promotion, and team assembly. However, more recent
theories have suggested that at extreme levels these desirable traits can result
in sub-optimal performance, consistent with other work linking extreme levels of
adaptive traits (e.g., conscientiousness) to maladaptive traits (e.g., obsessive
compulsion). Despite convincing theoretical arguments, studies testing for such
relations between personality traits and job performance have been mixed. These
mixed results represent a serious challenge for both our understanding of
behavior in the workplace and can have deleterious effects on the quality of
decisions made by organizations. This research clarifies this relationship
through two overlooked means. First, the research capitalizes on recent advances
in the measurement of personality by using statistical algorithms that have been
shown to more accurately distinguish persons with moderately high levels of
personality traits from those with extreme levels of those traits. By utilizing
these algorithms to both develop personality measures and index persons? levels
of personality traits, the idea that extreme trait levels can result in sub-
optimal human performance can be more accurately tested. Second, the research
integrates this methodological advance with theoretical advances in the person-
situation interaction by considering the degree to which the relevance of a
given personality trait to the desired performance behaviors of the particular
job in which they are working. For example, although extreme extraversion may be
adaptive in jobs with a high social orientation (e.g., sales), it may result in
maladaptive behaviors in jobs that are lower in social orientation (e.g.,
engineer). Finally, this research extends empirical work regarding the influence
of extreme levels of desirable traits to the team context, an area that has been
greatly under-studied and has also shown inconsistent empirical results. This
research has a large impact on both the scientific study and practical
application of the link between personality and behavior. Long-standing
assumptions that seemingly-desirable traits always contribute to increased
performance have largely informed our understanding of personality in the
workplace and our use of personality tests for organizational decision-making.
This research greatly increases the accuracy of scientist and practitioner
communities? activities surrounding the areas of personality and workplace
behavior, employee selection, team assembly, and personality
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes two basic data sources.
First, Procter &amp; Gamble has supplied the research team with a large dataset
including performance metrics, job titles, and responses to personality surveys
that were designed to conform to ideal point models, a statistical test-scoring
algorithm that results in more accurate distinction between extreme- and
moderately-high levels of personality traits. This research utilizes these data
to test for curvilinear relations between various personality traits and
dimensions of job performance. In particular, this research tests the hypothesis
that when the relevance of a particular personality trait for the persons?
occupation is high, extreme levels of that trait are beneficial, resulting in a
linear relationship. However, when the relevance of that particular trait to
performance is only moderately high, then a moderate level of the trait is
optimal for performance, whereas extreme levels of the trait result in sub-
optimal performance, resulting in curvilinear relationship. When trait relevance
is low, the personality trait is expected to be irrelevant to performance,
resulting in a null relationship. This research integrates perspectives on
curvilinear personality-performance relationships with those on the person-
situation interaction, such as trait activation theory. Second, this research
tests this hypothesis in large samples of adult workers using more faceted
measures of personality to replicate and extend the test of this hypothesis in
more representative samples. These data collections also serve the purpose of
the development and free dissemination of measures developed and scored
according to the more accurate ideal point scaling approach, and the development
of a software program that allows researchers to easily implement the
appropriate scoring for these measures in small samples, which currently
requires large sample sizes and high quantitative expertise. Finally, this
research capitalizes on collaboration between personality researchers and
experts on team assembly to acquire and utilize lab and field samples of work
teams to extend the research on curvilinear personality-performance relations to
the team composition context. This research represents a major development in
uncovering the true functional form of the personality-performance relationship
and specifying its dependence on context. By integrating recent advances in
methodological and theoretical perspectives on personality and leveraging this
integration across multiple contexts, the research represents an important step
forward in our theoretical and practical understanding of the operation of
personality traits in organizational settings and provides researchers and
practitioners with the tools to continue to generate innovations in this area of
scientific inquiry.