* 1561190
* Multi-Point Monin-Obukhov Similarity and Spectral Dynamics in the Convective Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chenning Tong, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 437,485.00

The research focuses on the Monin-Obukhov similarity hypothesis, which is the
theoretical foundation for understanding the surface layer of the atmospheric
boundary layer (ABL). The hypothesis has been used successfully to scale many
statistics (e.g., those containing the vertical velocity) in the surface layer.
However, it fails to scale some other important statistics, such as the
horizontal velocity variances and the large-scale horizontal velocity spectra in
the convective surface layer.

The research will provide a more universal scaling framework for the influence
of shear and buoyancy on the surface layer turbulence, termed multi-point Monin-
Obukhov similarity (MMO). In the research, the PI will systematically
investigate MMO through its spectral predictions and the spectral dynamics in
the surface layer. Systematical tests of the predicted large-scale velocity and
temperature spectra using high-resolution large-eddy simulation (LES) fields
will be conducted. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Dr.
Martin Otte at Computer Science Corporation (CSC), a research firm contracting
with the Environmental Protection Agency.

Intellectual Merit: The research addresses the critical issue of Monin-Obukhov
similarity of the atmospheric surface layer. It is expected to further validate
MMO through its prediction of the turbulence spectra and cospectra; it will
provide an important understanding of the physical basis for MMO. Due to the
central role of the Monin-Obukhov similarity in our understanding of the surface
layer dynamics, the research on MMO will provide a new framework for analyzing
and understanding the surface layer turbulence, and will have a strong impact on
the understanding and modeling of the ABL in general.

Broader Impacts: The research has broader impacts in several areas. It will
provide education and research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Improved understanding of the surface layer turbulence and the ABL in
general will be of importance to developing predictive models for atmospheric
dispersion and diffusion, weather forecasting, atmospheric chemistry, wind
energy, and land-atmosphere exchange. The modeling approach will also be
important for modeling boundary layers with a strong pressure gradient (e.g.,
curved boundary layers) in the atmosphere and in engineering flows. Advances in
these areas will benefit the environment and society.