* 1561854
* Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Andres Rodriguez-Clare, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 265,000.00

This project develops and applies a framework to measure the impact of
international trade on a nation's economy. This includes not just measures of
the total impact, but also measurements of the distributional and employment
effects of international trade. The framework does not require data from trade
reforms, so it can be used to understand the changes of proposed trade reforms;
this is an advance over the current methods, which can evaluate the effects of
past trade reform but are not as useful for predicting future outcomes. The
project will result in a quantitative method for predict how changes in
international trade flows affect employment and how the benefits and costs of
increased trade affect different kinds of workers. As a result, the project
contributes in an innovative way to our scientific evidence about whether or not
increased international trade flows reduce or exacerbate economic inequality
between citizens of the same country. As a result, the project contributes
directly to better public policy and will help to improve the competitiveness of
the US economy.

This project includes a novel general-equilibrium analysis of world trade and
labor markets that yields new insights into the quantification of both the
aggregate gains from trade, their distribution, and the connection with
manufacturing employment. The key theoretical innovation is to extend the multi-
sector gravity model of trade to allow for heterogeneity in worker ability
across sectors, with systematic differences across groups of ex-ante identical
workers. As in the Roy model, workers select into sectors based on comparative
advantage. The model serves as a natural generalization of the benchmark
specific-factors model for analyzing the distributional labor market
consequences of trade. The model allows for alternative definitions of groups
based on characteristics such as education, age, and gender, thus enabling the
study of the distributional consequences of trade along different dimensions of
interest in a simple and transparent quantitative framework. When groups are
defined along a geographical basis,the model can be shown to provide a
theoretical foundation for recent work on the differential effect of trade
across regions within countries (e.g., Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013). The
baseline model is flexible enough that it can be easily extended along several
dimensions that make the quantitative results more compelling while also
providing implications for the effects of shocks (such as the raise of China) on
manufacturing employment, a question that has received considerable recent
attention. In particular, the extended model can be used to shed light on the
quantitative role of fiscal transfers (e.g., disability insurance) and trade
imbalances across regions in affecting the way in which a trade shock is
absorbed through changes in wages and employment. This project's flexible
framework of the aggregate and distributional consequences of trade can be
employed to analyze the impact of a broad set of trade-reforms, such as NAFTA,
or possible trans-Atlantic or trans-Pacific liberalizations, across multiple
countries