* 1561377
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Household Practice And The Emergence Of Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Elizabeth Arkush, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2016
* USD 14,112.00

The emergence of social inequality, here defined as unequal access to material
and social resources within a society, is one of the most intriguing issues for
social scientists as it implies the existence of hierarchical power structures
and the emergence of complex society. As the basic social unit, household is a
particularly apt arena for studying economic difference and for reconstructing
the nature and degree of social inequality in early societies. Under the
supervision of Dr. Elizabeth Arkush, doctoral candidate Peiyu Chen, of the
University of Pittsburgh, will excavate the site of Huaca Negra on the Peruvian
northern coast and undertake analysis of the recovered materials to investigate
early social inequality from a household perspective. Through investigating
practices of domestic activities, both commoners' and elites' everyday life can
be studied, which offer the potential for examining the whole spectrum of social
variation within a given society, and helps to reconstruct the nature and degree
of social inequality. This project will incorporate US and Peruvian students
from various universities and provide training in different archeological
techniques and analysis. The information obtained, which will be the foundation
for Chen's dissertation, will be digitalized and made available through the
Center for Comparative Archaeology of the University of
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous scholarship on the emergence of
complex society in Andean prehistory has focused on monument construction, under
the presumption that it requires leaders to organize large scale construction
projects. The proposed research, however, attempts to shift attention away from
magnificent public constructions towards understanding daily household practice.
Huaca Negra, a Peruvian coastal site that was occupied from 5,000 to 3,000 B.P
in the Viru Valley, had been identified by earlier researchers as a domestic
midden mound, and its time span witnessed the emergence of large-scale monument
construction on the Peruvian northern and central coast. This makes the site an
ideal place to examine both household practices and the development of social
inequality. The research will involve a program of excavation and analyses of
unearthed materials. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses will be applied
to discern the spatial distribution of resources, variation in abundance between
households, and diversity in the proportion of different resources. This project
will distinguish materials related to the subsistence economy (food), craft
production (utilitarian goods) and social networks (trade goods), providing a
window onto the process by which certain households might be able to gain
unequal access to resources and started to accumulate power to support their
leadership.