* 1561112
* Geographic Access to the Built Food Environment and Impacts on Obesity and Health
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Marta Jankowska, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2020
* USD 326,116.00

This project examines the relationship between access to the built food
environment (such as fast food restaurants and grocery stores), obesity, and
food behaviors in a population of Hispanics. The research will inform efforts to
reduce the rising epidemic of obesity and diabetes by aiding with individual and
environmental level interventions focusing on access to the built food
environment. A number of scientific advances will be achieved including
advancing methodologies for measuring geographic access through the use of
Global Positioning System (GPS), Geographic Information System (GIS), and person
worn camera technologies, as well as theoretical advances including a better
understanding of the role acculturation and perceptions play in changing diet
patterns. This project examines not only obesity as an outcome in and of itself,
but will also explore food behaviors such as social eating, distracted eating
(eating in front of the computer or television), and ethnic food preferences as
related to the types of food environments that different groups of Hispanics are
exposed to. By understanding these behaviors and patterns and how they are
linked to obesity as a health outcome, individual interventions as well as
environment level interventions can be better crafted to target high-risk
groups. This is of pressing concern to minimize the pending costs of treating
obesity-related disease such as diabetes, and to increase quality of life. The
project will be completed by the research team with the assistance of
undergraduate and graduate students. Students will also work closely with one
high school and middle school in the area to teach the GIS survey tool as a data
collection methodology and introduction to spatial sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the 2011-2012 NHANES, 35% of US adults are
obese, with even higher rates among Hispanics (43%) and other minorities,
leading to a variety of diseases such as diabetes, stroke, cancer, and
cardiovascular disease. Obesity is not just an individual problem, but is also
influenced by social, cultural, environmental, and policy level factors that
work together in complex interactions. The built food environment is one
environmental level factor that has been demonstrated to have some influence on
food choices and obesity outcomes, however current methods and theory are
underdeveloped, and often lack necessary data (such as movement patterns of
individuals). This study will address many of the methodological limitations in
previous studies by examining the differences between home-based access and
mobility-based access to the built food environment using objective measures
(GPS and person worn cameras). It will also assess the unique and combined
relationships of these two types of access on food behaviors, diet, and obesity,
and work to better understand how acculturation and perceptions of the built
food environment interplay individual level engagement with the built food
environment. This will be the first study to examine how Hispanics interact with
their built food environment using state-of-the-art sensor tools (GPS, person
worn cameras, GIS interviews) and methodologies.