* 1561794
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanics of Tension-Induced Adaptation in Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2019
* USD 302,752.00

Transport of macromolecules into cells occurs via a collection of pathways,
commonly referred to as endocytosis. These pathways are characterized by a chain
of remodeling events during which an almost flat patch of plasma membrane is
transformed into a cargo-carrying closed vesicle. The most commonly used pathway
is called clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) which is important for the
exchange of lipids and proteins between the plasma membrane and organelles. As
such, CME is critical for maintaining the organization of the plasma membrane
and regulating various cellular processes. Recent research on CME suggests that
cells sense the mechanical environment by adapting the protein machinery to
ensure successful CME. How cells sense and adapt to the mechanical environment
to maintain cellular transport is not well understood. The goal of this project
is to gain mechanistic insights into this dynamic adaptation in cells via
combined theoretical and experimental approaches. Since cells experience varied
mechanical environments in different diseased states, this work can provide
fundamental insights into cellular transport in diseased cells that can help
facilitate the design of improved nanoparticle-based
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will offer a physical explanation for the
observed "mechanosensitivity" and tension-based adaptation in clathrin-mediated
endocytosis. To achieve this objective, continuum mechanics and Monte Carlo
simulations of membrane-protein interactions will be complimented with high-
resolution live cell and super-resolution fluorescence microscopy to test the
competing explanations for assembly of membrane-associated proteins and tension-
induced adaptation in CME. This study will address two major debates in the
endocytosis literature. First, it will identify the energetically optimal
mechanism by which clathrin drives membrane curvature. Second, it will identify
the mechanism by which membrane senses tension and recruits actin filaments for
driving vesicle growth. The numerical and experimental findings will quantify
the extent to which the key membrane-remodeling proteins can counter tension and
drive vesicle growth. Overall, these findings would reveal the general
principles by which tension regulates the assembly of membrane-remodeling
proteins.