* 1561333
* RUI: Examining Early Stage Technology Firms' Use of Business Development Programs
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Jennifer Woolley, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2020
* USD 263,249.00

Entrepreneurship is critical for job creation, economic growth, and innovation.
Given the difficulty of starting and building new firms, public and private
organizations have created venture development programs to help firms survive
and succeed. The programs offer services, education and access to resources.
Examples of venture development programs include government innovation grants,
business incubators, private accelerators, university-based incubators, and
venture capital. Billions of dollars are spent each year on and by venture
development programs in the U.S. alone. Work has shown that these programs
generally work; however, few studies have looked at the long term outcomes of
these programs or the relative performance of the participating firms. This
study develops a deeper understanding of nascent firm participation in venture
development programs by determining how and why entrepreneurs use these
programs, examining how development programs influence firm outcomes, and
identifying the most useful elements of each type of
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study has three parts. The first
part builds a data set of nanotechnology firms in the U.S. by integrating
several sources and includes detailed information about each firm, its
participation in venture development programs, and the firms? outcomes. This
part of the study provides insight into the types of firms that participate in
the different programs. The next part of the study statistically examines how
the participation in a program influences firm success. Multiple positive and
negative firm outcomes are included such as business closure, bankruptcy,
liquidation, acquisition, follow-on funding, and initial public offering to
develop rich insights into these programs. The last part of this study asks firm
founders about their participation in venture development programs and how their
engagement of the programs influenced their firms? outcomes. Thus, this research
expands our understanding of how technology firm founders can influence the
longevity of their firms by participating in venture development programs.
Understanding how entrepreneurs choose and engage these programs can improve the
offerings from both the private and public sectors. Programs that influence the
success of technology ventures are important for innovation, employment, and the
federal funding of related education, research and development. Thus, this study
supports policy makers in their endeavors to improve the development and
availability of services and economic resources that support venture growth,
innovation and national competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;