* 1561572
* CSBR: Living Stock Collections: A "Biological Gold Mine" of plant natural products and pathways for biochemical and evolutionary studies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Normanly, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 315,948.00

An award is made to the University of Massachusetts Amherst to improve a large
Plant Cell Culture Library (PCCL) that was recently donated to the university
from industry, and make it available to the research community. The PCCL
includes over 2200 unique plant species, the largest and most diverse collection
of plant cell cultures in the world (representing approximately 69% of plant
orders) and is the only such collection in the western hemisphere. The PCCL is a
unique and valuable source of novel natural products and the genetic information
required for their biosynthesis. Significantly, the availability of the PCCL to
the academic research community and to industry has the potential for broad
societal impact through the discovery and development of new compounds with
applications in ecological sustainability (green chemistry, renewable
resources), agriculture (prevention of crop loss with novel anti-microbial or
anti-fungal agents, nutritional enhancement of food and feed crops) and human
health and wellness. Additionally, the PCCL provides a valuable resource for
undergraduate education and outreach as a source of material with which to
engage students in the vast genetic and biochemical diversity of plants.

Specifically, this project will streamline cell culture maintenance protocols
and optimize procedures for rapid culture scale-up and dissemination to the
research community. The PCCL database will be modernized, a web interface for
the research community deployed, and a sustainable model for maintaining and
distributing PCCL materials will be developed. The approach will improve the
development of cold storage conditions that will reduce the labor and cost of
maintaining the living cultures by slowing growth to increase the time between
transfers. Cryopreservation methods will be tested to optimize the transfer of
as many living cultures as possible to a cryopreserved state. Cryopreserved
materials will be duplicated to be deposited in the National Center for Genetic
Resources Preservation, a USDA facility in Fort Collins. Culture media will be
evaluated to reduce the amount of media required for culture maintenance.
Finally, an updated PCCL taxonomy will be integrated into a web-based interface
to improve accessibility of the PCCL (pcc.library.umass.edu).