* 1561035
* Mapping the Temporal Structure of Entrepreneurial Start-Up Activities
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Mark Suchman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 02/28/2021
* USD 284,186.00

Entrepreneurship is both an important source of employment and, especially
within science and engineering, a powerful force for social and economic
renewal. Despite this importance, however, entrepreneurship research has only
recently expanded beyond studying precursor conditions (such as entrepreneurial
personality traits and untapped market opportunities) to address the process of
starting a business--developing a business model, incorporating, registering
intellectual property, making first hires, and so on. The present project seeks
to map the field of start-up activities and to identify the common pathways that
nascent entrepreneurial ventures follow in transiting that field. The PI
hypothesizes (a) that start-up trajectories cluster into distinct archetypes;
(b) that the choice of archetype depends on identifiable attributes of the
founding team, the new firm, and the social context; and (c) that different
start-up sequences will yield different outcomes, depending on these team, firm,
and context contingencies. If confirmed, these predictions would represent a
significant advance over current "one size fits all" models of the start-up
process. Such a shift would have a transformative impact on science, teaching,
practice and policy in the field of entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances the entrepreneurship literature's recent turn toward "process
studies" that explore the contingent, unfolding nature of new firm emergence.
Applying a set of under-utilized statistical techniques to data on the timing of
36 start-up activities recorded by the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics
(PSED I and II), the investigation seeks to identify temporal patterns in the
early trajectories of nascent entrepreneurial ventures. First, the project will
adapt multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) techniques from psychometry to map the set
of start-up activities onto a multi-dimensional activity space, based on various
measures of the activities' temporal similarity to one another. Second, the
project will adapt sequence analysis (SA) techniques from genomics to cluster
the observed start-up sequences into a limited number of archetypal trajectories
through the activity space. Third, the project will assess the impact of
exogenous conditions such as founder attributes, organization type, and
environmental context in determining a new venture's particular trajectory.
Fourth, the project will evaluate the interactive impact of these exogenous
contingencies and archetypal trajectories in shaping the new venture's survival
and performance outcomes. In furtherance of these analyses, the project will
refine MDS and SA methodologies to better accommodate the unique features of
social-scientific data such as the activity sequences in the PSED. The project
will also supplement the existing PSED data sets with new measures of socio-
political and economic conditions in respondents' environments. These new
methods and variables will enhance the PSED's usefulness as a data
infrastructure for exploring social vs. economic, local vs. global, and
objective vs. subjective environmental influences on the start-up process, both
for the current investigation and for other investigations in years to come.