* 1561430
* COLLABORATIVE: Women's Engineering Participation in the US: What can the US Learn from Women's Decisions to Pursue Engineering in Diverse Cultural Contexts?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nehal Abu-lail, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2020
* USD 343,203.00

This project seeks to understand the links between cultural context and
expanding women's STEM participation by studying the economic, educational,
socio-cultural, legal, and political drivers of women's participation in these
contexts. This project will apply case study methods to collect rich data from
focus groups and in-depth interviews in four countries (Jordan, Malaysia,
Tunisia, and Saudi Arabia) with female engineering undergraduate students,
faculty members, and practicing engineers (total
N=208-325).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This project entails
conducting research in four countries (Jordan, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, and
Tunisia) to assess the contextual factors that encourage women's participation
in engineering in tertiary education and as a career. In three of the four
countries identified (Jordan, Malaysia, and Tunisia), women's participation in
engineering is much higher than in the US, despite social, political, and
economic restrictions on women's participation in public life. In the fourth
country (Saudi Arabia), women's engineering participation is also rising. The
research is significant because it promises to document factors that encourage
women's successful participation in STEM in social, political, and cultural
contexts that are very different from the US. It will provide cross-national,
in-depth exploration of women's curricular and career choices and attention to
mechanisms producing gender-differentiated curricular and career decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Women's participation is engineering is a
crucial national priority. The shortage of engineers in the US weakens the
country's position as a leader in the global market and restricts our capacity
to solve infrastructural challenges. This project promises to shed light on how
context shapes women's successful participation in STEM in ways that inform our
efforts to broaden participation in the US.&lt;br/&gt;