* 1561060
* The Spatial Demography of Population Loss in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Rachel Franklin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 243,848.00

This research project will investigate the geography of population loss in the
United States. It will generate new knowledge regarding the geographical extent
and nature of population decline, including its demographic sources, the
characteristics of the individuals exposed to this decline, and information
about the demographic change occurring in locations of decline. The project will
enhance basic understanding in geography and population studies and will provide
new information and insights about connections among population change,
geography, and population composition as measured for specific areas as well as
the individuals living in those areas. The project will contribute to spatial
demographic theory by focusing on the links between declines at various spatial
scales and demographic characteristics. Project methods and results will be
generalizable to other countries experiencing regional population loss and will
be useful for researchers in related fields who require up-to-date understanding
of the evolving distribution and composition of the U.S. population. Products
from this project will be communicated to scholarly audiences in geography and
population studies as well as to policy makers and directly to the public. The
project also will contribute to the professional education, training, and
development of a post-doctoral researcher.

Population loss is longstanding and widespread in the United States and will
become more relevant if population growth slows. Population loss affects places
and people, although past research has tended to focus mostly on impacted
places. This project will highlight the disproportionate exposure to population
decline experienced by different demographic groups. The investigator will
develop new measures of place-specific population change that incorporate
spatial context and temporal scale. The resulting typology of population change
will identify various types of declining and growing places according to recent
population change, the growth trajectory of neighboring areas, and population
change in previous decades. She will identify the demographic sources of
population decline (such as fertility, mortality, and migration) associated with
each category of population change and investigate variations in migrant
characteristics and destinations by decline type. She will evaluate the
demographic burden of decline (such as differences in the characteristics of
those exposed to population decline), with special focus on the characteristics
of those living in areas declining at multiple spatial scales, and she will
assess the dynamics of decline in order to discover how age structure,
residential segregation, population composition and distribution, and poverty
levels change when places lose population.