* 1561717
* Investigating the Effectiveness of Boot Camps in Developing a Diverse Software Development Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2019
* USD 277,920.00

ETR Associates and the College of Charleston will conduct a collaborative
research project that is designed to increase diversity in computer science by
exploring whether boot camps build students' adaptive expertise and how the
actual preparation aligns with computing workforce expectations for knowledge
and competencies. The study will be conducted in Silicon Valley in California
and Silicon Harbor in South Carolina and will yield (1) models of the attributes
of effective software developers from the perspective of universities, coding
boot campus, and software development companies; (2) a conceptual framework of
how software development workforce needs align with training preparation, and
how variations in the preparation of adaptive expertise can inform efforts to
broaden participation; and (3) longitudinal case studies of students from
underrepresented groups from the two types of training settings. The results
will inform researchers, educators, and employers about the knowledge and
coursework necessary to develop adaptive software developers who are prepared
for the computer science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
use a three-phase mixed-methods approach to investigate the following research
questions: (1) What kinds of software development learning opportunities are
offered by undergraduate programs? What kinds are offered at coding boot camps?
(2) How well do the different training settings align with regional software
development industry needs? and (3) What kinds of learners are attracted to the
different learning opportunities and why? They will triangulate the findings
across multiple data sources, follow a tested process for developing a
conceptual framework, and use a rigorous set of procedures for analysis. Data
will include surveys, interviews, and focus groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in three thematic areas: STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation, and STEM workforce development.