* 1561655
* Collaborative Research: Big Data from Small Groups: Learning Analytics and Adaptive Support in Game-based Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* James Lester, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,249,611.00

This is a research project supporting a new model of Computer Supported
Collaborative Learning (CSCL) that combines the advantages of game based
learning with problem based learning. Good game based learning environments
combine rich scenarios with engaging activities to serendipitously provide
student learning. These learning environments also provide an opportunity for
players to collaborate in reaching their game goals. Good problem based learning
environments provide support for the solution of complex and ill-structured
problems. The combination of these two types of learning environments promise to
provide the engagement and richness of game based learning with the support
environment to engage students in authentic science. Both of these environments
are computer based so the actions and interactions of the students and teachers
are captured for analysis. Applying learning analytics to the captured data
provides information on student learning for the teacher, provides learning
information to the student for self-reflection and improved learning, and
provides information for the system designer to improve the effectiveness of the
new CSCL environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific problem domain is
environmental science for middle school students. The CSCL environment is a game
based learning environment that incorporates problem based learning. The
interaction between the CSCL environment and the student is enhanced by the
collection of data on the student based on cognitive, affective, and
metacognitive states that are inferred using artificial intelligence
technologies. Specific strategies are employed to help students construct
explanagions, reason effectively, and become self-directed learners. Key
outcomes of the project include a model of collaborative scaffolding for game
based learning that is usable in classrooms to help students learn STEM content
and learning analytics designed to support the teacher in the roles of guide and
collaborator. A goal of the project is wide dissemination of the CSCL system.