* 1561008
* Understanding Electronic and Magnetic Interactions in Complex Mixed Metal Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Emmanouil Kioupakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 895,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The ability to create new magnetic
semiconductors in which the "up" or "down" magnetic spin orientation of
conducting electrons can be controlled and manipulated through "on" or "off"
electrical charge at ambient temperature could lead to smaller spin-based
electronics (spintronics) for faster data processing, ultra-high-density data
storage and low power consumption. With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, the research team will use a combination of
experimental and computational techniques to create new ferromagnetic
semiconductors with flexible crystal structure and to investigate the nature of
interactions between magnetic spin of free-carriers and localized magnetic atoms
within these compounds that enables stable spintronic properties at room
temperature. The discovery of such compounds could pave the way to next-
generation computing in which data storage and processing functionalities are
integrated on a single chip. The multidisciplinary nature of this project
enables outstanding training of graduate students, undergraduate interns, high-
school students and high-school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Engineering the atomic structure of an inorganic
semiconductor to create isolated one-dimensional ferromagnetic subunits embedded
within the semiconducting crystal lattice can enable (1) electronic manipulation
of the ferromagnetic coupling strength within individual magnetic domains and
(2) magnetic control of electronic transport within the semiconducting
framework. Such atomic-scale integration of ordered magnetic and semiconducting
domains in the same crystal structure enables independent investigation and
understanding of the interactions between free-carrier spins and localized
magnetic moments within these new classes of ferromagnetic semiconductors
(FMSs). In this project, the research team combines advanced growth and
characterization techniques with first-principles calculations to investigate
FMSs based on transition-metal chalcogenides. The goal is to elucidate the
mechanism by which charge carriers mediate or induce coupling between localized
magnetic substructures embedded in the same crystal lattice in order to achieve
exotic combinations of properties such as large magnetic moments, large
coercivity, high Curie temperature and high electrical conductivity within a
single material. Such a result would significantly advance our knowledge about
the nature of coupling between electronic properties and magnetism, which is of
tremendous importance to further expansion of research on spintronic materials.