* 1561466
* Conference: Biology and Medicine through Mathematics; Virginia Commonwealth University; May 20-22, 2016
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Angela Reynolds, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This award assists with funding the 3-day conference, Biology and Medicine
through Mathematics, to be held in Spring 2016 at the Virginia Commonwealth
University. The main topics of the conference are Ecology, Evolution,
Epidemiology, Medicine, Neuroscience and Fluid Dynamics. Plenary lectures will
be given by internationally renowned speakers, Jim Cushing of the University of
Arizona, Leah Edelstein-Keshet of the University of British Columbia, Bard
Ermentrout of the University of Pittsburgh, and James Keener of the University
of Utah. Their expertise covers a broad representation of the application of
mathematical theory to the solution and modeling of problems originating in life
science and medical applications. At the meeting their talks will provide
highlights of research encompassing topics in population dynamics, cell biology,
neuroscience, wound healing and the chemical and physical behavior of the heart.
This meeting will provide an intimate conference environment with opportunities
for participants at all levels to present a poster or give a talk. There will be
scheduled events during the conference to provide networking opportunities
between junior and senior researchers. Travel awards will be given to promote
the the attendance of junior participants with particular attention to providing
opportunities for attendance by women and underrepresented minorities in
mathematics and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will be hosted by
Virginia Commonwealth University. The goals of this conference are to: i)
provide a venue for the exchange of biomathematics research that highlights
research in areas of federal strategic interest (health, medicine, and global
and environmental changes), as well as, methods in mathematical biology; ii)
promote the research of junior investigators (graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and junior faculty); and iii) help train the next generation of
researchers in mathematical biology by providing a good environment for
networking between junior and senior researchers. New developments in the broad
field of mathematical biology will be introduced to a diverse group of students,
postdoctoral researchers, and faculty. This meeting is supported by the
Mathematical Biology program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences. Details
for this conference can be found at the conference website go.vcu.edu/bamm.