* 1561469
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Integration of a Collection of Reptiles and Fishes into the LSU Museum of Natural Science.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Prosanta Chakrabarty, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 485,957.00

The Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science (LSUMNS) is one of the
largest and most active research oriented natural history museums in the United
States. The LSUMNS is reputed internationally for its documentation of
biodiversity and its support of cutting edge research. This reputation has made
LSUMNS the premier public institution in Louisiana for the deposition of
specimens documenting the biodiversity of the state and region. To accomplish
this the university has invested in facilities to house and secure the
collections. A recent acquisition of over 40,000 amphibian, reptile and fish
specimens by the museum takes advantage of this investment. This project funds
the utilization of renovated space at LSUMNS, allowing for the consolidation of
all vertebrate collections in the same building with modern facilities for
specimen storage, preserving this biodiversity repository for posterity. The
specimens to be incorporated include one of the largest collections of turtles
in the world, and a large number of Gulf of Mexico fishes collected prior to the
2010 oil spill. Plans are to digitize specimens and integrate these data into
online resources, making these collections available to national and
international researchers. Outreach and educational opportunities will engage
undergraduate and graduate students from diverse backgrounds through
collaboration with existing programs at the museum. Students will be trained in
modern digitization methods, curatorial methods and the use of social media for
public outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
incorporate a recently acquired collection of fishes, reptile and amphibian
specimens into the collections of the LSU Museum of Natural Science. The
amphibian and reptile collection were acquired from Tulane University. LSU has
provided additional space to house the collections and has committed to the
support of a collections manager to help integrate these important specimens
into the museum's collections. Plans are to install mobile compactor shelving,
new storage tanks and racks to fully and efficiently integrate the specimens
into the renovated space. The high-density storage system will also provide room
for future growth of the collection. The investigator also plans on digitization
of these specimens to increase their accessibility to the community. The
digitized collections data will be shared with and made available online through
iDigBio (www.idigbio.org). The project will collaborate with existing education
and outreach programs at the LSU Museum for public outreach and in the training
of undergraduate and graduate students.