* 1561182
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive Mechanisms of Early Math Learning - Improving Outcomes by Harnessing Multiple Memory Representations
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Susan Cook, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,592.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will investigate the processes that connect gestures and mathematics
learning. Gestures are an important yet under-investigated aspect of mathematics
teaching. They can influence students' memory and understanding of mathematical
representations. The series of studies will examine students' learning of the
concept of mathematical equivalence by testing instruction that incorporates
commonly used verbal explanations and gestures. Mathematical equivalence
includes understanding the meaning of the equal sign and determining if two
expressions are equal. Second and third grade children will be participants. Of
particular interest in the studies is the influence of gestures on preexisting
knowledge of procedures, how gestures support learning beyond emphasizing
information and direct learners' attention, and the creation of procedural
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The series of experimental studies will examine
the mechanisms that connect gestures and procedural understanding of
mathematical equivalence. The studies begin in the first phase with examining
how gesture is connected to procedural knowledge of mathematical equivalence.
Subsequent studies investigate how gesture functions as a mechanism for learning
beyond emphasizing or directing attention to relevant information. Data
collected will students' responses to equivalence problems and eye tracking data
to follow whether students are looking from one side of the equal sign to the
other. In the second phase of the work, the studies will examine how gesture has
beneficial effects on learning more generally in mathematics. Working memory
will be assessed in order to examine the role of gesture across different
individuals. Fraction tasks will be used to examine the generalization of the
previous results regarding gestures to other mathematics concepts.