* 1561996
* Effects of Turbulent Dissipation and Pressure Perturbations on Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Vincent Larson, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 354,628.00

Turbulent dissipation and non-hydrostatic pressure perturbations have profound
effects on the structure and evolution of cloud fields. For example, turbulent
mixing of dry environmental air into cumulus clouds may greatly reduce their
buoyancy and moisture content. Viewing this process as a problem in entrainment
has led to controversy in part because entrainment is difficult to define in a
precise and practically useful way. Instead, it may help to focus attention on
the turbulent scalar dissipation of, e.g., total water content, which has a
mathematical definition and appears explicitly in the equation for the variance
of total water. To cite another example, wind fields are highly anisotropic in
stratocumulus layers just below the inversion, with the static stability above
suppressing vertical motion but not horizontal motion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Study of these phenomena has
been impeded in part by the difficulty of making observational measurements.
Recently, however, two new opportunities have arisen. First, new and useful
diagnostics are becoming available in large-eddy simulation (LES) models that
have simulated a variety of cloud cases. In particular, budgets of velocity and
scalar variances are becoming available, along with estimates of dissipation
rate. Second, higher-order closure parameterizations that can take advantage of
improved understanding of turbulence and pressure effects have now been
implemented in weather forecast and climate models. This enables the possibility
of exploring how small-scale turbulent processes influence large-scale emergent
cloud properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore turbulent and pressure
processes in cloud fields, several steps will be undertaken. First, additional
budgets and diagnostics will be implemented in a LES model. Second, LES of cloud
cases will be analyzed in order to better understand the turbulent and pressure-
related behaviors. Third, the LES output will be used to evaluate existing and
new parameterizations of turbulent dissipation and pressure covariances.
Finally, regional and global simulations with various parameterizations will be
performed in order to better understand how different assumptions influence
large-scale fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The research
group has been offering internships since 2007 to software engineering students
at a local undergraduate institution. Those undergraduates see firsthand both
the power and pitfalls of working with large pieces of software. In return, the
students help the project to improve software development. Eleven undergraduates
have completed the internships, and all have obtained good jobs in software.
This program will be continued this student training. In addition, the project
will train a graduate student, disseminate research broadly, and improve
modeling techniques that may be of use in weather forecast and climate models.