* 1561691
* CSBR Living Stocks: Continued Support of the Duke Lemur Center for the Study of Primate Biology and History
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 499,997.00

The Duke Lemur Center (DLC) is a unique institution dedicated to the study and
care of the world's most endangered and biologically diverse primates: The
lemurs of Madagascar. The DLC was founded on the principle that the study of
lemurs and related primates can inform larger questions in biology such as the
genetic and biological underpinnings of the human condition. Investigators and
students from around the world come to Duke to study the living and fossil
collections of the DLC. The DLC serves as a unique center for scientific
inquiry, a hub for student activity, a nexus of knowledge, and a global partner
for understanding and mitigating the Earth's escalating environmental
challenges. Founded on the unifying themes of scientific inquiry, scholarship,
information, and global engagement, the DLC will capitalize on recent
revolutions in genomics, informatics and nanotechnology to make possible much
more detailed investigation of its endangered primates and the application of
these approaches for enhancing public knowledge of the scientific process. The
DLC serves multiple educational communities, including the general public, K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students. A multitude of opportunities
exist for engagement at the undergraduate and graduate student levels. In the
past five years alone, more than 400 students from 98 institutions have engaged
in research and/or training activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lemurs are
endemic to the biodiversity hotspot of Madagascar, and due to their critically-
endangered status, it would be impossible to recreate the taxonomic diversity of
the DLC colony that presently contains 19 species. Over the past five-year
period, 276 research projects led by 208 investigators from 100 institutions
representing eight countries (primarily the U.S.) have been conducted at the
DLC. These projects span a broad array of biological disciplines including, but
not limited to, aging, behavioral ecology, biomechanics, cognition, epigenetics,
life-history strategy, metabolomics, metagenomics, molecular evolution,
neurophysiology, phylogeography, phylogenomics, population genetics,
reproductive biology, sensory communication, speciation, and virology. During
this three year project, the DLC will continue to make lemurs readily available
to investigators, along with extensive collections of biological samples,
decades of medical records, fossil representatives of extinct taxa, and rich
life-history records. The DLC will also release a new version of the mouse lemur
genome assembly, which will further enhance the research potential of the mouse
lemur colony specifically, and the entire DLC colony by phylogenetic extension.
In addition, the DLC will collaborate with Duke University's Center for In Vivo
Microscopy, continue in vivo and ex vivo studies to produce an online
multidimensional neural atlas of the dwarf and mouse lemurs. The DLC is also
wholeheartedly committed to conservation activities via both ex situ captive
management and in-country programs. The DLC's conservation Initiative in
Madagascar has already served as a "landing pad" for numerous student and
faculty researchers engaged in projects ranging from disease transmission, to
behavioral ecology, to ecophysiology, to climate change. On-line access to
colony inventories, demographics, metadata, research opportunities, and more is
available through two web-based portals. Details on all facets of the DLC
mission and activities can be found online (lemur.duke.edu).