* 1561424
* Equity in Engineering: Understanding and Promoting All Elementary School Children's Knowledge of and Motivation to Engage in Engineering
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martin Reisslein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2020
* USD 919,465.00

Increasing concern in recent years has highlighted the low percentage of adults
who are earning degrees and pursuing careers in engineering, and this is
especially true for female and ethnic minority individuals. Given that early
experiences have a profound effect on later skill development and one's
motivation to learn, it is essential to target children's early beliefs and
experiences to better understand and change occupational disparities later in
life. Very few studies have been conducted looking systematically at young
children's beliefs about engineering in majority or underrepresented
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, guided by expectancy-value
theory and ability mindset beliefs, makes three critical intellectual merit
contributions. First, this project is developing and validating age-appropriate
measures to assess elementary school children's occupational knowledge,
stereotypes, and achievement-related beliefs within engineering. Second, this
project is filling a gap in the literature by examining gender and ethnic
differences in children's developing occupational and stereotype knowledge and
achievement-related beliefs associated with engineering. Third, this project is
assessing the promise of a time-efficient and cost-effective growth mindset
intervention to promote positive beliefs and performance in engineering. The
project involves cross-sectional survey research methods and a randomized
experiment with approximately 3,600 elementary school students and their
teachers. At least half of the students who participate will be from
underrepresented backgrounds. Teachers will participate in training on
integrating engineering concepts into their curricula and maximizing students'
motivation and engagement in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation.