* 1561021
* Data Complexity and Spatial Scaling: Prediction Accuracy and Implications for Emerging Landscape Paradigms
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Amy Frazier, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 11/30/2019
* USD 121,921.00

This research will contribute new knowledge regarding the merger and aggregation
of diverse geographic datasets and how their data quality loss can be minimized
during these processes. As datasets are merged across varying spatial scales,
statistical biases, commonly known as the Modifiable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP)
occur and are impacted by the composition and configuration of the datasets. The
investigator will study how these biases can be overcome in order to allow
datasets to be accurately scaled to different resolutions. By developing methods
that use measures of compositional and configurational heterogeneity, the
researcher will provide new insights regarding how to assess the potential of a
dataset to be accurately scaled to coarser and finer resolutions in order to
foster integration. The investigator will raise awareness of accuracy issues
surrounding appropriate and correct use of ecological, social, and geographical
datasets for integrated analysis, and she will offer solutions to promote better
interdisciplinary integration as well as methods for exposing young scientists
to these issues through learning modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the spatial sciences by drawing on parallel theories in geography and
landscape ecology. The research will seek to answer three core questions: (1)
How do data complexity and spatial heterogeneity impact statistical biases
associated with MAUP? (2) Can standards for data reduction/complexity improve
prediction? (3) Do various landscape paradigms respond differently to changing
heterogeneity? The investigator will use multiple methods, including innovations
in surface paradigms in the field of landscape ecology, advances in remote
sensing spectral unmixing, and scale-dependency of spatial pattern metrics to
answer these questions. The research findings will result in identification of
different forms of data reduction and complexity aggregation methods across
multiple resolutions; development of a rapid assessment method for predicting
downscaling accuracy; and establishment of a statistical basis for using the
emerging continuous surface paradigm of landscape analyses. These outcomes have
the potential to transform how scientists across environmental, social, and
economic disciplines approach aggregation and scaling of various types of
geospatial data.