* 1561346
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Securing a Living Collection of Rare Plants at the Montgomery Botanical Center Through the Installation of an Automatic Backup Generator System.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* M. Patrick Griffith, Montgomery Botanical Center
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2017
* USD 60,645.00

CSBR: Living Stocks: Securing a Living Collections of Rare Plants at the
Montgomery Botanical Center Through the Installation of an Automatic Backup
Generator System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to the Montgomery
Botanical Center (MBC) to install an automatic backup power system to secure its
collections for community use. MBC living stock collections help advance
scientific understanding in numerous fields in biology. The facility provides
the most diverse and thoroughly documented collections of palms and cycads in
the US, through its historic and ongoing plant exploration fieldwork, as well as
its location in frost-free, subtropical South Florida. In addition, to their use
in research and education, maintaining these collections reduces the need for
field collecting, preventing the extirpation of species from their natural
habitats. However, South Florida is prone to more frequent lightning and
hurricane strikes and these hazards threaten the security of the collection.
Loss of electrical power in Florida is highly correlated with lightning and
wind, and such interruptions create dangerous conditions for tender seedlings in
the greenhouse, and living stocks in cold storage. Thus, backup power for these
facilities will ensure continued and increased service of this collection to
researchers and to the public. MBC closely collaborates with local institutions,
including some of the most diverse university communities in the US. MBC also
fully leverages its living collection for education, training, broadened
participation, and public understanding of science. This is accomplished through
programs in service learning, paid fellowships, frequent student fieldtrips,
high school internships, volunteer programs, guided tours, and frequent online
and printed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
ensure continued security of the living collections for further research use.
Recent improvements to MBC's living collections propagation and cryostorage
environment have improved survivability, leading to greater diversity of the
collection. This project will install an automatic backup generator system to
ensure uninterrupted electrical power to the propagation and cyrostorage
facilities. This will ensure that critical environmental systems (reverse
osmosis water filtration, timed mist and irrigation, air circulation,
environmental controls, and ultracold freezer systems) can function in the event
of a short- to long-term power outage. This upgrade will ensure the long-term
security of these living collections, and their future service to the NSF BIO-
funded research community. Ensuring a stable environment for cryostorage and
propagation facilities will also further increase the potential diversity of the
living collections, helping to reach a broader pool of potential users. The
outcomes of this project can be found on the Montgomery Botanical Center website
(http://www.montgomerybotanical.org/Collection.htm).