* 1561829
* Collaborative Research: Improving Capabilities of Micro-scale Vibratory Systems by Embracing and Accounting for Large-Amplitude Responses
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Steven Shaw, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,950.00

This project considers the development of techniques to assist in the design and
optimization of micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) that utilize resonant
vibrations. These micro-scale devices are important elements in many consumer
electronics and products including wireless telephones, automobiles, and
entertainment devices. The capabilities of these systems are often limited by a
number of factors that restrict their range of operation, such as their maximum
amplitude of vibration. This research pursues a fundamental understanding of
these limitations and developing systematic tools for improving the performance
of these devices. The broader impact of this project includes outreach,
mentoring and training, inclusion of students from underrepresented groups,
development of classroom materials motivated by the research, and dissemination
of results. This project will result in multidisciplinary training of students,
who benefit from the close collaboration and integrated theoretical and
experimental research approach of the PIs. Also, the PIs and their graduate
students will continue their longstanding participation in summer outreach
programs to middle- and high-school students, and the inclusion of undergraduate
research assistants. The PIs also plan to create an alumni mentoring program for
graduate students, in which current graduate students will be connected with
alumni who will offer professional advice and support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
commercial devices that employ vibratory MEMS are designed so that the resonant
elements operate in their linear range and the designer can rely on simple
models to analyze their response. However, this sets limits on their operating
range that do not take full advantage of their potential. There have been recent
efforts demonstrating significantly improved performance when nonlinear effects
are systematically included in the MEMS design process. The focus of this
project is to embrace nonlinear behavior in resonators, to develop an
understanding of the attendant limits, and to develop and experimentally
demonstrate design methods that allow one to optimize performance in this realm.
The research focus is on MEMS that operate with one or two fundamental vibratory
modes that can be described by weakly nonlinear models so that analytical
methods, namely perturbation techniques, and the theory of normal forms, are
applicable. These models are linked with multi-physics computational tools and
optimization techniques, using normal forms to formulate objective functions for
the applications of interest. Devices developed with these tools will be
fabricated, characterized, and tested to validate the approach. Applications
will include frequency generation, frequency conversion, and inertial sensing.