* 1561427
* Cell-Free Protein-based Bionanomanufacturing of Metal Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Shelley Minteer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,882.00

Over the last two decades, there has been considerable interest in synthesizing
new nanomaterials with unusual optical and catalytic properties. This has led to
many innovative new applications. The success of this research has created a
great deal of enthusiasm for nanomaterials as a solution to the nation's energy,
medical, and environmental needs. Unfortunately, very few of these nanomaterials
have made it to the marketplace due to challenges with scaling up their
manufacturing and finding low-cost and 'green' or environmentally-benign methods
to make them at an industrial scale. However, nature does an excellent job of
reproducibly making complex metal and semiconductor nanomaterials. This
biological inspiration will be used to generate bionanomanufacturing platforms
in aqueous solutions without hazardous materials or extreme processing
conditions. This interdisciplinary research will be integrated into the
curriculum and provide research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students. This project will integrate research with teaching and mentoring,
provide unique student internships, and teach them about innovation,
intellectual property, and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
organisms utilize proteins and peptides to produce individual metal
nanoparticles at room temperature without organic solvents as a method to deal
with metal-ion toxicity in the biological cell. This bio-detoxification process
produces uniform and pure spherical nanoparticles. In addition, there is
biological programming to the size, shape, and purity of the nanoparticles
produced, although the mechanism of this biological programming is not well
understood. This award will utilize the bio-inspiration of microbial metal
nanoparticle fabrication to build new bionanomanufacturing platforms. This
interdisciplinary project will include fundamental biological studies of the
mechanisms that microbes utilize to control metal nanoparticle nucleation and
growth. These fundamental studies will determine the proteins responsible for
control of nucleation and growth. These proteins will be translated to in-vitro
manufacturing processes using cell-free techniques for forming the same metal
nanoparticles outside of the living cell, but with considerably higher
production rates. These cell-free techniques will include protein
immobilization, protein stabilization, and cofactor regeneration systems.
Finally, these cell-free processes and techniques will be utilized for
nanomanufacturing of metal nanoparticle systems of various size, shape, and
purity. This protein-based nanomanufacturing will allow for the scale-up of
manufacturing of low-cost, but high purity nanomaterials.