* 1561584
* Career Commitment and Retention in STEM: The Intersection of Professional Identity and Career Management Skills in Minority and Women STEM Students
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Marie Hammond, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2020
* USD 1,417,169.00

Researchers at Tennessee State University will study the role of professional,
social, and cultural identities on career choice and commitment among
underrepresented minorities. They will expand the Social Cognitive Career Theory
(SCCT) by examining factors such as problem solving, decision making, goal
setting, and managing goal pursuit that are not articulated in the current
model. As critical as self-efficacy is in the process of developing one?s
interests, making career choices, and preparing for career entry, it is not
clear how lower levels of these skills may limit one?s commitment to, ability to
enact, and self-efficacy about engaging in the chosen career. The research will
provide valuable insights for students and career development practitioners on
tactical measures for successful careers in STEM fields. The knowledge gained by
understanding the interplay of the sophistication of career skill level and
career development could alter the design of interventions to recruit and retain
underrepresented persons throughout the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use a mixed methods longitudinal design to investigate three
questions: (1) What is the relationship among STEM career development measures,
basic career skills, and social class and developmental complexity? (2) How do
these variables change over time in both STEM persisters and non-persisters? and
(3) How do these variables explain persistence among African American and women
STEM majors? The sample will include a stratified, proportionally representative
sample of 400 STEM majors. In addition to the primary variables of interest
(career-related problem solving, decision-making, goal setting, and managing
goal pursuit), STEM career development, professional identity, social class, and
developmental complexity will be studied. Collecting data on grade-point
average, changes in majors, internships, employment/graduate student
interviewing, and progress toward career goals will provide the opportunity for
examining the link between the previous variables and more traditional measures
of success and persistence. They will use structural equation modeling and
hierarchical linear modeling to analyze the relationship between and among the
variables and growth curve modeling and profile analysis to provide additional
data regarding the longitudinal change in the variables of interest. The
research will result in a clearer understanding of the role of problem-solving,
goal- setting, and planning skills in the development of a STEM vocational
identity and persistence in STEM careers; the role of professional,
racial/ethnic, and social class identities on commitment and retention in STEM
majors; and the role of cognitive complexity in facilitating STEM career
development, commitment, and retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in
three thematic areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation, and STEM workforce development.