* 1561738
* Career Technical Education: Investigating Factors Associated with Enrollment and Persistence in Information and Computing Technologies Among Underrepresented Groups
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2020
* USD 871,150.00

Researchers at ETR Associates will conduct a mixed methods longitudinal study on
the malleable factors that affect community college students? persistence in
information and communications technologies (ICT) classes and careers. The
project involves a partnership between a research organization, about 25
community colleges, and five external advisors with expertise in higher
education research, policy, and teaching. It will test and extend theories of
student persistence and build on the team?s prior research on community college
pathways to four-year computer science majors. The study will produce evidence
on factors that influence retention, degree attainment, and technical skills
development for community college students in ICT fields and inform future
research about appropriate theory and measurement tools for use in studies about
community college to ICT career pathways. Research results will inform
investments in broadening participation programs, institutional and classroom
policies and procedures, and intervention programs designed to increase
persistence in ICT programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will test a
portion of an expanded and adapted theory of student persistence to investigate
how different factors influence community college students? outcomes. The
project will investigate three research questions: (1) What baseline factors
(individual, relational, and institutional) are most related to the intentions
of community college students to complete their ICT courses? (2) What baseline
and interim factors are most related to completion of the ICT course? And (3)
What baseline, interim, and current factors are most related to other indicators
of success that include program completion, technical skill development, and
enhanced workforce capacity? Data analyses will proceed from descriptive and
bivariate analyses to multilevel linear and logistic regression analyses. These
will be guided by theory as well as prior research on the role of individual,
relational, and institutional factors in career pathways. The study will yield
evidence about what leads to retention, degree attainment, and technical skills
development for underrepresented community college students in information and
communications technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in three thematic
areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation, and
STEM workforce development.