* 1561453
* Assessing the Structure of Knowledge in Teaching Mathematics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Temple Walkowiak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,740,996.00

Understanding how elementary teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching
develops and how it influences instruction and student learning has been a
persistent challenge in mathematics education. Very few measures exist that
allow researchers to reliably assess the nature of teachers' mathematical
knowledge. The purpose of this study is develop measures of mathematical
knowledge for teaching in both novice and experienced elementary teachers to
more effectively assess teacher knowledge and its relationship to student
learning. This study will take advantage of recent psychometric and
methodological advances to develop more sophisticated and sensitive measures of
teachers' mathematical knowledge for teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal includes a set of four studies. The first study will examine how
mathematical knowledge for teaching differs for novice vs. experienced teachers.
The second study will examine the development of teacher mathematical knowledge
for teaching and its relationship to the experience of teaching topics in that
area. The third study will examine how student learning of specific mathematics
concepts is related to teacher knowledge of those concepts. The fourth study
will involve classroom observations to examine how mathematical knowledge for
teaching is related to corresponding aspects of mathematics instruction. The
methodology makes use of diagnostic classification models to characterize
teacher knowledge in particular domains of mathematics--fractions and decimals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.