* 1561531
* To Compare or Space? The Role of Timing in Children's Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Haley Vlach, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2021
* USD 529,881.00

This research will contribute to understanding how science concepts are learned.
This project will study how concepts are generalized from individual examples,
thus continuing to inform the cognitive science literature on this topic. The
experiments will present students with multiple examples of science concepts
according to different timing patterns so that students can abstract
similarities and differences among them. The studies will directly address a
seemingly paradoxical set of findings: presenting examples at the same time and
apart in time have both been shown to promote science learning. As such, this
work will resolve conflicting findings in cognitive science and science
education and, in turn, will generate a body of research that elucidates
fruitful methods for designing learning environments. The long-term goal of this
work is to provide STEM educators with educative curricular material supplements
that outline the timing patterns that promote students' learning outcomes. This
project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments will test
conflicting but possibly mutually informing hypotheses. One line of research in
cognitive science has proposed that presenting examples of science concepts
simultaneously promotes students' abstraction and immediate generalization of
concepts. However, another line of work has argued that spacing presentations
across time promotes students' abstraction and long-term generalization of
concepts. The current work bridges these two lines of research by examining the
conditions under which simultaneous and spaced presentations promote students'
generalization. The central hypothesis in this work is that developmental
changes in students' cognitive abilities, such as attention, memory, and science
knowledge, will create shifts in which presentation schedule promotes their
generalization of concepts. The results of this work will generate a cognitive
model of how presentation timing impacts students' science learning. This
cognitive model will allow researchers and STEM educators to make predictions
about the presentation timing that will best promote students' acquisition and
generalization of science concepts.