* 1561258
* CSBR: Natural History: Compact Mobile Storage Retrofit, Electrical to Mechanical, Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* James Solomon, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 302,966.00

This award is made to improve physical access to approximately 2.5 million
herbarium specimens in the Herbarium of the Missouri Botanical Garden by
converting the portion of the current compact storage ranges that are
electrical/motor-drive to manual/mechanical-drive. The Missouri Botanical Garden
Herbarium, established in 1859, contains over 6.6 million specimens of ferns,
conifers, flowering plants and mosses from around the globe, making it the
second largest collection of its kind in the United States and one of the
largest in the world. The Herbarium is a major global repository of preserved
plants and a research resource of botanical information accessible to a world-
wide community of scientists, students, governmental and non-governmental
agencies and the general public. The specimens contained in the herbarium
document the variety of plant life on Earth and can be used to answer a
multitude of fundamental questions related to species diversity, genetics,
ecology, environmental change, agronomy and other uses of plants by people.
Analysis of specimen attributes and their associated data, as well as
information from other sources, can provide solutions to these problems but only
if the specimens are cared for and accessible. Ultimately, the use of herbarium
resources will lead to a better understanding of the world's rich botanical
heritage and to the development of the knowledge base necessary to conserve and
use that diversity for societal benefit into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will retrofit the ten
electrical/motor-drive compactor ranges in the Lehmann Building to
manual/mechanical-drive. After more than forty years of continuous service, the
increasing lack of operational reliability and the difficulty in finding parts
and making repairs is significantly impacting access to the collection by users.
This is a serious and urgent problem since access to the herbarium collection is
available 24 hours per day, seven days a week for hundreds of staff, students
and visiting researchers each year. Completion of this project will immediately
improve the reliability and ease of use of the compactor system, and will
significantly reduce future maintenance issues. The conversion to a manual
system will involve replacing the end panels of the compactor units with new
panels fitted with a hand crank and a gear and chain-drive system. Although this
project is a relatively fundamental infrastructure modification, the results
will have a real impact and benefit for all who consult the herbarium
collection. It will allow users to utilize their time more efficiently with
simple, unimpeded access to all parts of the collection. This infrastructure
improvement continues the Garden's long-term commitment to provide safe and
reliable access to the specimens under its care. Additional information on the
Missouri Botanical Garden and its science and conservation programs may be
consulted online (www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/).