* 1561724
* CSBR:Living Stocks. Securing the future of the Chlamydomonas Resource Center collections: security and accessibility
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Paul Lefebvre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 490,976.00

The unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii serves as a unique model
system for studies of photosynthesis, metabolic pathways, flagellar biogenesis
and function, signal transduction, and other aspects of cell biology.
Chlamydomonas allows researchers to apply the powerful genetic techniques
available in a simple microbial system to an organism with chloroplasts and
flagella. The system also provides a platform for applied research in biofuels
and in protein engineering. Uniquely among algal systems, over 50 years of
experimentation by hundreds of laboratories has generated a collection of more
than 4000 mutants affecting many cell processes. The Chlamydomonas Resource
Center, in its 36th year of operation, serves as the central repository to
receive, catalogue, preserve and distribute wild type and mutant cultures of C.
reinhardtii. It also maintains and disseminates molecular reagents such as
plasmids and provides information on this organism to the international
scientific community. The Center prepares and distributes teaching kits, with
simple reagents, strains and instructions to allow high school and college
biology students and classes to perform sophisticated experiments, producing
hydrogen, for example, without needing expensive laboratory facilities. By
maintaining and distributing mutant strains that can be used to illuminate the
functioning of flagella and chloroplasts, and by encouraging the interest of a
new generation of researchers, the Chlamydomonas Resource Center plays a
critical role in ensuring that this valuable model system continues to provide
unique insights into many areas of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The aims of
this project are to: 1) improve the security of the collection by
cryopreservation of all living strains in liquid nitrogen, in duplicate; 2) make
the mutants in the collection more useful to users by preparing and distributing
custom collections of strains using a recently acquired replica-plating robot;
and 3) enhance the educational use of the collection by recruiting undergraduate
students to test and refine our current teaching kits, and to help the co-
directors of the Center design new laboratory experiments to be distributed to
teachers through the website. These enhancements of Center activities will
insure that users have access to the information and strains needed to make
optimal use of this increasingly important model organism for research and
teaching. A frequently updated web site (chlamy.org) provides descriptions of
all cultures and plasmids in the collection, historical information and
reference material on genetic loci and mutant alleles, a library of useful
laboratory protocols and laboratory exercises, as well as genetic and molecular
maps, and links to other relevant information.