* 1561491
* Scalable Manufacturing of Nanostructured Bioassemblies for Low-Cost Portable Biosensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 331,697.00

There is a growing demand for developing manufacturing processes that can
reliably and reproducibly generate nanostructured materials with functional
bioactive properties at low cost and in large quantities. These technologies are
needed in a wide range of applications, especially in medical diagnostics and in
environmental and food monitoring. Examples include responsive materials for
wearable biosensing devices, flexible bioelectronics, functional contact lenses,
smart screens and intelligent packaging. For example, bioactive nanostructures
that have the appropriate detection sensitivity and selectivity are particularly
important for the development of low cost devices for home and point-of-care
diagnosis. This research will develop a process for large scale manufacturing of
functional bioactive nanostructures on flexible and inexpensive substrates such
as paper and plastic, using three-dimensional (3D) printing. This award will
enable the development of a new class of biosensing devices that are easy to
use, portable and inexpensive. Research outcomes will be disseminated through
journals and conference presentations, including hands-on demonstrations of the
sensing capabilities of the nanomanufactured devices, curriculum enhancement and
professional development workshops for high school teachers, collaboration with
industry, and providing entrepreneurial training for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop scalable fabrication
methods for nanobioactive materials with defined optical and electronic
properties and biological functionality. The overall goal is to gain fundamental
understanding of the formation mechanism of hybrid bioactive nanostructures by
printing and to use this knowledge to develop scalable production methods for
low cost diagnostic applications. The research team will focus on the
engineering design of eco-friendly printing inks of characteristic viscosity and
composition that maintain functional nanoscale properties and bioactivity. These
nanostructures will integrate biorecognition, signal amplification and detection
capabilities and will function as all-in-one biosensing devices. Fabrication
steps and detection schemes will be developed to facilitate automatic printing
of the entire sensing unit and enable reagentless operation. The approach can be
expanded to the synthesis of other hybrid nanostructures and devices with
tailored functionality. The method will open the way for the in situ assembly of
hybrid bioactive nanostructures using a low cost, versatile and controllable
manufacturing process.