* 1561676
* Collaborative Research: Using Data Mining and Observation to derive an enhanced theory of SRL in Science learning environments
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 629,630.00

This project aims to enhance theory and measurement of students' self-regulated
learning (SRL) processes during science learning. SRL refers to learning that is
guided by metacognition (thinking about one's thinking), strategic action
(planning, monitoring, and evaluating personal progress against a standard), and
motivation to learn. The project will accomplish this by developing a
technology-based framework which leverages human expert judgment and machine
learning methods to identify key moments during SRL and analyze these moments in
depth. The project uses an existing science learning environment, Betty's Brain,
that combines learning-by-modeling with critical thinking and problem solving
skills to teach complex science topics. The environment is designed to have the
student teach Betty science topics using concept maps (the critical elements of
the science) and reading materials provided by the environment. A critical
component of this project is to determine when a student using the system needs
help. Using SRL as a basis, the additions to Betty's brain will identify key
points in the SRL processes of metacognition, strategic action, and motivation.
Some of these points can be determined automatically in recognizing key points
while others require human intervention to recognize key points and then to
determine what actions should be taken to enable the student. This information
will be recorded and the experiences then are used to update the automatic
identification of key points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main
intellectual merit is in integrating the power of data mining to rapidly sift
through large amounts of data to find key inflection or change points in student
reasoning and strategies, with the power of human beings to deeply understand
other humans' SRL processes. This measurement framework, with the accompanying
detectors of inflection points in students' SRL in online learning, has the
potential to transform science learning and teaching in K-12 settings by
providing insights into how SRL unfolds during learning through the interactions
between affect, engagement, cognition and metacognition. Those insights will be
used to extend an existing theory of SRL, increasing its richness, specificity,
and predictive power. Self-regulated learning is important to student success,
both in K-12 education and during life-long learning afterwards. Better
understanding of SRL processes will support the development of computer-based
science learning environments, such as Betty's Brain, with the capability to
better support students' learning of SRL skills and strategies in science
classrooms. By studying these issues within the diverse population of urban
students who currently use Betty's Brain, success of the project will increase
the relevance of SRL to the full diversity of America's learners. The project's
software will be available through the portal www.teachableagents.org.