* 1561918
* Countably Infinite Monotropic Programs
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Archis Ghate, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 02/29/2020
* USD 325,055.00

Countably infinite monotropic programs form a large class of convex optimization
problems that arise in infinite-horizon planning applications in economics,
inventory control, supply chain management, asset selling, equipment
replacement, capacity expansion, and dynamic resource allocation. Existing
theoretical knowledge about the structure of optimal solutions to these problems
is very sparse. Efficient algorithms for their solution are also non-existent.
This project will develop a mathematically rigorous theoretical and
computational framework to tackle countably infinite monotropic programs. This
will ultimately help governments, non-profit organizations, and private
institutions make better farsighted decisions, and thus benefit the US economy
and society. The PI will provide research opportunities to students from his
undergraduate classes and incorporate research findings into his graduate
classes. The project will thus contribute to educating students in mathematics
and engineering.

Finite-dimensional monotropic programs include linear programs, separable convex
programs with linear constrains, and convex minimum cost network flow problems
as special cases. Classic works of Minty and Rockafellar have revealed important
connections between their geometric and analytical properties. Duality results
for finite-dimensional monotropic programs are as powerful as those available
for linear programs. These, in turn, have led to efficient solution algorithms.
However, countably infinite extensions of such results have proven elusive owing
to several mathematical pathologies in infinite-dimensional sequence spaces. The
PI plans to overcome these hurdles by exploiting insights from his recent
theoretical and algorithmic work on countably infinite linear programs.
Specifically, the project will first provide three hypotheses for choosing
primal and dual variable spaces so that weak duality and complementary slackness
for countably infinite monotropic programs can be established via finite-
dimensional proof techniques. It will then derive boundedness conditions under
which strong duality in finite-dimensional approximations of countably infinite
monotropic programs is preserved in the limit. The PI will also develop
implementable approximations of infinite-dimensional extensions of classic
finite-dimensional solution procedures such as descent algorithms, relaxation
methods, and auction algorithms. These approximations will be adaptively
designed to include a sufficient number of variables in reduced-cost and other
calculations so as to guarantee monotone convergence to optimality. The
resulting algorithms will be compared against a planning horizon benchmark that
simply solves a sequence of larger and larger finite-dimensional approximations.
This research will draw from and contribute to fundamental results in functional
and convex analysis, and in infinite-dimensional linear algebra and
combinatorics. It will also pave the way for future work on more general
infinite-dimensional convex programs.