* 1561068
* Collaborative Research: Large-scale Database Construction of Firms' Organizational Form, Competition, and Industry Change
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Gordon Phillips, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 02/29/2020
* USD 268,000.00

This project proposes to analyze how organizations and industries change over
time by building a large-scale database compiled from Internet web pages of over
1,000,000 private and public firms, and an analytical web-based tool to provide
efficient access to this database. This large-scale database will contain
information on products and services directly offered by public and private
firms to their customers over the last 20 years, as well as links to the US
Patent and Trademark Office's patent data for the last 20 years. The resulting
database and analysis tool will enable researchers to answer many questions,
including: How do industries, competition in industries and their products
change over time? What are the dynamics of product introduction rates for
private and public firms and how did private firms and their array of product
offerings change during the recent financial crisis? What products are
introduced by public and private firms following increases in patenting activity
within an industry? Do the patenting firms introduce the new products or do non-
patenting firms? Which government policy changes were most effective in
stimulating the growth of entrepreneurial firms, and in what kind of markets did
these policies work best? What local product market conditions are most
conducive to successful entry by entrepreneurial firms and how do waves of
innovation impact product market competition? What economic forces trigger firms
to cross the boundary between public and private status? In addition to
impacting academics that study innovation and how industries change over time,
business decision makers, consumers, and regulators will benefit from the new
industry designations. Businesses can use the database and web based tool to
assess existing market structure around new products. This will facilitate more
informed decisions about where and when to commit scarce resources to enter new
markets. By examining the nature of existing competition and market structure by
both public and private firms, large and small, entrepreneurs can also better
assess the likely success of their new ventures. Regulators including the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) can
also benefit from refined knowledge of industry structure and product market
boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a highly scalable
approach for mining historical Web data to create comprehensive product-based
databases and tools to query and analyze this data. This integrated database
will be built using firm web pages from the Internet Archive Wayback Machine
project. Using the text from these web pages, the resulting database will
classify firms as competitors, which will be used to build new industry
definitions. These new industry definitions will be based directly on the
product and service descriptions firms use to interface with customers. The
project will produce a publicly available web-based analytical tool based on
"Elasticsearch" (www.elasticsearch.com). This tool will allow users to query the
database of public and private firms, their competitors, and the products they
offer. Using this tool, a user will be able to input a company, or list of
companies, and the tool will provide that company's product descriptions and a
list of its competitors that produce similar products, along with the
corresponding similarity scores, indicating the strength of competitive links.
The analytical tool will also allow a firm's local product market to be
visualized as a network. In addition to the hosted, online search tool, users
will be able to download bulk datasets to perform their own local processing.