* 1561151
* I-Corps:  Exploiting matching score distributions to improve biometric recognition
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Whether we want to unlock our cell phones or pay with our credit cards, we need
to verify our identity. Biometric technologies can help accomplish this task
easier, faster and in a more secure manner. For example, Apple's Touch ID system
allows users to unlock their phones and make payments using their fingerprint.
However, conditions such as noise in the background (in the case of using
speech) or bad illumination (in the case of using facial images) can degrade the
accuracy of these systems. This problem is more pronounced for challenging
recognition tasks such as surveillance, access control, and personalized
customer service. Acuity?s latest report estimates that $20 billion in annual
revenues will be generated in the biometrics sector from direct purchase and
software development fees by the end of 2020. The proposed add-on software
developed by this I-Corps team can improve the system's decision-making process
regardless of the biometric train used (e.g., face, speech, or iris). Potential
customers can either add the proposed software to their biometric system or use
a cloud-based app.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognition algorithms compare biometric
data (e.g., speech segments or facial images) to produce scores that reflect how
similar are these samples. However, poor acquisition conditions degrade the
quality of the obtained scores. This problem affects all biometric systems
regardless of the biometric trait used. Score normalization methods transform
scores into a domain that reflects similarity more accurately. This team has
developed a framework that describes how to employ existing methods (and those
to be invented) more effectively. Specifically, the proposed invention is an
algorithm that partitions a set of scores into subsets and then normalizes the
scores of each subset independently. Participating in the NSF I-Corps program
will allow the team to test its hypotheses and improve its chances of converting
companies to clients. At the end of the program, the team intends to present a
refined business model canvas and demonstrate its minimum viable product.