* 1561166
* Early Career: Acquisition of a laser ablation system to enable new constraints on continental crust, dinosaurs, and ore deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Adriana Potra, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 542,294.00

This project seeks to use laser ablation techniques to understand three
fundamental aspects of the Earth system: 1) the origin and evolution of Earth?s
continents, 2) the preservation of fossil bone material and its use in
constraining aspects of Earth?s paleoclimate, and 3) understanding the source
and development of economic ore deposits. Of particular interest to the national
interest is the project?s efforts to mitigate dinosaur fossil bone poaching and
to develop new methods for understanding the origin of economically viable metal
ore deposits. This award also provides critical analytical support for three
early career scientists, including two women, one of whom is Hispanic. Finally,
the award will help establish a new laboratory that will facilitate the
education of undergraduate and graduate Earth scientists in cutting edge
analytical techniques that are applicable to understanding the Earth
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will help establish the University
of Arkansas? TRAIL facility (Trace element and Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory).
Laser ablation capabilities provided by this award will be used to develop both
conventional and split-stream analytical protocols for accessory phases, fossil
bone, and sulfides utilizing the laboratory?s existing multi-collector and
quadrupole ICP-MS instruments. The lab will be focused on three main goals: 1)
using accessory phase (e.g., monazite, zircon, and titanite) Th-U-Pb
petrochronology to constrain the metamorphic reactions that occur during melting
and deformation in the deep continental crust, 2) understanding vertebrate
taphonomy and its utility for constraining aspects of paleoclimate and
paleoecology, and 3) providing new constraints on the genesis of economic ore
deposits via the in situ analysis of Pb-isotopes, Cu-isotopes, and trace
elements in sulfides. A fourth early career scientist in the Department of
Anthropology will utilize LA-ICP-MS to analyze archeological pottery to
constrain trade networks.