* 1561055
* HRRBAA: Development of in-field methods for analysis of primate olfactory compounds
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Christopher Vinyard, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2018
* USD 26,498.00

Using scent to communicate is common in primates and even can occur in humans.
Yet research on primate olfaction (sense of smell) lags behind studies of other
senses such as vision and hearing. Understanding how scents communicate
information, what reactions they produce, and how this information is chemically
communicated, can improve our understanding of primate behaviors and motivation.
In order to measure and characterize primate scents, researchers have used
laboratory methods that require large, high-cost equipment and sample
preservation during shipment from a field site. In this high-risk project, the
investigators will test a portable field method for characterizing the chemical
composition of scents in real time. If the field method is feasible, it will
allow new avenues of research that could advance the understanding of olfactory
communication in primates and other mammals. This project will promote
international collaboration between US and Brazilian researchers, and support
student training at a US institution with a high number of first generation
college students.

Laboratory-based gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) has been the
standard method for quantifying the chemical composition of primate scents. In
this high-risk project, the investigators will explore the potential and
feasibility of a portable, in-field GC-MS method to characterize the chemical
composition of scent marks for wild common marmoset monkeys in Brazil.
Development of a field method would mitigate the expense and challenges
associated with long-distance transport of samples, and allow for data
collection on how scent cues change over time in their original context and the
resulting reaction by recipients of the scent mark.