* 1561304
* Collaborative Proposal: Mathematical Modeling with Cultural and Community Contexts
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Julia Aguirre, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 491,723.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
team of investigators from the University of Arizona will conduct research on
the teaching and learning of mathematical modeling in diverse elementary
classrooms in Arizona and Washington. Mathematical modeling skills are
foundational as they connect core mathematical ideas to real world experiences
through analysis, representation, interpretation, and revision. Mathematical
modeling also supports enduring understandings and practices in mathematics,
such as problem solving and generalization. While mathematical modeling has a
strong tradition in secondary education, the increased content of college and
career readiness standards requires an introduction to modeling in elementary
school. To address this need, the researchers will: (a) advance foundational
knowledge on teaching and learning mathematical modeling in grades 3 through 5;
(b) refine innovative professional development programs to increase teacher
understanding and practice of mathematical modeling that draws on student
experiences and relevant cultural and community contexts; and (c) develop a set
of valid and reliable measures to evaluate teacher and student learning outcomes
related to mathematical modeling. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research
program, which supports fundamental research that advances the research
literature on STEM learning, and has implications for education in both formal
and informal settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted as a
mixed methods, multi-tiered design experiment. Across the three project years,
researchers will iteratively develop and refine a professional development model
with cohorts of teachers in Arizona and Washington who work in high poverty
schools with culturally and linguistically diverse populations. The researchers
will measure the potential for impact of the model on mathematics instruction
and student learning. The proposed work to design mathematical modeling tasks is
based on tenets of progressive formalization Realistic Mathematics Education
(RME), which suggest that contexts matter for supporting student learning of
mathematical modeling. The model integrates research on teaching and learning of
mathematical modeling, and research on the role of culturally and community
based funds of knowledge in teaching and learning mathematics. As students work
on modeling tasks, they will produce artifacts that include evidence of
reasoning and thinking. They will also be assessed by means of a Common Core
aligned State-level Standardized Mathematics Assessment measure. Teachers will
adapt mathematical modeling tasks, design lessons around those tasks, and
iteratively refine a set of reusable tools for assessing students modeling
activity. To measure impact on student learning, the researchers will use a two-
group design to compare student learning in classrooms of training condition
teachers with student learning in comparable, non-training condition classrooms.
Since few teachers currently use mathematical modeling instruction in grades
3-5, a teacher comparison group to measure impact on teacher learning will not
be employed. Rather, the researchers will use participating teachers as their
own controls to examine changes over time in their understanding and practice.