* 1561866
* Power Harvesting with Magnetic Shape Memory Alloys: Understanding the Mechanisms and Predicting Voltage Output
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Constantin Ciocanel, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports fundamental research into the mechanisms facilitating power
harvesting with magnetic shape memory alloys and the development of tools to
accurately predict output power during various load conditions. Power can be
generated from environmental sources like wind, waves, or structural vibrations
using various technologies. Recently, it has been shown that useful electrical
power can be harvested from the environment using a relatively new type of
material - magnetic shape memory alloys. While this capability of the material
has been demonstrated experimentally, the mechanisms responsible for it are not
well understood. Consequently, current mathematical models of this material fail
to predict power output accurately, hampering the development and optimization
of magnetic shape memory alloy based power harvesters. Successful completion of
this work will significantly deepen understanding of this new material and could
lead to new technologies to power, or power assist, sensors deployable in remote
locations (e.g. to monitor forest conditions) or in infrastructure (e.g. to
monitor operational safety).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this
project are to understand the underlying microstructural mechanisms occurring in
magnetic shape memory alloys during power harvesting and to mathematically embed
these mechanisms into a material constitutive model that accurately predicts
change in magnetization, power output, and strain. In order to understand the
mechanisms that lead to power harvesting with these materials, microscopic
observations will be performed simultaneously with macroscopic magneto-
mechanical characterization; this will allow for the two scales to be
correlated. Observations about changes in the microstructure, during various
loadings, will be incorporated into a thermodynamics based constitutive model of
the material. The model will be validated against macroscopic magnetization,
magnetic field, strain, stress, and power data obtained experimentally, under a
wide variety of magneto-mechanical loading conditions. Understanding of the
underlying mechanisms causing power harvesting, including the magneto-mechanical
interdependencies, and embedding these mechanisms into a constitutive model will
be a major advance in the field and will yield knowledge that can be employed to
develop new technologies with this material and may be extended to understand
and model other adaptive or magnetically active materials.