* 1561419
* Persistent Photoconductivity in Strontium Titanate and Related Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Matthew McCluskey, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 398,570.00

Nontechnical description: The project investigates a unique property of
persistent photoconductivity, recently observed at room temperature. Samples
with this property experience a dramatic increase in electrical conductivity
when exposed to light, which persists long after the light is turned off.
Normally, this effect is observed at low temperatures, requiring coolants such
as liquid nitrogen. Strontium titanate, a transparent crystal, exhibits large
persistent photoconductivity at room temperature, opening up new possibilities
for practical devices. The research team is attempting to identify and
characterize the defect responsible for this novel behavior. The aim is to use
this effect in an optical pen to define reconfigurable electronic circuits. The
students involved in this research, perform cutting-edge research, present
results, and meet with industry representatives to discuss potential
applications. Educational outreach activities include visits to reservations in
rural areas to enhance Washington's workforce diversity in science and
technology.

Technical description: The project builds on the discovery of persistent
photoconductivity in annealed strontium titanate single crystals. This
phenomenon is unique because the enhanced conductivity is large, very
persistent, and occurs at room temperature. It is tentatively attributed to the
excitation of an electron from a defect level to the conduction band, with an
extremely low recapture rate though, the exact origin and behavior of this
defect is currently unrevealed. The primary goals of this research project are:
(i) to elucidate the defect physics behind persistent photoconductivity, and
(ii) to use the persistent photoconductivity to optically define reconfigurable
circuits. A variety of experimental methods, including Hall effect, infrared
spectroscopy, and photoluminescence, are used to study the persistent
photoconductivity and the defects responsible for it. Lithographic and confocal-
microscopy techniques are utilized to write circuits on the crystal surface and
in the interior, respectively. This approach could provide a basis for 3D
electronic architectures, with current paths and active devices throughout the
bulk of an oxide crystal.