* 1561810
* Collaborative Research: New Nonlinear Modal Analysis Framework for Multi-Scale Modeling of Structures with Bolted Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Allen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 348,000.00

Engineers in many industries use the finite element method to divide structures
into small elements so that the equations governing each can be found and solved
by computers. This allows one to compute the stresses and deformation of
structures with complicated shapes such as airplanes, machines, biomedical
implants, etc. and to predict whether the structure can survive the loads it
will experience in operation. While this method has proven very effective in
many scenarios, even modern computers are not powerful enough to model the
interfaces between parts accurately. As a result, billions of dollars are spent
annually testing structures to determine the stiffness of interfaces, such as
bolted connections, in order to adjust the simulation models so that they better
capture the real behavior of the structure. This makes new machines much more
expensive and often leads to designs that break prematurely, potentially
endangering lives. Prediction is particularly difficult when a structure, such
as an aircraft, experiences dynamic loads due to turbulence in the air passing
over the wings. This work will explore a new means of simulating the motion of
structures with bolted interfaces and will perform experiments to seek to
understand how to model friction and microscopic slip in the joints and its
effect on vibration damping. The methodology can be easily integrated in
existing finite element software, to facilitate its transition and broad
adoption. The research will be complemented by outreach activities at the PIs
institutions and a short course exposing students and researchers to the
technique formulated as part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics
that are responsible for energy dissipation in mechanical joints are complicated
and span the full range of length scales. While much has been learned in recent
years about the nature of nano- and meso-scale contact interfaces, friction is
exceedingly complicated and may be influenced by local elasticity, chemistry,
plasticity, surface roughness and lubrication provided by oxides or thin layers
of wear particles. This work posits a new reduced order modeling framework that
allows one to connect the physics of small scale contacts to the global motion
of the assembly. An extension to modal analysis that can then be used to obtain
a wealth of insight into the response of the structure under a variety of
loading conditions. The methodology will be validated through simulations on
various structures and through experiments on assemblies with bolted interfaces,
providing new insights into the role of interfaces on a structure's response.
Simulations will be performed to understand how the features/parameters of
various friction laws manifest themselves in the damping and nonlinearity of the
global dynamic response.