* 1561789
* Collaborative Research: Wrinkling and Folding of Thin Films on Viscoelastic Substrates by Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2021
* USD 211,195.00

This award supports fundamental research to develop controllable surface
wrinkles and folds on a variety of polymeric materials. Surface properties of a
material are important for many applications. The capability to design and
control surface texture would open opportunities to realize material surface
properties that are otherwise unavailable, such as smart surfaces with tunable
adhesion and self-cleaning properties. One viable approach to controllable
surface texture is to create surface wrinkles, which can be accomplished easily
by mechanically compressing a thin film coating attached to a relatively
compliant substrate material. Current understanding in this field is well-
developed for situations when both the thin film and the substrate material are
elastic. However, many practical applications involve polymeric materials that
are not elastic, but either viscous or viscoelastic, with time-dependent
mechanical properties. Furthermore, complex surface textures with localized
folds may be achieved on polymer surfaces by increasing compression. This
research will enable potential applications using wrinkle-textured surfaces for
controlling wettability, friction and adhesion, as well as stimulus responsive
smart surfaces in energy, healthcare, aerospace, and automotive industries.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and society.
This research involves a collaboration between two institutions and across
disciplines including mechanics, material science, and chemical engineering. The
interdisciplinary collaboration will help broaden participation in research from
diverse background and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research on wrinkling has focused
predominantly on thin films attached to soft elastic substrates. On viscoelastic
substrates, however, wrinkling is kinetically-limited, and the wrinkle patterns
intrinsically depend on the rate of compression. The primary hypothesis of this
research is that the entire spectrum of the wrinkling behavior between the
elastic and viscous limits can be exploited by using well-selected model
polymeric materials. The research team will perform both computational and
experimental studies. A simple and elegant method will be developed to impose
well-controlled large compressive deformation on polymer-supported thin films,
which allows the effects of strain and strain rate to be examined independently.
Numerical simulations based on finite element method will be conducted in
conjunction with experiments to understand the underlying mechanisms and to
predict formation of wrinkles and folding structures. Beyond the immediate focus
on viscoelastic substrates, this project will broadly elucidate the role of
dissipative effects in a wide range of wrinkling and folding phenomena observed
in nature.