* 1561341
* Collaborative Research: Career Lifecycles of Enterprising Workers in R&amp;D Intensive Industries
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Rajshree Agarwal-Tronetti, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 266,215.00

Enterprising individuals build their careers, continuously making choices
between staying at the start-ups they create, leaving to engage in serial
entrepreneurship, or exiting into paid employment, either alone, as part of a
small independent team, or as part of full company acquired by an established
firm. These choices are shaped by experiences and constraints and, in turn,
affect subsequent career choices and economic outcomes. Greater attention to
human capital dynamics by tracing career histories of innovative personnel
within and across firm boundaries may provide richer insights into economic
dynamism. An examination of factors that impact enterprising workers' career
choices can inform science and innovation policy to promote knowledge creation
and diffusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Census Bureau Longitudinal Employer-
Household Dynamics (LEHD) Project provides near universal coverage that allows
the construction of the career histories of enterprising individuals in R&amp;D
intensive industries across the 18 year time period from 1991-2008. The research
focuses on the fates of these individuals after entrepreneurial activity by
examining the paths that individuals take after exiting new ventures of
different types and by examining the transferability of different
entrepreneurial experiences outside of the entrepreneurial context. Family
composition constrains geographical mobility which in turn shapes how
enterprising individuals build their careers through mobility and
entrepreneurship. Together the research explore important individual antecedents
to, and consequences of, entrepreneurial activity.