* 1561536
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Development and Evaluation of Next Generation Homomorphic Encryption Schemes
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Berk Sunar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2019
* USD 275,397.00

Fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) is a promising new technology that enables an
untrusted party to efficiently compute directly on ciphertexts. For instance,
with FHE a cloud server without access to the user's encrypted content can still
provide text search services. An efficient FHE scheme would significantly
improve the security of sensitive user data stored and processed on cloud
servers. Significant progress has been made in bringing FHE proposals closer to
practice. The PIs conduct a multi-pronged investigation of next generation
homomorphic encryption schemes that do not require heavy computation or
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation is structured in two research
modules. The first module focuses on the theoretical foundation of FF-Encrypt -
a new scheme by the PIs - including a thorough security analysis, selection of
parameters for secure and efficient construction, and investigation of noise
mitigation techniques. The second module compares the new scheme to existing
ones with similar properties to establish its security and efficiency. Further
techniques are studied to improve the scalability of the scheme. The performance
of the developed theoretical homomorphic encryption schemes is scrutinized under
the lens of optimized software and hardware
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation develops strategies for
creating and optimizing next generation FHE schemes. In particular, the proposed
new FF-Encrypt scheme has the potential to reduce parameter sizes while also
eliminating evaluation keys, pushing FHE a step closer to the realm of real-
world applications. The challenges in this project include the analysis of a new
homomorphic scheme based on a new assumed computationally hard problem.