* 1561623
* Does Active Learning Build Grit?
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* John Chen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 05/31/2021
* USD 499,275.00

Concerns about maintaining a strong, vibrant US economy and improving global
competitiveness have led to efforts to increase the number and diversity of
graduates in STEM majors. Attrition among engineering students is high in the
first two years of college studies, and even higher among women and
underrepresented minority students. There have been research investments made by
multiple stakeholders that have invested in various strategies to improve the
situation with many efforts focused on knowledge-acquisition aspects of student
performance. In contrast there are research efforts to explore strategies that
are more focused on motivation and self-regulatory aspects of student
performance. There has been an increasing effort to investigate a construct that
measures these aspects called grit. Grit, which is defined as unwavering
interest in and perseverance for a long-term goal, is likely to be important to
individuals trying to achieve the challenging, long-term goal of attaining an
engineering degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study is an active
learning model that evaluates the impacts on grit character trait and its
relations to student retention in engineering. It will be conducted with an
ethnically and economically diverse sample of undergraduate engineering
students. The team is using an experimental design approach in which response to
the control groups is utilized to evaluate grit characteristics of growth
mindset and build optimism. The research questions seek to investigate if active
learning builds the character trait of grit among engineering students while
they learn in a sequence of engineering mechanics courses and whether increased
grit leads to other success outcomes such as retention in the major and progress
toward degree. The intellectual merit includes the treatment approach to explore
active learning impacts on student grit upon student retention and course
sequencing. The broader impacts of research is that an active learning design
model that can provide insights to the impact on student retention and
completion of coursework and degree completion. Also there will be special focus
on investigating women and underrepresented minorities who leave STEM majors at
disproportionately higher rates in the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSFs EHR Core Research
Program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field.