* 1561082
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Bedload Sediment Flux in Large Rivers
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Sagy Cohen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 11/30/2018
* USD 153,384.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will provide new knowledge regarding global-scale predictions and analysis of
sediment fluxes in large rivers, with special attention given to sediment
transported in riverbeds. The investigator will develop a globally distributed,
bedload-flux computer model to analyze the spatial interactions between bedload
and environmental dynamics as well as the ratio between bedload and sediment
transported in suspension. The project will provide new insights into the
drivers and mechanisms of fluvial geomorphology, thereby transforming
fundamental analytical capabilities with regard to these key geomorphological
processes. The project will incorporate a multifaceted educational plan that
promotes research, teaching, and participation of students in geography and the
geosciences through a combination of research, mentoring, and outreach
activities involving graduate, undergraduate, and middle school students as well
as the general public. Project results will enhance public awareness of water
resources and education through a long-term interpretive exhibit at the Alabama
Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bedload sediment transport is a
significant driver of the physical, biological, and chemical dynamics in river
systems, and it affects water quality and availability in river systems, river
shape and ecological functioning, and coastal dynamics. The investigator will
develop a new bedload flux module within an existing global-scale hydrological
modeling framework. The analyses will focus on the universal applicability of
the physically based bedload module for large-scale simulations and on the
spatial trends of the ratio between suspended and bedload fluxes along river
systems as well as its relationship to river basin characteristics. To
facilitate these analyses and to validate the model, a globally distributed
observational database will be collected from existing U.S. Geological Survey
databases, scholarly literature, online resources, and the investigator's
collaborative network. Outcomes from this research will provide one of the first
spatially and temporally explicit first-order estimates of global bedload flux
and a numerical framework for studying the parameters, drivers, and mechanisms
of bedload flux in large global rivers. The quantification of sediment transport
in rivers will be catalytic for examining carbon and nutrient cycles, river,
coastal and marine ecology, dam sustainability, and water and food security.