* 1561176
* Trace element analysis of ochre for modern and prehistoric pigment source use patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Andrew Zipkin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2017
* USD 45,241.00

Dependence on symbolism to communicate information and mark identities is an
essential attribute of modern humans. The use of red and yellow ochre pigments
for symbolic purposes is among the most widespread and persistent of human
cultural behaviors. However, the study of archaeological ochre has been hindered
by ambiguity over how to interpret this iron-based pigment in the absence of
obvious symbolic applications such as cave or rock art. This project combines
archaeological, geological, and ethnographic methods to investigate prehistoric
through modern use of ochre pigments. The investigators have already conducted
interviews with the Maasai and Samburu peoples of Kenya, many of whom still use
ochre in their daily lives, and identified outcrops of ochre minerals that these
groups exploit for symbolic and functional purposes. Geochemical techniques
proven to be effective at telling apart ochre from different sources will be
used to analyze samples collected from ochre deposits, and to match them to
paint samples from rock art sites and ochre artifacts from archaeological sites
in the region. This project will refine minimally destructive methods that can
be used to analyze the composition of ochre and other iron-containing materials
for anthropological, geological, materials science, and forensic applications.
Improving techniques for determining the geographic and geologic origin of ochre
pigments and related materials has significant implications for identifying
looted heritage items and forgeries. The project will also provide opportunities
for public science education via museum outreach, international collaborations,
and mentoring in the STEM sciences for underrepresented minority students.

Recent discoveries of ochre pigments from Stone Age archaeological sites have
shed light on the great temporal depth of human symbolic behavior. Our
understanding of the evolutionary significance and potentially the meaning of
ancient symbolism using pigments has been enhanced by novel geochemical
techniques for provenance studies of ochre, particularly minimally destructive
trace element fingerprinting by Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass Spectrometry.
The project builds on improvements in this method over the last decade by
creating a database of trace element and stable isotope (strontium, lead, and
iron) fingerprints for ochre sources currently or recently used by inhabitants
of the Kenya Rift Valley. The Maasai and Samburu are among the few remaining
peoples in East Africa with active rock art and ochre self-adornment traditions.
They present the best opportunity for studying how modern humans interact with
their geologic environment for symbolic purposes. Once completed, the source
database will be used to determine the geologic provenance of ochre artifacts
and rock art paints of Stone Age through recent origin that were sampled during
field and museum research. This will allow for investigation of hypotheses about
symbolically mediated versus least-cost (nearest source) models of mineral
deposit exploitation, transport and trade of ochre pigments, and preferential
use of specific pigment colors. In addition, the source fingerprint database
will be made freely available online for other scientists to use in their own
research upon completion of the project.