* 1561300
* Partnership for Building Capacity for Improvement in State Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Philip Bell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,499,998.00

The ECR (Education and Human Resources Core Research) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. As such, the incoherence of state and local science systems is well-
documented in the research literature, as are the ways that incoherence makes
system-level improvements difficult to attain. This project will investigate the
steps state level science educators and policymakers might take to help build
coherent systems of science education around a common vision where curriculum,
instruction, and assessment align. It will address the problem of incoherence by
testing strategies to better understand the conditions under which state systems
of science education afford all students with opportunities to meet the
challenging new vision for science education presented in A Framework for K-12
Science Education (NRC, 2012). A network of state teams and researchers will
work together to bring a unique blend of expertise to collaborative co-design
processes and to conducting rigorous implementation research using formative
assessment as the vehicle for promoting advancement in educational leadership
practice. The project will examine two main forms of coherence important in
systems relevant to state leaders' roles in their respective systems: (1)
vertical coherence, which looks at the degree to which there is a shared
understanding of the goals for science learning and consensus about the purposes
and uses of assessment: and (2) horizontal coherence, which focuses on the
alignment of curriculum, instruction, and assessment policies and practices with
the new vision for science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
employ design-based implementation research (DBIR) using a mixed methods
approach to build foundational knowledge and theory about how a network of
states can support implementation of ambitious new standards and promote
coherence across systems of science education. The project will collect data
through surveys, focus groups, key informant interviews, and case studies from
multiple levels of the states' education systems including state level officials
and classroom teachers. Researchers and state teams will serve as co-researchers
through participatory research that builds local capacity for conducting
systematic inquiry into educators' needs and an information network to enable
cross-state comparisons of perceived challenges to coherence. Outcomes from the
project will include foundational knowledge about methods, tools, and strategies
for building knowledge and theory in science education. In turn, these outcomes
will benefit society by supporting the development of a shared vision for K-12
science education among participating states, experts, researchers, and the
broader science education stakeholder community. In addition, the project will
benefit the students in the states by increasing their knowledge of science and
engineering in ways that will allow them to engage in public discussions and it
will benefit the design of solutions to expand diversity in STEM fields.