* 1561512
* Enabling Cloud-Based Quality-Data Management Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Xiaojin Zhu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,498.00

Cloud-based platforms for accessing, sharing, and visualizing manufacturing-
enterprise-level data are becoming available. In a cloud-based quality-data-
management system, the quality-characteristics of different devices, products,
and facilities are accumulated in a centralized database. These data pertain to
multiple machines and multiple facilities, offering opportunities to achieve
more effective quality control and productivity improvements. However, most
cloud-based platforms are as yet unable to exploit the information contained in
such data to make better decisions for production-system control and quality
improvement. The objective of this project is to advance a series of
methodologies that enable modeling of a large number of quality characteristics,
timely change detection, accurate root cause diagnosis, and optimal repair
decision-making. The project will also contribute to workforce training by
offering students opportunities to engage in interdisciplinary research dealing
with manufacturing, computing, sensing, and machine learning.

The reason why cloud-based platforms may not as yet exploit manufacturing-
enterprise-level data lies in the dearth of techniques to (1) describe the
quality characteristics and their relationships, and (2) make decisions informed
by such descriptive models. To enable cloud-based quality-data-management
systems of the future, the investigators will first advance methodology needed
for a flexible, yet rigorous, hierarchical graphical model, which will describe
the inter-relationships among different quality characteristics. The
hierarchical structure of the model will enable information sharing across
different facilities within an enterprise. Based on this descriptive model, the
investigators will next develop methodologies for process monitoring and
diagnosis via likelihood based risk-adjustment and Bayesian-factor theory, and
for optimal repair decisions via Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDP) framework. The developed methodologies will be tested on data obtained
from an industrial collaborator.