* 1561278
* Characterizing and improving children's block-building skills: Interdisciplinary studies using approaches from cognitive science and computer science
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Barbara Landau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,449,434.00

The ability to understand and reason about the spatial relationships among
objects supports children's academic readiness and achievements in math and
reading yet, we know little about when they emerge or how to improve them during
early development. One of the earliest and most accessible windows into spatial
skills is children's block play--building structures with physical blocks.
Building with blocks is surprisingly complex, which makes it difficult to
characterize in detail how children build structures, why they sometimes
struggle, and what can be done to improve their skills. Drawing on traditional
observational methods and advancements in computer science, this project creates
detailed, robust, and automatic techniques for characterizing children's
building behaviors and articulating the different building paths taken by
"novice" and "expert" child builders. Its multidisciplinary approach advances
the frontiers of understanding about how people learn, and how they might use
their STEM knowledge more effectively. The tools produced by the project will
offer new ways to measure spatial skills in formal and informal learning
settings, and has the potential to change the way we think about early block-
building as a marker for learning. In this way the project reflects NSF's
investments in promising developments that build a coherent, cumulative
knowledge base, focusing on high-leverage topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial
skills represent a fundamental aspect of human knowledge, supporting a wide
range of cognitive functions including our ability to create and understand 2-
and 3-D spatial representations of information. This project focuses on one of
the earliest developing yet highly complex spatial skills--block building--which
has garnered attention in both cognitive and educational arenas due to its
accessibility and adaptability for young children in formal and informal
learning contexts. Consistent with the Education and Human Resources Core
Research program's mission of supporting fundamental research on learning in
STEM that combines theory, techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of
disciplines and contexts, the spatial skills coding system developed in this
project combines video and motion tracking of children's block building. This
will allow researchers to gather and characterize data from much larger numbers
of children than ever before, to relate these data on block-building to other
academically-relevant skills, and to use the characterization of child "expert"
performance as instructional input to "novice" builders. Its use of traditional
cognitive methods along with machine learning techniques to characterize the
process of children's block building and how it develops will generate scalable
tools that can be used by scientists and educators to characterize, analyze, and
promote development of spatial skills in our youngest learners.