* 1561640
* CSBR: Ownership Transfer: Securing the future and accessibility of the Carl W. and Marian E. Rettenmeyer army ant guest collection
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 499,850.00

Army ants live in highly complex societies, accompanied by legions of tiny,
intimate associates (primarily mites and insects). The study of these
host/symbiont systems is precluded by a lack of access to basic information and
knowledge about their biology, including physical collections. Resulting from 50
years of fieldwork, the Rettenmeyer Army Ant Guest Collection (AAGC) at the
University of Connecticut (UConn) is an unparalleled resource for studying
complex systems of social insects. The AAGC comprises more than two million
specimens of New World army ants and their associated guests: Hundreds of
species of mites, beetles, flies, wasps, springtails, and bristletails.
Extensive field notes and numerous photographs complement the biological
specimens, detailing intricacies of species interactions. This project will
stabilize this collection, addressing critical issues. This project aims to
address basic physical storage issues and to make all data publicly available
via an on-line database so as to maximize its potential as a source of
information on social behavior in insects. A two-part exhibit will engage the
campus community. One part will highlight the Rettenmeyers' collecting
activities. Across campus, the second part will include a large ant model
complete with an array of mites attached all to scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the recent donation of the
Rettenmeyer Army Ant Guest Collection (AAGC) to the UConn Department of Ecology
&amp; Evolutionary Biology Biodiversity Research Collection Facility. The AAGC
comprises more than 2 million specimens of New World army ants and their
associated arthropods. It includes ca. 1,000 types representing 200 species, ca.
16,000 pinned specimens, ca. 5,000 microscope slides, more than 15,000 vials and
jars, complemented by detailed field data and 5,000 Kodachrome transparencies.
The collection is in dire need of stabilization - fluid levels are low, stoppers
are deteriorating, specimens are overcrowded and disorganized. The project's two
primary goals are specimen curation (e.g., replacing fluid, re-vialing,
labeling, attaching barcodes, and reorganization) and establishing an on-line
presence by modifying an existing MySQL database to accommodate the AAGC in four
related Tables. Type specimens and colony exemplars will be image and linked to
database records. Data will be shared with iDigBio (www.idigbio.org) and the
Global Biodiversity Information Facility. High school students will work with
graduate students to hone their writing and observation skills as they interpret
slide labels to populate the database. Project results can be accessed online
(biodiversity.uconn.edu/ant-guests/).