* 1561084
* Collaborative Research: Lagrangian Simulations of the Madden Julian Oscillation over Warming Oceans
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Sharon Sessions, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2020
* USD 118,630.00

The Madden Julian Oscillation (MJO) is a large weather system that forms over
the Indian Ocean and moves slowly eastward until it dissipates near the middle
of the tropical Pacific Ocean. When it passes a given location, it typically
causes a rainy period that lasts 15-30 days that is followed by dry weather, as
well as an extended period of strong westerly winds. The circulations that
accompany the MJO go all the way around the world in the tropical atmosphere,
and they affect when monsoon rainfall begins in Asia, Australia, and North
America, as well as when and where tropical storms and hurricanes form. Despite
its importance to global weather and climate, the MJO has been poorly simulated
in climate models for decades, so current predictions of how it will change in
the future are unreliable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists involved in this
project have developed a new kind of weather model that better predicts the
behavior of the MJO. It is referred to as "Lagrangian," because instead of
solving equations for atmospheric motions on a grid of points, it tracks air
masses as they move around the world. The Lagrangian weather model will be used
to study how the MJO will change in the future as the oceans warm, and to better
understand how the MJO works, so its representation can be improved in other
models as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty about future changes to the MJO
represent an important X-factor for climate change. Preliminary results suggest
that the MJO will intensify, become more frequent, and affect a broader region
of the tropics as the oceans warm. Potential impacts include changes to tropical
rainfall patterns, altered distributions of tropical storms and hurricanes, and
changes in wind patterns that favor more frequent and persistent El Nino-like
ocean warming. This project will also educate two graduate students and several
undergraduate students about techniques in modeling atmospheric circulations and
about climate dynamics.