* 1561436
* Algebra Instruction at Community Colleges: An Exploration of its Relationship with Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* April Strom, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 04/30/2020
* USD 2,370,836.00

Community colleges serve a large portion of students who require mathematics at
the undergraduate level and play an increasing role in STEM workforce
development. There is a growing national interest in the role of community
colleges for undergraduate education. The proposal seeks to investigate the
conditions under which instruction in community college algebra courses can be
associated with student learning gains and course performance. This information
can be used to design programs to improve instruction and to support student
success in algebra. The study involves six community colleges from three states
and focuses on three key algebra topics: linear equations, rational equations,
and exponential equations. The results will also have applications for
mathematics courses at other institutions of higher education. This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will connect both levels of the
classroom (students and instructors) in a model that examines personal
characteristics of both groups (e.g., gender, ethnicity, educational background,
student mathematics knowledge, and beliefs about mathematics) and aspects of
classroom interaction (e.g., quality of mathematics, quality of instruction).
The institutions represent urban, suburban, and rural communities, a range of
institution sizes, and three different regions of the United States. A model is
proposed for examining these related variables to examine what relationships
exist. Quantitative and qualitative data will be collected in a mixed methods
design in multiple project phases. The first phase will include pilot testing
some of the instruments for the project and testing the models. Later phases
include data collection and analysis across the institutions. Data collection
includes student-level and instructor-level measures. For students, the project
will examine measures of mathematics performance, mathematics beliefs, and
perceptions of the classroom environment. For instructors, the project will
examine knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes. Demographic information will be
collected for all participants. In addition to the quantitative measures,
classroom observations and video analysis will be used to document the nature of
instruction.