* 1561072
* Impacts of Education-Driven Urban Migration on Youth Aspirations and Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Sara Smith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 04/30/2022
* USD 250,001.00

Around the world, young individuals, especially those who are rural, first
generation, indigenous, and racialized minorities, seek educational
opportunities in cities to improve their lives. This temporary migration and
resulting encounters with different people and ways of life in the city has
countless unintended consequences particularly for those from marginalized
groups. As they leave their homes for major urban centers, they may experience
increased exclusion but also may find new freedoms and a sense of cosmopolitan,
national, and even transnational identity. As these youth complete their
education or drop out, return to their homes or seek employment elsewhere, their
migration experiences will alter relations between these members of marginalized
groups and the nation-state. Geographers are well placed to investigate how
young people from minority communities in remote regions experience urban
migration and higher education; how they adapt to cultural difference and how
this experience in turn affects their lives, their home communities and their
understanding of belonging to the nation. This project will provide insight into
crucial questions about how migration and higher education in the city informs
the social aspirations and political identities of minority
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a multi-sited study of higher education-
driven migration in South Asia, a region of critical geopolitical importance,
this research will develop theoretical frameworks and methodologies for
understanding a) the social and cultural impacts of migration for higher
education ? both for students and home communities; b) how daily life in an
urban university context shapes the individual, collective, and territorial
understandings of minority identity; and c) the central role that higher
education plays in youth politics. In addition to these conceptual
contributions, this project will d) develop a new methodological approach for
working with minority youth and building research capacity among this crucial
population. Dr. Sara Smith and her research team will use focus groups, in-depth
interviews, a household survey, and a participatory media project to meet these
objectives. The project will advance Dr. Smith's geopolitics framework, which
builds on advances in political geography to relate micro-scale experiences of
daily life to macro-scale political phenomenon such as territorial conflict and
nation-building. By bringing this framework to bear on migration, youth, and
higher education, this project is expected to provide a new way to understand
the relationship between minorities and the nation-state. The research will
contribute to global geographies of higher education and political geographies
of youth, encounter and cosmopolitanism.