* 1561496
* Identifying and Validating Interactive and Uncommon Characteristics of Retention and Success in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nong Ye, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 490,853.00

This project targets three significant gaps in the current state of knowledge
relevant to engineering retention and success: 1) lack of knowledge on
engineering retention and success characteristics based on interactive,
concurrent effects of multiple factors, 2) lack of knowledge about engineering
retention and success characteristics based on the modeling of variable
relations that exist for some but not all values of variables or are different
for different value ranges of variables, and 3) lack of knowledge about uncommon
engineering retention and success characteristics of outlier students who do not
fall into common characteristics of engineering retention and success. The
project will employ the new Partial-Value Association Discovery (PVAD) algorithm
to identify common and uncommon characteristics of engineering retention and
success. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The
ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New findings from this
project will enrich the understanding and knowledge of engineering retention and
success, in comparison with existing findings based on effects of individual
variables and all-value variable relations. The intervention with an engineering
counseling and tracking program to help students development of the newly
identified engineering retention and success characteristics will be developed
and implemented. The intervention effects on students will be observed and
analyzed to validate the new findings of engineering retention and success
characteristics. The identification and validation of new engineering retention
and success characteristics will provide guidelines to help more students
achieve engineering retention and success across the nation, thus broadening the
participation of more students in engineering fields.