* 1561382
* African American Students'  Sociocultural Experiences, Motivation, Identity and Performance in Math
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Ming-Te Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,624,705.00

Research has shown that, on average, African American students perform less well
on STEM standardized tests, opt out of advanced coursework despite requisite
ability, and choose to major in non-STEM fields in college despite relevant
preparation. This project will use a combination of a primary quantitative
analysis and a supplemental qualitative analysis to examine the interrelations
between African American middle school students' experiences of stigma in math,
developing gender and racial identities, racial socialization experiences with
adults at home and in school, and motivational constructs of competence beliefs
and values in math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To inform efforts
to broaden STEM participation among African American students, there is a need
for more research using within-group designs and attending to race and gender
simultaneously. The quantitative analysis will investigate this complex system
of interrelations and the development over time of these dynamics, while a
supplemental qualitative analysis will explore both the precise effect
mechanisms at hand and qualitatively distinct intersectional effects across
these pathways. The overall project represents longitudinal, multi-informant
research, using in-depth interviews to supplement survey data analyses of
reports from students, parents, and teachers. This project targets 6th through
8th grade, a critical developmental juncture for students in terms of formation
of identity and math motivation. The combination of these techniques will
ultimately reveal how race- and gender-related experiences interrelate to shape
African-American early adolescents' motivation and achievement in math.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The study will advance research on
African American adolescents' motivational processes and sociocultural and
contextual correlates of achievement in math contexts. Moreover, this study will
identify the ways in which middle school-based experiences can affect personal
and contextual factors in ways that are malleable to efforts aimed at promoting
high math achievement and persistence for African American adolescents. Finally,
the project's partnership with the local school district will increase the
possibility for reciprocal relationships in which the research team can continue
to learn from those school settings and help address challenges the schools
encounter with empirically-based responses.