* 1561401
* Evolving Minds in Early Elementary School: Foundations for a Learning Sequence on Natural Selection Using Stories
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Deborah Kelemen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,498,539.00

The ECR (Education and Human Resources Core Research) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. Research shows that world-wide, despite its importance to the life
sciences, natural selection remains one of the most widely misunderstood
processes in biology. Specifically, studies reveal that scientific
misconceptions about natural selection not only persist among high school
students and undergraduates who are usual targets of instruction on evolution by
natural selection, but, disturbingly, also among many of the teachers trained to
teach them. Research further reveals that the origin of many of these
misconceptions can be traced to intuitive cognitive biases found at the
elementary school level. This project will address this problem by building and
testing a learning sequence on natural selection at the early elementary grades
before intuitive theoretical misconceptions are likely to have become
entrenched. This effort will expand existing infrastructure for research and
education currently supported through a university, to school partnership
involving elementary educators, curriculum developers, professional development
providers, interdisciplinary academic researchers and cognitive development
expert consultants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on understanding
whether the proposed natural selection learning sequence is even viable and
beneficial for elementary school students and teachers given children's
representational constraints, the development and entrenchment of intuitive
cognitive biases and teacher science anxiety. The two central aims will be to:
(1) develop the core architecture and explore the feasibility of an expanded
elementary school learning sequence on natural selection; (2) examine the
educative professional development benefits to elementary school teachers of the
developed story-based intervention materials. Six interventions will be
conducted through an iteratively designed series of laboratory, afterschool, or
classroom empirical studies to explore the viability of mechanistically teaching
K-2 children about within- and between-species adaptation by natural selection.
Due to the non-binary nature of data that will be generated by the studies, core
analyses will be repeated measures ordinal logistic regressions with chi-squared
tests for significance. Effect sizes will be indexed by odds ratio. Results from
this work will advance scientific knowledge and educational practice by yielding
insights about children?s capacities as explanatory thinkers and theory-
builders. Materials and products (storybooks, animations and assessment tools)
will directly benefit schools, teachers, children and parents in the State of
Massachusetts and nationally.