* 1561774
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Housing, Databasing, Digitizing and Accessibility Upgrades to the Largest Pacific Island Land Snail Collection (Bishop Museum)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Norine Yeung, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 495,633.00

Islands comprise only five percent of the Earth's landmass, yet nowhere in the
world, in relation to land area, does land snail diversity compare to that of
the Pacific Islands, where more than 6,000 species occur. However, habitat
destruction, environmental change and incursions by invasive species threaten
populations of native land snails. Snails have the highest recorded extinction
rate of any major animal group, and the majority of extinctions are from Pacific
Islands. The largest Pacific Island land snail collection in the world is at the
Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum (BPBM), which houses six million specimens. Natural
history collections are critical to maintain research knowledge and to making
decisions about biodiversity conservation. To secure this collection and improve
accessibility to critical data for researchers, natural resource managers,
students, and the public, this project will rehouse land snail specimens in
environmentally stable and protective containers, image all original specimens
from which species descriptions are based, and digitize all collection data so
as to make these data readily available. The project team will recruit and train
college and high school students to assist with this work and students will
receive training in topics ranging from systematics to curation and museum
conservation. Researchers and students will participate in outreach activities
to increase public awareness of invertebrates, including land snails, their
importance to natural ecosystems, and for monitoring environmental change, human
migration and trade; and in the value of natural history collections to
conserving and securing biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The security and
accessibility of the largest and most biogeographically diverse Pacific Island
land snail collection in the world will be ensured by completing the objectives
of the project. Specifically, to safeguard against Byne's and glass disease, all
cotton will be removed from the approximately 116,900 glass vials and replaced
with polyethylene caps or archival foam. Approximately 5,000 lots with shells
housed freely in no-lid boxes will be transferred to polystyrene friction boxes
to secure them and prevent disassociation from labels. All labels are currently
handwritten and these will be replaced by thermal transfer, acid-free labels
with QR codes. Data from the ledger, labels, and other historical documents will
be digitized, digitally curated, and images of Pacific island land snail primary
types will be made available online and in type catalog publications. Specimen
data and images will be made available through portals including iDigBio
(idigbio.org), the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, and the BPBM
website (bishopmuseum.org/PILS).