* 1561175
* Interdisciplinary Earth Data Alliance: Continued Support for a Data Center that Allows Public Access and Discoverability of Solid Earth Geoscience Data from NSF-Funded Research
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Vicki Ferrini, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2017
* USD 2,313,202.00

Ensuring that the results and data related to taxpayer-funded research are
accessible and discoverable to both the scientific and lay public is an
essential function of the National Science Foundation. In an effort to provide
such services for data in the solid earth geosciences, several NSF programs
jointly funded the Integrated Earth Data Applications Data Management Center at
Columbia University. Since 2009, this data center has become an important
geoscience community resource and a leader in hosting, making accessible, and
making discoverable data from marine geophysics, igneous petrology and
volcanology, hydrothermal vents, the Antarctic, and a variety of other solid
earth geoscience disciplines. It is also an international leader in creating,
testing, and implementing tools, utilities, and interfaces to make its data more
easily accessible and discoverable; providing unique identifiers for physical
samples and datasets so those who produce data get credit for their work; making
accessible and linking its data to that in other data centers; working with
publishers to link repository data to publications; and helping investigators
applying for Federal funds create agency-compliant data management plans.
Continued support in 2016 allows the data center to continue these and
associated services. Broader impacts include free and open access to a wide
range of data holdings, enabling advances solid-earth and polar geoscience
research. The data center's utilities, services, and data are also used in a
wide variety of educational enterprises whose impacts range from high school to
graduate school and beyond. Through its proactive and community-focused
approach, the data center has also helped to create innovative solutions for
data interoperability, building essential new cyberinfrastructure that can be
adopted and transported to other data centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued
funding for the Integrated Earth Data Applications data center, now renamed the
Integrated Earth Data Alliance, enables free and open public access to data and
research results from a wide variety of geoscience disciplines. It consists of a
core of basic services and interfaces built around innovative data models and
search/visualization tools into which datasets or information can be
incorporated, integrated, and made publicly accessible. It supports data
stewardship through the full data life cycle with long-term archives residing in
the Federal sector. A key component of its operation is close attention to and
interaction with members of the scientific communities it serves thorough
workshops; a community advisory structure; and professional science meetings.
These interactions help identify new development targets and gaps and/or needed
improvement in data center products and performance. In addition to its
continued operation and the providing of cyberinfrastructure and data management
services to the solid earth geoscience community, efforts are in force to move
data holdings into the cloud to improve the user experience and decrease
download and refresh times.