* 1561966
* RUI: Continuous Processing for Improved Properties of Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Vincent Beachley, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 313,430.00

Electrospinning is a versatile and economical nanotechnology used to fabricate
polymer fibers with nanoscale diameters. Polymer nanofibers can be used to
produce lightweight composite materials, nanoelectronics, efficient energy
storage and conversion devices, highly responsive sensors, and biomedical
devices where their small dimension enhances performance. Nanomaterials are
theoretically expected to outperform conventional materials in categories such
as mechanical strength, conductivity, and sensing. However, in practice,
electrospun nanofibers are much weaker than larger conventional fibers even when
adjusting for the size effect. This award supports fundamental research into a
new manufacturing process that stretches pliable electrospun nanofibers during
manufacture in the same way as the drawing process that is used in conventional
fiber manufacturing and that is known to enhance the mechanical strength and
functional properties of larger-scale fibers. The key advantage of the new
method is that it can be implemented as an additional stage in the continuous
electrospinning process and is amenable to full scale production. This work will
support the advancement of innovative nanofiber materials for application in a
wide variety of technologies and industries. Execution of this project will
involve graduate and undergraduate researchers who will gain firsthand
experience in nanotechnology. Underrepresented K-12 students will be exposed to
the project through various outreach activities.

It has been hypothesized that the poor macromolecular alignment and mechanical
properties observed in electrospun nanofibers is due to chain relaxation in the
presence of residual solvent. Strategies to investigate and overcome this
challenge have been limited by an overall lack of control over fiber
organization and manipulation that preclude fundamental fiber processing
techniques such as post-stretching. This work will utilize parallel automated
tracks to simultaneously immobilize and stretch thousands of individual
nanofibers. Nanofibers can be wet-stretched in the semi-solid state immediately
upon collection before solvent has fully evaporated. A systematic investigation
of processing parameters such as total elongation, rate of elongation, and
solvent evaporation rate will be conducted for several different polymers,
proteins and carbon materials to determine their relationship to final nanofiber
molecular and functional properties. The influence of nanofiber diameter on the
mechanisms of wet-stretching will offer new insights into unique nanoscale
effects such as molecular confinement.