* 1561153
* Boron-Nitrogen-Doped Conjugated Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Shih-Yuan Liu, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 380,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professor Shih-Yuan Liu and his students in the Department of
Chemistry at Boston College synthesize boron-nitrogen(BN)-containing polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). These molecules exhibit BN/CC (carbon-carbon)
isosterism, that is, they replace two carbon atoms in an aromatic organic
molecule with one boron and one nitrogen atom. While both the carbon-carbon and
boron-nitrogen containing molecules have the same number of overall electrons,
their properties are very different. BN-substituted PAHs may be useful in a
number of applications including medicinal chemistry and devices that convert
light to electricity. The Liu group is developing new synthetic methods to make
BN-doped PAHs. Once prepared, the molecules are examined to see how they react
differently than the related carbon-containing molecules. The broader impacts of
this program include industrial internships for graduate students at local
companies, science outreach to local high schools, collaboration with
international researchers, hosting of an international conference, and continued
involvement of undergraduates in chemical research via programs which promote
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron-
Nitrogen/Carbon-Carbon (BN/CC) isosterism, i.e., the replacement of two carbon
atoms with a boron and a nitrogen atom, has emerged as a novel strategy to
expand the structural diversity of compounds relevant to materials science.
Despite the recent advances in BN heterocycle chemistry, the systematic
exploration of BN/CC isosteres of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons that have
relevance to the development of organic materials has remained underexplored.
This research seeks to develop a comprehensive structure/reactivity relationship
in BN isosteres of simple acenes. Research plans include: 1) synthesis of the
unreported parental BN isosteres of naphthalene and anthracene, 2)
characterization of the optoelectronic properties and chemical reactivity of the
synthesized materials, and 3) development of a predictive energetic model for
BN/CC isosterism of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Moreover, this research
serves as excellent training for graduate and undergraduate researchers in
fundamental and applied chemical synthesis. Student participants in this project
are exposed to a variety of experimental methods and techniques commonly applied
in synthetic organic, inorganic, physical organic, and organometallic chemistry.
The interdisciplinary and collaborative nature of the research in conjunction
with the outreach activities seamlessly integrates with the education and career
development of participating students.