* 1561237
* Collaborative Research: The Role Of Fortifications In Long Term Political Process
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Maureen Marshall, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 221,173.00

Dr. Ian Lindsay (Purdue University) and collaborators Dr. Alan Greene (Stanford
University), Dr. Maureen Marshall (University of Illinois-Urbana Champaign), Dr.
Lori Khatchadourian (Cornell University) and Dr. Adam T. Smith (Cornell
University), along with collaborators in Armenia, will investigate the
relationship between warfare, settlement patterns, and political development in
the ancient past. Traditional social science scholarship on pre-modern warfare
has typically framed conflict as a rational pursuit of material needs, or as a
strategic contest among aspiring elites seeking political advantage in the
evolution toward political complexity. However, archaeology is well-positioned
to offer a more nuanced perspective of ancient warfare that focuses on the
broader fields of social action and historical contexts that shape the
motivations, goals, and cultural practices of war. This research will contribute
essential time depth to the study of contemporary regional conflicts, their
impacts on the politics and identities of social groups, and the ties to place
and polity. As persistent ethnic and civil clashes continue to impact
contemporary life, understanding the impact of war in the past can help frame
the causes and implications of modern conflicts while shaping responses to them.
This research will contribute to actionable scholarly efforts to understand the
long-term impacts on human political, economic, and settlement practices and
subjectivities that emerge within fortified and militarized landscapes.

The ubiquity of stone hillforts in the South Caucasus and the prevalence of
metal weapons indicate that violence played an essential role in regional
sociopolitical development. Dr. Lindsay and his co-investigators will study the
institutional mechanisms through which warfare constituted authority, created
and dissolved political association, and shaped a specific form of political
economy during the Late Bronze Age and Iron Age periods (ca. 1500-200 BC). The
researchers will examine the role of violence and warfare in community
formation, social order, and sociopolitical boundaries through a diachronic
study of fortified landscapes in the upper Kasakh River valley of northwestern
Armenia. In particular, they will address questions regarding how the history of
fortress construction and abandonment inform models of political association,
what types of violent practices in these areas are evidenced in burial goods and
inscribed on human skeletal remains, and how patterns of politics and warfare in
the Caucasus correlate with regional environmental shifts and historical change
in the neighboring Near East and Eurasian Steppe. The research team will employ
a battery of traditional and cutting-edge archaeological approaches to address
these issues, including pedestrian and magnetometry survey; the use of drones
for aerial photogrammetry of fortresses and associated settlements; test
excavation of burials and forts; pollen analysis of a bog core to reconstruct
paleoenvironmental contexts; analysis of human remains to study demography,
trauma, diet, mobility, and social identity; and portable X-ray fluorescence
(pXRF) and digital radiography on pottery materials to illuminate preliminary
patterns of goods circulation. Combined, these techniques will provide the
groundwork for a robust evaluation of the long-term engagement of warfare and
sociopolitical life in the South Caucasus. In addition, this research will
facilitate the training of a new generation of archaeologists in a range of
advanced research methods, which will help improve the research infrastructure
of scholarship in a region that remains economically disadvantaged.