* 1561342
* CSBR:Natural History: Upgrade and transfer of the Museum of Southwestern Biologys Division of Genomic Resources frozen tissue collection to Nitrogen vapor storage.
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 499,976.00

CSBR: Natural History: Installation of an Archival Storage System to Ensure
Specimen Security at the Museum of Southwestern Biology.

An award is made to New Mexico State University's Museum of Southwestern Biology
to ensure the long-term preservation, quality and security of the Division of
Genomic Resources (DGR). DGR is a world-class repository for frozen biological
materials representing >200,000 organisms that are digitized and fully
searchable on-line. Over 84% are associated with traditional voucher specimens.
Dating back to 1979, DGR is the largest wild mammal collection worldwide, and
among the top 10 largest bird tissue collections. The facility also houses
substantial fish, amphibian and reptile tissues including critical samples from
endangered species and threatened ecosystems. DGR is worldwide in scope with
excellent representation from North America, Asia, Africa, and throughout Latin
America. These specimens provide critical resources for studies of specialized
and interdisciplinary studies. Annually > 50 loans of approximately 2000
specimens generate >80 peer-reviewed publications. DGR has held a leadership
role in developing connections between the museum community and the molecular
genomic efforts. This upgrade to DGR provides a platform to further those
efforts, and also leverages the heavy involvement of DGR with municipal, state,
and federal agencies, especially in the fields of natural resource management
and public and wildlife health. Planned outreach utilizes existing programs at
the museum to educate the public, including young students, on the role of
collections in the practice of science that benefits society.

This project will create a state-of-the-art facility by replacing the existing
electrical (-80C) freezer system with 3 large liquid nitrogen freezers and a
nitrogen generator that will significantly increase sample quality by providing
much lower archival temperatures (-190C) and much longer protection should there
be a catastrophic interruption of power or other emergency. In addition this
upgrade will reduce electrical consumption substantially (>60% reduction). All
samples to be moved will receive unique barcodes to enable the transfer of
associated specimen data into a digital object tracking system and to
informatics applications. The associated database, Arctos, has direct links to
GenBank (and soon IsoBank) that immediately tie the specimen and associated
museum data (spatial, temporal, morphological) to other Big Data on the web.
This connection places the museum specimen as the primary nexus that connects
not only the publications derived from specimen-based research, but also the
increasingly vast amounts of new molecular data derived from each specimen.