* 1561405
* Harnessing Gesture and Action to Improve Pre-Algebra Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,492,327.00

Students who succeed in algebra are more likely to be successful in advanced
STEM courses. Students who fail algebra are more likely to drop out of high
school. A team of researchers at the University of Chicago and Loyola University
Chicago will conduct a set of experimental studies to explore how gesture and
use of manipulatives may improve understanding of mathematical equivalence. a
fundamental, pre-algebraic building block. Young children often have
misconceptions about this concept??they can correctly solve problems like
3+4+5=___ , but when faced with a problem like 3+4+5=___+5, they add all of the
numbers together, or just add the numbers to the left of the equal sign. This
misconception often leads to difficulties with algebra. The researchers will
test how two forms of movement that students and teachers already use in a
classroom setting can be used to improve learning outcomes: actions, performed
directly on objects, and gestures, movements of the hands that can communicate
ideas along with speech. Previous work shows that both action and gesture have
powerful effects on how children think and learn. Through a series of studies,
the research team will explore (1) how children learn, generalize, and retain an
understanding of mathematical equivalence after learning through action or
gesture, (2) how spoken instruction can be used with action and gesture to
affect learning outcomes, and (3) how action and gesture can be combined in
instruction to bolster learning. To motivate future work and refine educational
practices, behavioral methods and neuroimaging techniques will be used to
understand how action and gesture produce their effects. By considering how the
brain changes over the course of learning, it will be possible to gain a clearer
understanding of the aspects of gesture and action that should be emphasized in
the creation of teaching tools. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research
program, which supports fundamental research that advances the research
literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
research is to investigate how action and gesture instruction affect children?s
ability to learn, generalize, and retain information relevant to developing the
pre-algebraic concept of mathematical equivalence. Action and gesture are both
powerful tools that can shape cognition. However, these tools may promote
learning in different ways and thus may be beneficial at different stages of the
learning process. The supported projects explore this hypothesis, and have 3
specific goals: (1) To determine how action and gesture can best be used not
only to promote initial learning of mathematical equivalence, but also to
promote generalization and retention of the newly learned concept. The effects
of action and gesture training will be considered on both a behavioral and
neural level. Behavioral data will indicate general outcomes; neuroimaging
methods will be used to differentiate between various mechanisms that could
underlie the behavioral effects. Combining these methods will lead to the
development of evidence-based educational techniques that target learning
through action and gesture. (2) To determine how action and gesture interact
with spoken instruction to promote learning, generalization, and retention of
mathematical equivalence. Spoken instruction is the most common instructional
method used by teachers, and prior work suggests that gesture is more tightly
integrated with speech than action. Understanding how speech interacts with
gesture and action to promote learning thus has the potential to increase the
utility of each of these teaching tools. (3) To determine how gesture and action
can be combined to promote learning, generalization and retention of
mathematical equivalence. Action may be a useful way to introduce a concept;
gesture may encourage children to generalize the concept. This issue takes on
importance because of the frequency with which actions on manipulatives are used
in classrooms; although good at introducing learners to a concept, manipulatives
may have an important downside: They may inhibit generalization to new problems.
These goals will be addressed through research with 9-10 year old children in a
series of between-group studies.