* 1561660
* Divergent Thinking in the Engineering Design Context:  Experimentation to Connect Performance to Neurocognitive Responses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Zahed Siddique, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,769.00

Divergent thinking, which is related to ideation, continues to be a not fully
understood and yet a very important part of the design process. Using cognitive
neuroscience experiments to study divergent thinking for various idea generation
methods and design tasks, and studying the effectiveness by comprehensive
evaluation design outcomes, we can better understand the idea generation
process. Cognitive neuroscience uses different techniques to study the brain in
action, and each technique has specific characteristics that make a technique
optimal for a given research question. Hemodynamic neuroimaging techniques such
as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or positron emission tomography
(PET) in comparison to electromagnetic techniques such as electroencephalography
(EEG) are difficult to utilize for providing direct measurements of brain
activation patterns related to creative cognition and divergent thinking.
Research on utilizing these important techniques to scientifically investigate
idea generation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposes to use a
cognitive neuroscience model that utilizes EEG measurement techniques in
combination with engineering ideation performance analysis to assess student
divergent thinking and creative processes. This multidisciplinary research is
being explored by a team that has combined expertise in the fields of
engineering, neuroscience, and cognitive psychology. The intellectual merit is
that it focused on using cognitive neuroscience to develop a systematic way to
measure effects of different techniques on divergent thinking to develop
effective creativity curriculum for engineering. The study uses assessments
based upon changes in spectral power of the in different EEG frequency bands and
the analysis of Event-Related BRAIN Potentials to track changes in brain
activation patterns associated to assess divergent thinking The broader impacts
is insight into the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying divergent
thinking related to experimental design and innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
Program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM Education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field.