* 1561134
* Network-based Modeling of Infectious Disease Epidemics in a Mobile Population: Strengthening Preparedness and Containment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 407,000.00

Mathematical models of infectious disease spread are potent tools for the
management of dangerous outbreaks. These models can form a basis for planning
and implementing vaccination strategies, evaluating the risks and benefits of
travel bans, and improving the effectiveness of prophylaxis campaigns. However
traditional modeling approaches do not fully capture the national and
international mobility characteristic of modern society, where contacts do not
remain geographically confined to the area of the initial outbreak, and an
infection may jump thousands of miles in a single day. This project will advance
fundamental understanding of dynamical systems evolving on reconfigurable
networks, in which the subsystems and the network connections change on
comparable time-scales. The resulting mathematical framework will enable a new
class of predictive models of infectious disease spread. These models will aid
in safeguarding uninfected populations and in mitigating impact on afflicted
nations, even when, as in the case of Ebola Virus Disease, no therapeutic
protocol is available. More broadly, the underlying theoretical advances are
expected to transform the analysis, design, and control of dynamical systems on
rapidly reconfiguring networks. Complementing the research component of this
project is outreach to promote the education of underprivileged students and to
serve economically-disadvantaged communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program seeks to advance the field of dynamical systems and complex networks
toward tractable mathematical models of infectious disease epidemics.
Specifically, this project will establish a theoretical framework for the study
of the concurrent evolution of the dynamics of infectious diseases and the
formation of the network of contacts through which they spread. The framework
will be based on the notion of activity-driven networks, which can be
effectively utilized to model contact processes that evolve over time-varying
networks across a range of time-scales. This modeling paradigm contrasts that of
traditional connectivity-driven networks, where links between nodes have a long
life span, resulting in the separation between the time-scales of the dynamics
of the network connections and the process evolution. The research team will
seek to understand the effect of non-ideal containment procedures on the spread
of infectious disease through the systematic analysis of global and local
network features; devise strategies for community detection in time-varying
networks, toward identifying untraced contacts that are critical for disease
spreading and of great public concern; and establish model-based optimization
strategies to prioritize contact tracing procedures toward improving the
effectiveness and outcomes of control interventions.