* 1561578
* Nonlinear Mechanics of Defects in Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Arash Yavari, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 304,265.00

This award supports research towards the application of modern tools of
differential geometry to the mechanics of defects in solids. The formulation
would improve the accuracy of failure predictions for nonlinear materials such
as metals, soft materials, and biological tissues. Defects in solids play a
crucial role in determining the mechanical and physical properties of many
engineering materials. However, the analysis of defects has been restricted to
linear elasticity in almost all the existing theoretical works. Many physical
theories are most naturally expressed in terms of geometric notions. The
research outcomes of this project will also be summarized in a new textbook for
an advanced course on differential geometry applied to mechanics of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to use techniques
from modern differential geometry to formulate a fully nonlinear geometric
theory of defect mechanics that will enable one to solve several open problems
in the nonlinear mechanics of solids with distributed line and point defects.
There is very little known about defects in the setting of nonlinear elasticity.
Several new exact solutions will be obtained for the stress fields of nonlinear
solids with distributed dislocations, disclinations, point defects, and their
combinations. Not much is known about the interaction of defects in the presence
of large strains and our preliminary results show that the geometric theory will
be very useful in making progress in this direction. Dynamics and stability
studies of nonlinear defects are exciting and intellectually challenging
problems that will be investigated during the course of this project.