* 1561093
* Landscape-Level Measurements of and Controls on Wildfire Spread Rates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Douglas Stow, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,843.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will contribute new knowledge regarding wildfires spread, the physical
mechanisms through which they spread, and how wind, topography, and fuel
properties affect their propagation. Observation and analyses of how fast a
wildfire front travels is challenging because of the transient, hazardous nature
of wildfires and the spatially heterogeneous conditions in which they occur. The
project will enhance capabilities for inferring fire-spread rates and wind
speeds by developing a new approach for delineating fire fronts and measuring
their movements from precisely aligned airborne thermal infrared images. These
measurements and analyses of fire-spread rates have not been possible at scales
that are needed to understand fire behavior and its relationship to factors like
fuel properties, topography, and wind. Outcomes from this research will support
more sustainable fire practices. Measuring and generating knowledge about rates
of and controls on wildfire spread will benefit the fire-science and fire-
management communities as well as emergency response managers throughout the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfire-spread rates are key information
requirements for fire suppression and evacuations. Their measurement and
prediction pose a critical scientific challenge. Observing and analyzing how
fast a wildfire front is traveling is challenging due to the transient,
hazardous nature of wildfires and the spatially heterogeneous conditions in
which they occur. To address these challenges, the investigators will use
airborne thermal infrared imaging to acquire frequent and detailed tracking of
moving flaming fronts for an area of chaparral vegetation in southern
California. The flight lines will be aligned along the direction of the flaming
front in the vicinity of the maximum spread zone. Frequent, sequential images
captured along flight lines will enable wind speeds to be estimated through
image flow analysis techniques. Segments of the fire line will be analyzed using
spatial statistical and geovisualization methods to empirically establish the
relationships between the rate of wildfire spread and characteristics or
conditions of the vegetation fuels, terrain, and wind at the landscape scale.
Project benefits to the broader community will include better tools to evaluate
fire behavior and better estimates of the response of wildfires to fuel
conditions and treatments.