* 1561101
* USA - Pakistan International Conference on Renewable Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* M.A.K. Lodhi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2017
* USD 25,000.00

Securing future sources of sustainable energy is a global challenge that will
benefit greatly from international collaboration. The USA - Pakistan
International Conference on Renewable Energy, to be held in Lahore, Pakistan on
October 10 to 12, 2016, will facilitate these collaborations. Pakistan is a
developing country that suffers from energy shortages, lacks indigenous energy
resources, and depends heavily on imported oil to meet its energy demands. The
energy demand of Pakistan is growing, and environmental pollution associated
with the combustion of fossil fuels may increase as well. A viable solution to
secure future energy sources and address environmental issues is to exploit
renewable electrical energy sources and environmentally-friendly clean fuels
that are sustainable and economically beneficial. The USA - Pakistan
International Conference on Renewable Energy will provide a forum to encourage
dialogue between scientists and engineers in the United States and Pakistan, and
identify opportunities for scientific collaborations to explore renewable energy
options for Pakistan. This direct communication will facilitate collaborations
that could lead to the future development and expansion of markets for renewable
energy production in Pakistan as well as in other countries in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference topics include New Energy
International Cooperation, New Energy Storage and Smart Grid Technologies, Solar
Energy, Hydrogen Energy and Fuel Cell Technology, Nuclear Energy, Wind Energy,
and Other New Energy Sources and Technologies. The conference will be structured
to promote interactions between scientists of different disciplines and stages
of their careers that are working in academia, national research laboratories,
and industry, in both the US and Pakistan. The conference will also bring
entrepreneurs, policy makers and planners side by side with scientists and
engineers. The conference will have a floor for exhibition of new renewable
energy devices and equipment, as well as books and related literature related to
the latest renewable energy advances.