* 1561437
* The Carbon Balance of Arctic River Deltas: Tundra Fire as an Agent of System Change
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2017
* Robert Holmes, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 198,500.00

The summer of 2015 was an extraordinary year for fire in the Arctic, including
in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta, presaging a future where tundra and boreal fire is
far more common. Remarkably, the area burned in the YK Delta in 2015 exceeds the
total area burned from 1940-2014 combined. The response of the YK Delta in the
first year post-fire will set the stage for longer-term changes in delta carbon
storage and transport among tundra, aquatic and marine systems, and to the
atmosphere. Quantifying carbon export and understanding the immediate ecosystem
response to fire is critical because long-term recovery is, to a considerable
degree, dependent on short-term responses. A major question that this research
will address is how fire influences the amount and form of carbon transported
from delta ecosystems seasonally and in the first year following fire.
Ultimately, these results will inform long-term trajectories of the
vulnerability and fate of delta carbon pools. This research will significantly
improve our understanding of the role of fire in the loss of both modern and
ancient carbon from arctic river deltas, which contain &gt;10% of the Arctic?s
massive permafrost carbon store. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will allow
project scientists to engage with Alaska Native faculty and students in STEM-
focused teacher training programs at the tribal college in Bethel, which will
provide teachers with experience conducting research on climate change and
arctic system science and the opportunity to develop curriculum focused on
climate change and the feedbacks that result from fire and other changes in
ecosystems in the Yukon River Delta. This project will also improve the
infrastructure for arctic research and teaching at a small Undergraduate
Institution in central Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;]Arctic river deltas are
hotspots for carbon storage, occupying &lt;1% of the pan-Arctic watershed but
containing &gt;10% of carbon stored in arctic permafrost. They are also
heterogeneous mosaics of linked terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, and are
susceptible to changes in land, river, and marine systems. The vulnerability of
carbon stored in arctic river deltas is a major unknown and is critically
important as climate warming and increasing fire frequency may make this carbon
vulnerable to transport to aquatic and marine systems and to the atmosphere. The
goal of this proposal is to examine the immediate effects of fire on carbon
storage in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta and exchange between terrestrial and
aquatic components of the Delta. By extension this work will yield critical
insights into how the carbon balance of deltas in the arctic system will change
over the coming decades as warming continues and fire frequency increases.