* 1561663
* CSBR-Ownership Transfer: Curate, Preserve and Transfer Agriculturally and Environmentally Significant Microorganisms to established laboratories equipped for preservation and distr
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Anne Alvarez, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 228,276.00

The goal of this project is to revitalize and transfer a large culture
collection of plant-associated bacteria from the Pacific Bacterial Collection,
which is currently located in Hawaii to an established laboratory on the U.S.
mainland where the bacteria can be safely stored, re-cultured and distributed to
scientists nationwide. The collection consists of more than 6,000 bacterial
strains collected over a 40 year period from worldwide origins and habitats and
represents a national treasure for microbiologists, educators, and professionals
in agricultural and food industry. Historically valuable microbial germplasm
will be documented and preserved. The collection is a national resource for
scientists in diverse disciplines and supports collaborative contemporary
research on taxonomy, genomics, detection technology and forensic epidemiology.
The collection's size, novelty, and diversity permits data analysis of well-
characterized reference strains on a scale not previously possible. This will be
a valuable resource for identifying and characterizing microbes associated with
diseased/compromised trade goods and will enhance educational and training
opportunities for aspiring microbial taxonomists. Access to this large
collection of strains from a centrally-located laboratory serves the national
interest by enabling both industry and the non-profit biological research
community to access selected strains at a minimal cost.

Bacterial strains will be revitalized, annotated and prepared for transfer to
designated staff at Agdia, Inc., located in Indiana. Purity of each culture will
be confirmed, duplicates will be eliminated and data for each strain will be
added to a unified and modernized database. The focus of this project will be on
the transfer of strains that represent genetic bacterial diversity as determined
by DNA sequence analysis of multiple bacterial genes, development of molecular
diagnostic tests, and strains originally used in Hawaii to screen hybridoma cell
lines for production of pathogen-specific monoclonal antibodies. Publications
describing genetic characteristics and population diversity will be referenced
in the database. Remaining strains will be organized, validated and documented
over a three year period allowing total transfer of up to 6,000 strains.
Creation of a modernized unified database, which includes relevant data for
individual strains is a major undertaking that will enable researchers, students
and regulatory personnel to make informed selections before requesting a
culture. User fees for culturing, shipping and compliance with federal and state
regulations will result in sustained support. The back-up storage of reference
strains will ensure the long-term integrity of the collection and will serve as
a valuable scientific resource. Characteristics of each strain are currently
being organized into a database maintained at the University of Hawaii. After
the project is completed the data accompanying each culture will be transferred
to Agdia, Inc. enabling public access (www.agdia.com).