* 1561881
* I-Corps:  Thermally Conductive Polymer Based Interface Materials and Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Baratunde Cola, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

As electronic systems continue to shrink and become more energy dense, thermal
dissipation is emerging as a roadblock to sustained performance and reliability.
One of the main challenges to heat removal is heat transport across interfaces
where two surfaces are placed in contact during device packaging. In order to
maximize the thermal transport across interfaces, thermally conductive materials
are placed between the two surfaces and these materials form the nearly 1
billion dollar market for thermal interface materials (TIMs) (BCC Research).
TIMs are found in nearly all forms of electronic devices including consumer
products (cell phones, labtops, etc.), power electronics (electric vehicles and
power converters for renewable energy applications), and lighting assemblies
(including the emerging field of light emitting diodes), to name a few. As the
performance and power demands of these devices continues to increase, more heat
is being generated and needs to be removed, yet traditional TIMs lack the
thermal properties required to enable sufficient heat removal. This team has
developed a new technique to fabricate polymers, which traditionally do not
conduct heat well, with very high thermal conductivity for use as TIMs. These
materials will provide packaging and thermal engineers with a new weapon to
combat the electronics heating problem, which will allow for continued
innovation across a wide breath of technological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed thermal interface materials (TIMs)
demonstrate enhanced mechanical compliance and thermal conductivity, resulting
in "soft" materials that are exclusively composed of polymer with unprecedented
thermal conductivity. Traditionally, "soft" and mechanically compliant materials
such as polymers are plagued by low thermal conductivity due to molecular
disorder which results in phonon scattering. To overcome low thermal
conductivity, high conductivity fillers are often added to improve composite
conductivity, but the improvement in thermal conductivity is limited by
interfacial phonon scattering and high fill fractions can compromise the
materials mechanical properties. This team has found that nanoscale confinement
(forcing the polymer into very small pores) can be used to induce alignment of
polymer chains, which greatly improves polymer thermal conductivity in the
direction of alignment. Using alumina oxide nanoporous templates the team is
able to fabricate large area arrays of nanoconfined polymer nanowires with
improved thermal conductivity for use as thermal interface materials. The
proposed materials are processed through melt or electrochemical methods and can
be fabricated using a multitude of polymer systems and architectures, making
them suitable for many potential thermal management applications. These
materials exhibit thermal conductivities greater than 50x that of bulk polymer
and will allow for improved electronics that can maintain low operational
temperatures even at increased power densities.