* 1561716
* Cognitive and Neural Correlates of Mathematics Problem Solving Using Diagnostic Modeling and Dynamic Real-Time fMRI
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Curtis Tatsuoka, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,699,573.00

The broad objective of this study, led by a team of researchers at Case Western
Reserve University, is to further understanding of the neural and cognitive
basis for mathematics learning. The focus will be on mathematics problem-solving
strategies used by adolescents, and how these strategies are adopted and changed
as problems become systematically more difficult. The project will examine the
association of these strategies with mathematics-related cognitive skills,
scores on tests of mathematics achievement, and patterns of brain activations
displayed by adolescents while engaged in these strategies. Problem-solving
strategies are of interest because of their relation to higher-level mathematic
achievement and the insights they can offer into the basis of individual
differences in mathematics learning. The longer-term objective of the project is
to discover new ways to tailor mathematical learning strategies to individual
cognitive and neural capacities. The project will also undertake innovative
methods of collecting information about neural functioning during math tasks
with the potential to influence future studies of the brain systems involved in
learning and behavior. The project is funded by the EHR (Education and Human
Resources directorate) Core Research program, which supports fundamental
research that advances the literature on STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics) learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will be
adolescents, 14-16 years of age, who were previously enrolled in a longitudinal
study of the consequences of preterm versus term birth on academic progress
across the first 3 years in school. Measures will include tests of spatial
skills, attention, executive functions such as working memory, number sense, and
mathematics achievement; sets of mental arithmetic and fractions problems of
varying difficulty designed to reveal individual differences in problem-solving
strategies; and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) procedures to
examine the neural correlates of these strategies. Following piloting with a
separate sample of young adults, cognitive and achievement tests and assessments
of problem-solving strategies will be administered to 100 adolescents, 50 of
whom will be selected on the basis of their problem-solving strategies to
complete in-magnet problem-solving tasks. Adolescents with more advanced
problem-solving strategies (characterized by reliance on retrieval of solutions)
are hypothesized to display more intact cognitive profiles and higher levels of
mathematics achievement than those using less advanced approaches (characterized
by more effortful multi-step procedures). Adolescents using more advanced
strategies are also hypothesized to show patterns of brain activation in regions
specialized for efficient mathematics processing, such as the hippocampus and
posterior parietal region, as compared to regions that are less specialized such
as the prefrontal area. These participants are also expected to display less
pronounced changes in activation patterns with increased problem difficulty,
suggestive of greater neural efficiency in mathematics problem-solving and less
reliance on compensatory systems. The project will include novel statistical
methods for cognitive modeling and an exciting new approach to assess brain
functioning during math problem solving. This research will provide insight into
the cognitive skills and neural processes associated with successful strategy
adoption for problem solving, with an emphasis on neural capacity, efficiency,
and compensation.