* 1561230
* I-Corps:  Development of Novel Anticancer Agents
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,02/28/2018
* Zhendong Jin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Of the more than one million global cases of breast cancer diagnosed each year,
approximately 15-20 percent are characterized as triple-negative, lacking the
three major therapeutic markers (the estrogen, progesterone, and Her2/neu
receptors) for breast cancer. Compared to other breast cancers, it is more
aggressive, less likely to be detected on an annual mammogram, more likely to
metastasize early, younger age at onset, and more prone to relapse after
treatment. Because of the lack of a specific targeted treatment, triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) has the worst prognosis among all breast cancers. Hence, it
is highly urgent to develop effective anti-triple-negative breast cancer (anti-
TNBC) agents with novel mechanisms of action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this proposed project are to learn how to transfer innovative
technology (anti-triple-negative breast cancer agents) developed in the PI's lab
to successful FDA-approved drugs for clinical uses. By studying novel anticancer
natural products isolated from one type of marine sponge, the PI's group has
successfully developed an anticancer drug candidate that exhibits highly potent
activities against drug resistant cancers with a novel mechanism of action. Our
compound is particularly effective against the aggressive and metastatic cancers
without effective drug therapy, e.g. triple negative breast cancer. In this
program, the team will learn how to build Lean Startups and Evidence-Based
entrepreneurship. Customer discovery and development, risk assessment, lessons
learned, agility and evidence-based strategies for technology transfer will be
the major emphasis of the project. Specifically, the team will conduct 100
potential customer interviews to find out what customers really want, and how to
successfully build a biotech startup company. By the time the team completes its
training, each member will have a clearer vision for its company and a business
model that will lead the team to success. In addition, the team will carry out
Proof-of-Concept study of its leading drug candidate. The proposed project is
expected to have a strong impact on the field of developing effective anti-
triple-negative breast cancer agents with novel mechanisms of action. It will
provide oncologists new powerful weapons in the fight against this deadly form
of breast cancer.