* 1561899
* Using Topology Optimization to Reduce Support Structures in Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Krishnan Suresh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 10/31/2020
* USD 326,679.00

Additive manufacturing represents a class of processes for fabricating parts of
virtually any shape through material addition. The technique, often called 3D
printing, offers several advantages over traditional manufacturing, and has the
potential to revolutionize the way things are made. However, to fully exploit
additive manufacturing, new design methods are needed. This award supports
fundamental research towards developing a design framework for additive
manufacturing. The design framework will not only consider traditional
performance metrics but also additive manufacturing constraints. Specifically,
the award will focus on the reduction of the sacrificial support structures
needed to additively manufacture parts with geometric overhangs. By departing
from conventional practice for support-structure design, the project's
integrated approach will lead to low-cost products, benefitting the U.S. economy
and society. Developing the framework involves several disciplines including
design, manufacturing, and computer science. The research will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will leverage topology
optimization theory to integrate performance metrics and additive manufacturing
constraints. For example, it will help minimize the compliance of the part,
while respecting support structure constraints. The framework will be
sufficiently general to accommodate a variety of performance metrics such as
compliance, stress, and buckling, and a variety of additive manufacturing
constraints such as support structures, surface roughness, and fabrication time.
Robust level-set methods of topology optimization will be combined with
augmented Lagrangian formulations to create a design framework that will then be
integrated into these existing computer aided design systems and made available
to the public. Experimental calibration and validation will be carried out to
support the theory. The focus will largely be on polymer fused deposition
modeling since this process is both inexpensive and easily accessible. However,
experiments will also be carried out on metal additive manufacturing to
establish the broader implications of the findings.