* 1561099
* Holocene Fire History and the Vulnerability of a Primary Rainforest to Fire Encroachment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Daniel Gavin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 329,954.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will investigate the historical precedence of forest fires in order to provide
new knowledge about the resiliency of tropical rainforests to fires. By studying
the paleoecology of disturbance regimes from a historical context, the
investigator will provide new insights into the stability of a pristine
rainforest. The investigator's analyses of the spatio-temporal patterns of fire
across multiple habitat types will transform basic understanding of
distinguishing climate-induced fire impacts versus those that were human-
induced. The project will address fundamental questions of fire ecology and
landscape disturbance in a highly biodiverse ecosystem. The project will have a
strong focus on educational and research capacity-building in the study region.
It will foster collaboration across U.S. and foreign organizations, and it will
provide a strong foundation for interdisciplinary education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students. Project results will promote collaborative
ties among national and international partners to increase their capabilities to
address issues related to tropical forest stewardship across many parts of the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil charcoal records provide insight into the
potentially important role of fire in the ecology of rainforests affected by
episodic droughts. This project will focus on four core questions: (1) How
prevalent was fire during the Holocene and earlier periods? (2) Is the spatial
pattern of fire consistent with climatic control or with agricultural activities
associated with shifting cultivation? (3) What is the quantity of pyrogenic
organic matter in soils among different habitats, and how well is such charcoal
preserved in tropical soils? (4) What is the history of peat accumulation in the
forest over the past 6,000 years, and has it been affected by past fire events
and environmental change? A total of 126 sampling sites will be established
across seven habitat types in a study region in Indonesian Borneo, and the
investigators will examine these for direct evidence of past fires from
radiocarbon-dated charcoal particles in soil. Sampling data will be spectrally,
chemically, and quantitatively analyzed to determine the chronological pattern
of changing fire over time. The data and methods developed from this research
project will have global implications for studying fire behavior studies across
a wide-range of diverse ecosystems.