* 1561807
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Run-Time Support for Scalable Concurrent Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Maurice Herlihy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 540,000.00

Highly-concurrent data structures lie at the heart of modern multicore software.
This project will provide systematic run-time system support for several
techniques that that have proved essential for constructing highly-concurrent
data structures. The intellectual merits are to provide a new basis for thinking
about how to scale future generations of both hardware and software, and in
particular to develop novel uses of operating system kernel functionality, as
well as transactional hardware and software techniques. The project's broader
significance and importance is the benefit to society provided by higher
performing, less expensive, and more reliable software.

The specific techniques addressed are unsynchronized traversals, in which a
thread navigates through a linked data structure without writing to memory, and
atomic sequences of memory operations, where race conditions are eliminated by
making a sequence of individual memory operations appear to take place
instantaneously. Although these techniques have been successfully deployed in
many ad-hoc instances, they have never been packaged as general-purpose
mechanisms because they can have complex and dangerous interactions with
standard memory management schemes. This project will exploit recent
developments in hardware architectures and operating system structures to
develop automated, systematic run-time support, making these techniques
accessible to non-specialists.