* 1561915
* Collaborative Research: Microwave Heating of Carbon Nanotube Coatings to Enable Rapid Welding in 3D-Printed Polymer Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Mohammad Saed, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 149,778.00

One of the most critical problems in additive manufacturing of plastic
components is poor part strength caused by weak interfacial welding between the
deposited polymer layers. Uniform heating of the manufactured part cannot solve
this problem because it can cause warping of the 3D-printed structure that
affects the mechanical reliability of three-dimensional (3D) printing as a
plastic manufacturing technique. This research examines a novel manufacturing
process where a thin coating of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) is deposited on the
plastic filaments used in 3D printing. Microwave exposure of the printed parts
causes the CNTs to heat that allows for localized polymer melting at the welds,
resulting in markedly improved mechanical strength of the part. If successful,
the additive manufacturing technology enabled by this project has the potential
to overcome the current disparity between traditionally manufactured polymer
parts such as injection molding, extrusion molding and machining as compared to
parts printed with additive manufacturing techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this work uses a combination of
experimentation and computation to measure and model the response of CNT-loaded
polymer films in order to directly capture the coating thermal dynamics. This
will be done using a combination of alternating current dielectric measurements,
infrared imaging, and finite-element modeling (combining radio frequency heating
and heat transfer in thin coatings). This will be followed by a scaled-up
investigation of the coating, material extrusion, and controlled microwave
exposure processes to demonstrate how this concept translates to an additive
manufacturing context, with an emphasis on strength improvements (as measured on
vertically printed tensile bars) and reliability. The microwave exposure will be
carried out using simultaneous infrared imaging and real-time adjustment of
forward power to yield consistent, specified heating treatments. The
intellectual significance of the work stems from the translation of microscale
CNT heating to processing-structure-property relationships for welds in complex,
macroscale 3D printed structures. This work will have a strong impact on
multiple scientific and engineering fields including polymer physics,
nanomaterial percolation, microwave physics, plastics processing, advanced
manufacturing.