* 1561004
* Redefining Research Integration in a Bachelor's Degree Focused on Ecology and Molecular Biology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Lisa Azure, United Tribes Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,027,754.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings and
research capacity at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
This project aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will inform the
research literature on environmental science in several key areas of interest to
and relevance to Indian country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;United Tribes Technical
College (UTTC) will revolutionize the environmental science program it offers to
students by increasing the research capacity of the faculty and the institution,
including project-based learning opportunities in the revised curriculum,
focusing on faculty professional development, developing a BS in environmental
science with an emphasis on ecology and molecular biology, and providing a
bridge program that will both recruit students to the program and increase their
college readiness for the program.