* 1561248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ballot Structure and Voting Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Carolina Tchintian, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 14,874.00

General Summary This project focuses on the role played by ballot design and
vote casting procedures in shaping the decisions made by voters in the polling
booth and, therein, electoral outcomes. The PI argues that the different modes
through which electoral alternatives are presented to voters are critical to
understanding how people vote, and the extent to which certain candidates or
parties are disproportionately advantaged or disadvantaged by different types of
ballots. The countries selected for this project (Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, El
Salvador and Honduras) offer the opportunity to measure a variety of outcomes
affecting representation as a result of variations in the ballot structure. Such
variations in presenting the electoral offering may benefit certain parties,
offset the probability of women being elected, and/or affect whether candidates'
personal attributes observed in the picture of them included on the official
ballot affect the probability of being elected. Studying the consequences of
ballots and their features on electoral outcomes can help to explain how and who
people vote for, shedding light on different aspects of representation, such as
minority groups' access to legislative seats and the effectiveness and relevance
of informational cues provided by the ballot. The results of this project will
provide policymakers and citizens considering or engaged in ballot design reform
with invaluable information regarding the potential impact of reforms on
representation and accountability in particular and the quality of electoral
democracy in a given political system more generally.

Technical Summary

This project contributes to a deeper understanding of the electoral process by
addressing the role of ballot design and vote casting procedures on
representation. Two different analytic strategies are applied to evaluate how
the way the electoral offering is presented to the voter affects voter behavior
and electoral outcomes. First, the project uses observational data to assess
whether different ballot designs lead to different electoral outcomes. Second,
given that the causal mechanism operates at an individual level, and that voter
behavior can be influenced by a myriad of factors, an experimental research
design is used to assess how voters may judge candidates' traits in actual
elections. For the first strategy, the PI uses data from Argentina provinces
that have replaced the traditional partisan paper ballot with different versions
of the Australian ballot. She analyzes how different presentations of the
electoral offering benefit certain parties using a quasi-experimental research
design. Using Chilean municipal data from 1992 to 2008, the PI examines the
probabilities of candidates from underrepresented groups being elected given
their order placement on the ballot in open list multi-member proportional
representation systems. For the second strategy, she conducts experiments in
three open list system countries (El Salvador, Ecuador and Honduras) that employ
panachage (where voters have the opportunity to distribute their multiple votes
among candidates from different parties in multimember districts). The
experiments assess whether candidates' personal attributes affect the
probability of being elected and how contextual information provided in the
voting booth alters voters' evaluation of and preference for candidates by
supplying additional tools to decode informational cues.