* 1561121
* RAPID: Capturing the Signature of a Strong El Nino Event in Galapagos Lake Sediment Records: the 2015/16 El Nino Opportunity
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2015,10/31/2016
* Diane Thompson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2016
* USD 68,758.00

This award uses funds, under the auspices of the Rapid Response Research
(RAPID)concept, to maintain long-term monitoring sites at Genovesa and
Bainbridge crater lakes, Galápagos to capture the 2015/2016 El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) event and identify the impact of a potentially strong El Niño
events on key Galápagos lake sediment archives.

The sediment records from Genovesa and Bainbridge have provided long records of
past changes in tropical Pacific climate variability, particularly variability
associated with the ENSO. However, existing hypotheses for the impact of climate
variability on sedimentation in these lakes have not been field tested.

In 2009, the PI and her research collaborators deployed weather stations and in-
lake sondes, as well as simple sediment traps, to test existing hypotheses for
sedimentation in these lakes. These instruments have produced nearly continuous
daily data on the climate and limnology of the crater lakes from December 2009
to present, a period that covers more than five full seasonal cycles and
includes a weak El Niño, a moderate El Niño, and sustained La Niña conditions.

Research results to date have prompted a re-thinking of published
interpretations of lake-based climate reconstructions. However, the real-time
monitoring has not captured the impact of a strong El Niño event on the climate,
limnology and sedimentation of these lakes.

The researcher argues that it is therefore critical that she be able to isolate
the impact of the strong 2015/16 El Niño on sedimentation in these lakes to test
competing hypotheses for the impact of ENSO events on sedimentation.

Specifically, the funds will be used to support two trips for a team of three
researchers to collect data and redeploy long-term monitoring instruments at
Bainbridge and Genovesa crater lakes prior to and following the 2015/2016 El
Niño event. This data will be used to address two key research questions
regarding sedimentation in these key archives: (1) What is the signature of
strong El Niño events? and (2) What is the primary driver of carbonate
precipitation?

The potential broader impacts include providing a long-term monitoring dataset
and improving reconstructions of the strength and frequency of ENSO events in
the past, which will help constrain the range of variability observed in the
region. This project will support an early-career female researcher and provide
educational and research opportunities for U.S. and Ecuadorian graduate
students.