* 1561517
* STEM-R: Modeling STEM Retention and Departure across Physics, Mathematics, and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* John Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,985.00

Researchers at West Virginia University will develop a new theoretical framework
for STEM departure that will detail the reasons why students leave STEM majors.
The research extends Tinto's university departure model to include the career
exploration process where a student leaves STEM but remains in college. The
framework will be developed and tested by extensive measurement of demographic,
social, academic, affective (self-efficacy, self-esteem, belonging), career
exploration/aspirations and psychological variables at four longitudinal points
in physics and mathematics introductory class sequences required for many STEM
majors. The longitudinal measurement monitors evolution of a student's STEM
career commitment and vocational identity, and determines factors that influence
a decision to begin the process of STEM departure or lead to a well-investigated
resolution to pursue a STEM career. The research will explore crucial questions
influencing university STEM departure, including to what extent departure is
preventable by modifying advising protocols, to what extent performance in these
gate-keeper classes and its effect on self-efficacy influence the decision to
change major, what psychological/social factors mark students beginning to
explore non-STEM careers, and to what extent belonging influences retention,
particularly of underrepresented women and rural students. The research will
contribute to a deeper understanding of this important phenomenon. It also will
inform the national discussion of STEM retention by producing a theoretical
framework of STEM departure validated across a large, economically diverse pool
of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design will implement a multi-
stage analysis and measurement with the goal of modeling the process of STEM
departure and quantifying the reasons for and markers of the departure process.
Researchers will investigate in depth: (1) what modifications are needed in
theoretical frameworks for college departure to explain intra-university
departure from STEM disciplines, (2) the minimum information required to predict
STEM departure and where STEM departure originates, (3) what fraction of STEM
departure could be prevented by interventions, (4) how STEM departure markers
differ for underserved populations, and (5) how to identify subpopulations of
students where interventions will be most effective. Researchers will use
institutional class-taking and outcome data to build a set of "survival"
probabilities for individual classes and class-taking sequences. Linear
regression analysis then be used to analyze how these probabilities are affected
by (1) the student's intrinsic characteristics (ability measured by ACT/SAT,
race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status, first generation status, and
personality profile), (2) the student's academic preparation (high school GPA
and high school course-taking patterns), (3) the student's academic performance
in his or her current class (measured by attendance patterns and assignment
grades), (4) the students current social connectedness to both family and
university structures and communities, and (5) the student's current affective
state, his or her self-efficacy, sense of belonging, self-esteem, and STEM
identity. Latent growth modeling will track changes in these factors over time.
In parallel, the student's vocational identity status, his or her state of
career exploration and career decision making, will be monitored. Using the
four-point longitudinal measurement, transitions in the student's vocational
identity state (particularly changes that indicate a renewed career exportation
process and therefore the threat of STEM departure) will be correlated with
previous changes in survival probabilities and with changes in the student's
affective, academic, or social state. Signatures to inform advisers of at risk
students and general changes to advising protocols will be developed. Campus
social/academic structures that promote retention will be identified. At all
levels, differential results for underrepresented students will be investigated
with the goal of designing interventions that target these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in three areas: STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation, and workforce development.