* 1561622
* Facility Support: High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2018
* USD 626,168.00

1561622&lt;br/&gt;Ketcham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Earth
Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant supports continued
operation of the University of Texas Computed X-ray Tomography (UTCT) Facility
over a two year period. The CT scanner at UT was specifically designed to enable
x-ray tomography of a range of geological materials and sample sizes. The
technology was developed from commercial biomedical CAT scanners with the
adoption of a higher energy x-ray source and higher resolution CCD detectors to
allow micron-scale imaging of geological samples. The technique allows for
completely non-destructive imaging of the exteriors and interiors of samples.
Differences in x-ray attenuation that occur due to variations in sample density
and the elemental composition of the material along the x-ray path are digitally
recorded by a CCD. Samples are mounted on a rotating table in front of the x-ray
source. Radial 2-d slices of the attenuated x-rays are stacked by vertical
translation of the sample table. Resultant x-ray sinograms are then reduced via
computer algorithms to render high resolution 3-D images of the density
distributions within samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent upgrade of the UTCT
high energy system has increased both resolution and scanning speed, lowering
costs for lab clients and opened a multitude of new research possibilities. In
particular, it enables 4-D scanning of systems in motion (during fluid flow,
cooling, heating, strain, etc.). Exploration and exploitation of these new
capabilities for an expanded range of studies including studies of fluid flow
through fractured and porous media with relevance to groundwater hydrology,
hydrocarbon reservoir extraction enhancement and carbon dioxide subsurface
sequestration will be enabled by this renewal award. Continued support will
benefit a large and diverse set of research constituencies. Over the previous
period of support, UTCT has served over 190 principal investigators, most of
whom are Earth scientists spanning the full breadth of subdisciplines, including
petrology, paleontology, structural geology, hydrology, meteoritics, and
economic and petroleum geology. UTCT's clientele also includes many researchers
in other fields, principally biology, engineering, and anthropology. Three-
quarters of investigators were from outside the University of Texas. The
facility will continue to support user training through developed short courses
and assist users in data reduction routines. This support is congruent with NSFs
mission of promoting the progress of science and may advance the national
prosperity and welfare through advancing knowledge of the behavior of water and
hydrocarbon in the subsurface as well training students in cutting edge
analytical methods in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***