* 1561256
* USA - Pakistan International Conference on Renewable Energy (additional support)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* M.A.K. Lodhi, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,970.00

Securing future sources of sustainable energy is a global challenge that will
benefit greatly from international collaboration. The USA-Pakistan International
Conference on Renewable Energy, to be held in Lahore, Pakistan from October 10
to 12, 2016, will facilitate these collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Securing future sources of sustainable energy is a global
challenge and global collaboration is required to develop effective technologies
that suit the wide range of needs and operating environments. U.S. scientists
are increasingly seeking test-beds for evaluating technologies at the research
stage, are seeking partners with new perspectives, and also seek new markets for
the technologies they develop. This project will bring U.S. scientists and
engineers to Pakistan for a three day conference to discuss a wide range of
alternative energy technologies, focusing overall on material design, synthesis
and evaluation of material sustainability. This direct communication may
facilitate collaborations that improve the quality, versatility and
applicability of research efforts by providing U.S. personnel with a more global
perspective as well as the insights of new partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will discuss a range of topics that are both cutting edge and
appropriate for promoting collaboration between U.S. and Pakistani scientists
and engineers. The topics include: International Collaboration on New Energy,
Storage and Smart Grid Technologies, Solar Energy, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells,
Nuclear Energy, Wind Energy, and Other Energy Sources (geothermal, biofuel,
energy efficiency, etc.). The workshop will be structured to promote
interactions among scientists and engineers from different disciplines and at
different career stages. It will include researchers in academic institutions,
national research labs and industry in the U.S. and Pakistan. Entrepreneurs,
policy makers and manufacturers are also expected to be present, and the
conference includes an industry/manufacturers expo.