* 1561315
* CSBR: Natural History: Securing Paleobotanical Collections at the University of Kansas: Evolution of Seed Plants and Antarctic Fossil Plants
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Thomas Taylor, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 495,455.00

The University of Kansas (KU) Biodiversity Institute includes world-class
systematic research collections and is one of the leading university museums in
the world. KU has an extensive history of paleontological research and
collection stewardship back to the late 1800s. Paleontological collections
represent an invaluable resource for studying past biodiversity and tracing the
evolution and relationships of groups of organisms through time. Such
collections represent an irreplaceable record of past life and their proper
maintenance is especially crucial in cases where collection sites are no longer
accessible, where they contain evolutionarily important organisms, or represent
a unique record of Earth history. This project will provide funding for a
compactor storage system for fossil plant specimens that are currently in
unsuitable storage and inaccessible. The KU Paleobotany Division has a long,
successful history of outreach programs that use specimens from the collection.
Activities that this project will engage in include: recruitment/retention of
underrepresented minority and female graduate/undergraduate students and
postdoctoral scholars; workshops for middle school girls using female role
models and hands-on science activities; subject-based (paleobotany,
environmental change, Antarctica) workshops for various groups (TRIO program for
inner-city students from Kansas City; home-schooled students; gifted students
from Topeka PS); participation in Natural History Museum Public Education
programs (fossil identification day, Darwin Day); collection tours; public
lectures; permanent and temporary displays in the Museum; and teaching
paleobotanical techniques to school children and the public. This project will
include a Museum Studies student who will develop a virtual exhibit based on the
newly accessible fossils. The paleobotany collections have greatly exceeded
current space in Haworth Hall (biology labs, offices) and specimens are
scattered in storage areas and the paleobotany research laboratory. Specimens
will be moved into newly renovated space on West Campus, where many other
Natural History collections are housed. The Paleobotany Division contains more
than 100,000 specimens. KU houses the largest collection of Antarctic fossil
plants in the world. These fossils provide calibration points for molecular
clocks, molecular phylogenies, and extinction and dispersal events. The current
project includes Permian, Triassic, and Jurassic fossil plants from Antarctica,
and orphaned collections from Ohio University (OU), which were moved to KU in
2012. The latter includes Paleozoic plants from Appalachia and the Midcontinent,
as well as Oxroad Bay, Scotland. Together with collections already at KU, this
acquisition forms an unparalleled resource of the history of seed plants, from
the earliest accepted fossils to the evolution of modern groups. The OU
collection also includes plants from rare, seasonally dry ("upland") floras from
North American communities during glacial times in Gondwana; some of these sites
are no longer accessible for collection. The Antarctic fossils that need proper
storage represent a unique, anatomically detailed record of Paleozoic - Mesozoic
plants and fungi at a time before and after end-Permian extinctions - the
largest extinctions in Earth history. The Jurassic plants represent the only
substantial deposit of Jurassic plants on continental Antarctica and are an
important record of plant diversity and paleoclimate at the time of the breakup
of Gondwana. Results of project will be shared with iDigBio (idigbio.org) and
made available online (biodiversity.ku.edu/paleobotany).