* 1561167
* The 2017 National Breath of Life Archival Institute for Indigenous Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Leanne Hinton, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 218,850.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American Languages. All Native American languages are endangered, and over 120
of these languages have gone silent, which means there are no remaining fluent
first language speakers. Experts recognize around 7,000 languages worldwide, and
they estimate at least half will fall silent by the end of this century. Human
language is highly complex and scientists have thus far only scratched the
surface in analyzing and understanding the scientific diversity represented in
the grammars of the individual 7,000 languages. Because the number of languages
far exceeds the number of trained language scientists, one challenge is to train
more linguists. Another challenge is reversing language endangerment, thus
staunching the loss of languages, cultures and knowledge. Opportunities within
linguistics that use informal science learning in linguistics, such as short
workshops, conferences, and other training, have proven effective in addressing
both challenges. One such project, the Breath of Life archival model, has been
successful in engaging Native American citizen scientists to work with archival
language documentation in repositories in California, Oklahoma and Washington,
D.C. This project will fund the 2017 National Breath of Life Archival Institute
for Indigenous Languages (National BoL), the fourth of its kind since 2011.
Broader impacts include the training of Native American citizen scientists to
work on their own tribe's language and the training of linguistics graduate
students, who serve as mentors and learn from their experiences how to produce
documentation that is both better and more relevant and useful to community
language efforts. The general public, other tribal members and interested
scholars will also benefit from access to the newly digitized archival materials
from the Smithsonian Institution's holdings created as part of this project.

Co-hosted by the Smithsonian's National Anthropological Archives and National
Museum of the American Indian, and the Library of Congress, the National BoL
will last two weeks and introduce linguistics and the language sciences.
Participants are grouped by their heritage language, with each group assigned an
academically trained linguist for one-on-one mentoring in the analysis of
archival materials in that language. Ultimately, these efforts by citizen
scientists will increase their linguistic understanding of their languages, to
support reclamation and further investigation of the languages. The National BoL
will train citizen scientists from some 15 language communities, bringing the
cumulative number of languages investigated in these national workshops to over
70. By engaging community members in research, this workshop broadens the
participation of Native Americans in the social sciences by investigating
aspects of language that directly benefit community goals. Importantly, the 2017
National BoL will also use professional evaluators to quantitatively and
qualitatively assess the extent to which training targeted at capacity building
in archival research enables community members to address critical needs in
sustaining languages and continue to contribute to the language sciences.
Finally, the informal science learning environment provided by the National BoL
has the potential to show how it facilitates novel discoveries in linguistics as
researchers engage with archival language documentation, while also training new
cohorts of academic and community linguists.