* 1561299
* EAGER: Illuminating the Role of Science Funding on Disparities in Science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Cassidy Sugimoto, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2019
* USD 234,128.00

Although women have been matriculating at a higher rate than men for decades,
they are still underrepresented in elite scholarly positions, produce
proportionally less, and receive fewer citations to their work. One possible
explanation is the allocation of resources to female scientists: women fare
poorly in disciplines where research is expensive, and male authorship is
disproportionately associated with contributing resources, whereas female
authorship is significantly more likely to be associated with labor roles, such
as performing the experiment. This research analyzes the role that federal
funding plays in either mitigating or exacerbating gender disparities in the
scientific workforce. The research examines potential disparities and seeks to
understand how interventions through federal funding could address disparities
and allow for better utilization of the scientific workforce. The short-term
goal of this project is to illuminate the relationships between science funding,
sector of employment, gender, and outcome metrics. The longer-term goal is to
provide data that can be used for further study of the scientific funding
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multivariate analysis is used to analyze the
role of funding on scientific productivity and impact. Data is analyzed over a
decade to estimate effects of funding concentration and returns to scale in
funding. This project is dependent upon the integration of heterogeneous data
sources. Novel methodological techniques are used that allow for robust analyses
of the highly contextual environment of science funding and scientific
productivity. This work advances knowledge in numerous fields. The integration
algorithms have many potential applications in an era of big data--providing
novel methodological innovations for the analysis of large-scale heterogeneous
data; the outcomes of the project informs research in fields such as
informatics, sociology, and economics and will have practical implications for
science policy.