* 1561888
* Two-Dimensional Infrared Spectroscopy of the Conformational Dynamics of Biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Andrei Tokmakoff, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2019
* USD 620,595.00

This award supports the research effort of Professor Andrei Tokmakoff aimed at
developing the experimental method of two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (2D
IR) for the purposes of visualizing how DNA and proteins change their structure
in real time. As important as these processes are in materials chemistry,
biomedical research, and nanotechnology, few experiments are currently capable
of studying how macromolecules change their structure during the course of
chemical reactions and physical processes, since they occur on nanosecond to
microsecond time-scales in solution. This work supports two graduate students as
they learn about solution-phase chemical dynamics, macromolecular structure, and
protein and DNA conformational changes. Additionally, this grant plays a role in
supporting two continually expanding online textbooks, "Time-Dependent Quantum
Mechanics and Spectroscopy" and "Concepts in Biophysical
Chemistry".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific scientific objective of this grant
is to continue the ongoing development of transient 2D IR spectroscopy. The
current method uses a temperature-jump (T-jump) to initiate conformational
changes of proteins and DNA, and tracks the resulting changes in molecular
structure with 2D IR. First, T-jump transient 2D IR experiments are used to
study the conformational dynamics of DNA oligonucleotides, including
hybridization, bubbling, fraying, and base flipping. Second, as a complementary
approach to T-jumps, nanosecond transient pH-jump methods based on photoacids
are developed for transient 2D IR studies of protonation-triggered protein
conformational changes. Finally, the research group is continuing their ongoing
development of 2D IR to study conformational changes to membrane proteins and
lipid bilayers.