* 1561886
* Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchical Metallic Glasses as High-performance Electrocatalysts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Zhenhai Xia, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/28/2022
* USD 436,000.00

There is a strong need for high performance catalysts in energy-related
technologies such as fuel cells and batteries to meet the growing energy demands
across the globe and reduce dependence on fossil fuels. Catalysts in energy
storage and conversion devices promote the key electrochemical reactions that
determine their efficiency, durability and cost. Most of these applications
require that the catalysts have large surface area paired with suitable
chemistry to facilitate the reaction kinetics. Despite progress at various
levels, a versatile nanomanufacturing technology that can meet the necessary
requirements of high catalytic activity, durability and cost effectiveness is
lacking. This award will investigate a new paradigm of metallic nanostructure
catalysts for use in a number of energy conversion and storage applications.
Together with the basic research, an education program will be developed to
provide training and research opportunities to graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students. Special efforts will be made to
encourage women and under-represented minority students to participate in the
research, which will improve their retention in science and engineering. The
concept, theory, and results will be used in strengthening existing and creating
new undergraduate and graduate level courses. The success of this project will
provide a transformative approach for scalable nanomanufacturing of metallic-
glass catalysts for clean energy conversion and storage technologies such as
fuel cells, batteries, and water splitting systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this research are to study fundamental mechanisms of catalytic
activity for metallic glass nanostructures, and to create scalable and low-cost
approaches for nanomanufacturing high-performance amorphous catalysts for energy
conversion and storage technologies. Metallic-glasses are attractive as high-
performance electrocatalysts because of their metastable structure, tunable
chemistry, and availability in a wide range of compositions. Despite these
unique attributes, the application of metallic glasses has been impeded by the
limited ability to produce high-quality catalysts. This research will develop a
novel process that directly transforms conventional metals into high-performance
hierarchical nanocatalysts. In addition, simulations of the metallic-glass
surface morphology and chemistry and their effect on catalytic activity will be
carried out using first-principles methods. The integration of experiment and
computation to determine electro-catalytic activity will speed up the search for
the best metallic glass catalysts, provide better understanding of the catalytic
phenomena, and uncover new reaction mechanisms.