* 1561241
* I-Corps:  A team for development of the education game small business, Substrate Games
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2016
* Eve Wurtele, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Educational games are a potentially transformative technology; they transport
users to an immersive world and confront them with challenges in an environment
that encourages discovery and risk taking. The intrinsic appeal and intuitive
nature of computer games to the millennials and the as-yet-unnamed post-
millennial generation makes them a powerful medium for learning, and they are
beginning to take their place in classrooms as a complement to teacher-based
lectures. The engagement of more young people in science is critical for our
nation. This project will enable the formation of a small business targeted at
serving this need. By vetting the proposed educational computer game concept,
this I-Corps team will set the stage to bring science learning through gaming to
a multitude of other young people; students who might otherwise be uninterested
in science could become hooked and be provided a context for learning by playing
computer games.

The proposed Innovation Corps Teams Program (I-Corps Teams) research will seek
to identify and develop a plan to improve the usability of the proposed product
on marketing, business, design and presentation levels. Presently, computer
games that are in realistic 3D biological (virtual) environments are unavailable
in the market. Yet, this type of realism is exceedingly popular in commercial
computer games. In the longer term, the proposed innovation would result in
computer and mobile games, built by a team of gamers, programmers, artists,
scientists and business experts, that are different from existing types, in that
they enable 3-dimensional gameplay in a scientifically vetted environment. With
a technologically innovative, high-quality product and a vetted
commercialization plan the team will pursue additional resources to assist in
further identifying and affirming the initial target market. The team intends to
use the I-CORPS funding to catalyze the first steps in the development of
Substrate Games into a viable educational gaming company. The team's mission is
to meet the demand of STEM education via innovative interactive applications
that have proven scientific merit, are fun and engaging experiences, and present
themselves with high art and production values that rarely seen among
educational gaming products.