* 1561173
* Collaborative Research: Alteration of microbially-produced carbonate rock by unicellular predators to better understand early Earth's dominant ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Pieter Visscher, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2021
* USD 265,000.00

Collaborative Research: Alteration of microbially-produced carbonate rock by
unicellular predators to better understand early Earth's dominant
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How Earth transitioned from a microbe-dominated
Precambrian world to the Phanerozoic Era with complex multicellular life is a
continuing geological and biological riddle. Studying living microbialites
(carbonate rocks built by microbes, ancient counterparts of coral reefs) in
Fayetteville Green Lake, NY, will help solve this riddle. This interdisciplinary
study will reveal how the internal structure of these living rocks is formed by
microbes and how it is altered by the action of microscopic unicellular
predators (so-called protists). Understanding the role of protists in living
examples will help to decipher microbialites in the rock record, ultimately
improving understanding of the evolution of life on early Earth. The petroleum
industry seeks to improve understanding of microbialites' microstructure. The
discovery of large subsalt reservoirs off the coast of Brazil, Congo, Eritrea
and in the US Gulf of Mexico challenged oil companies to understand the record
of very deep (~1-2 km thick) fossil microbialites present underneath an equally
thick salt layer. This project will increase the understanding of fabric
porosity, and reservoir rocks, critical factors in decision-making during oil
exploration. The major outreach activity will be a Science through Art traveling
exhibition related to microbialite ecosystems and predation on early Earth, with
a tentative title of "Decimation of Slime World" (in other words, predation of
microbialites). This theme will generate wide interest, and will offer
explanations about the research findings in ways that would otherwise escape the
art-loving public sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oldest fossil microbialites
are the most visible manifestations of microbial life on early Earth.
Comprehension of structural differences between microbialite types (e.g.,
clotted thrombolites, laminated stromatolites) is hampered by incomplete
knowledge of their microbiology and early diagenesis. Prokaryotic diversity in
extant marine microbialites is well established, however, until recently
heterotrophic protists inhabiting these structures and their impact on
mesofabric were unknown. A comparative study of non-marine microbialites is
lacking. Fayetteville Green Lake NY (FGL), a Proterozoic ocean analog, supports
extant microbialites in a non-marine setting. Investigations will assess the
role of eukaryotes, notably protists, in microbialite fabric modification and in
the possible transition from laminated to clotted mesofabrics during early
diagenesis. Four hypotheses will be addressed using FGL materials with these
specific aims: 1. Assess biodiversity and activities in microbialites and non-
microbialite habitats via sequencing, Fluorescently Labeled Embedded Core
method, and various microscopy methods. 2. Determine biogeochemistry using
microelectrodes and major in situ microbial activities to link microbiota,
element distribution, and mesofabric. 3. Obtain microbialite mesofabric
information using microCT scanning. 4. Combine SEM-EDS and Synchrotron-based
microXRF to analyze mesofabric features, especially clots, for presence of
pyrite and biogenic metals. 5. Determine impact of foraminifera on microbialite
mesofabric using seeding experiment. 6. Perform ?forced diagenesis? by
incubating microbialite samples under elevated pressure/temperature, inspecting
changes in mesofabric using SEM, µCT and µXRF scanning. 7. Use SEM and
petrographic thin sections to examine relict thrombolite mesofabric for former
eukaryote activity/presence.