* 1561964
* Innovative Tunable Optical Properties in Nanocrystal-based Films by Employing Mechanical Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Rebecca Anthony, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2019
* USD 399,155.00

The future of technology for health monitoring, energy storage and use, and
communications is moving towards flexible, bendable, and stretchable devices,
including wearable devices and "electronic skins". To reach the maximum
potential of these applications, there is a need to discover materials that
exhibit exciting optical and electronic properties while remaining part of a
mechanically flexible system. Nanocrystals present an ideal system to
investigate for this purpose, as they have tunable electromagnetic absorption
and emission properties, are easy and inexpensive to make, and can be integrated
into thin films on stretchable substrates. Despite this, there have been few
studies on the deformation behavior of these systems. This award supports
research to create thin films of luminescent nanocrystals on deformable and
flexible substrates, to measure their optical and mechanical properties, and to
describe and predict the behavior of these films during flexion/stretching. The
projected applications of these systems include forming optical metamaterials
such as tunable gratings and filters, wearable sensors for body metrics, and
flexible energy devices (e.g., light-emitting devices and solar photovoltaics).
The research approach is to combine ideas across mechanical engineering,
materials science, and nanotechnology to create a robust understanding of how
layers of nanocrystals can be controllably deformed. This research will be used
in year-round outreach events to inspire and educate future engineers including
interactions with the general public and targeted events for underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystals, used often in traditional rigid
electronic devices, have the potential to withstand the strain of deformable
device operation. Moreover, they can be made using environmentally friendly
techniques and materials and exhibit exciting size-dependent properties such as
luminescence. In addition, tunable wrinkling, due to instability formation, in
thin films of nanocrystals on pre-stretched elastomeric substrates can be used
to generate new electromagnetic and acoustic meta-materials. The problem is that
the mechanical responses of nanocrystal films to stretching/flexion of the film
substrate are almost completely unknown. This research will be devoted to
experimentally and theoretically filling this knowledge gap. The research will
include experimental studies on the mechanical behavior and instability
formation in nanocrystal/substrate systems, depending on nanocrystal size and
film porosity/thickness. These studies will be complemented by theoretical
modeling of the mechanical properties of the systems to describe the instability
formation. The research will then be integrated and used for predicting and
designing the instabilities in nanocrystal films with ultimate application areas
in stretchable electronics, sensors, and optical/acoustic metamaterials.