* 1561210
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Enhancing the Quality and Efficiency of the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,540.00

The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) was established in 1991 with
the mission to collect, preserve, propagate and distribute diverse resources of
Arabidopsis thaliana and related species. The Center has been serving the
dynamically changing needs of the scientific community that uses Arabidopsis for
research, and has grown to serve more than 27,000 investigators worldwide. The
collection of almost one million stocks comprises seed, DNA, protein and cell
culture stocks, as well as educational materials. With over 200,000 samples
distributed annually, ABRC provides an essential service to the plant research
community involved in understanding the basic processes in plant models, and
ultimately leading to applications to accelerate crop
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the next three years the Center will: 1)
continue to enlarge and expand the collections of resources based on projected
demand, including antibodies and DNA resources from other species; 2) procure,
store and distribute novel types of resources as they are developed and driven
by the needs of the community; 3) continue to increase the efficiency of the
operation, thus providing higher quality of service without a budget increase;
4) continue developing partnerships with Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre
(arabidopsis.info) and the Arabidopsis Information Portal (www.araport.org) in
order to provide online access to stock information and ordering; and 5)
continue to expand the role of ABRC as a resource for education and outreach by
developing new K-12 hands-on programs and by increasing the reach of the
existing K-12 and college-level teaching activities. The updated procedures for
stock handling and maintenance, along with the quality control protocols and
statistics, can be found online (abrc.osu.edu). Education materials are also
available online (abrcoutreach.osu.edu), including the detailed information
about education kits.