* 1561637
* Staying in Science: Examining the Pathways of Underrepresented Youth Mentored in Research
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Timothy Podkul, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,476,474.00

This longitudinal research study will contribute to a broader understanding of
the pathways of STEM-interested high school students from underrepresented
groups who plan to pursue or complete science studies in their post-high school
endeavors. The project will investigate the ways that formative authentic
science experiences may support youth's persistence in STEM. The study focuses
on approximately 900 urban youth who are high interest, high potential STEM
students who participate in, or are alumni of, the Science Research Mentoring
Program. This program provides intensive mentoring for high school youth from
groups underrepresented in STEM careers. It takes place at 17 sites around New
York City, including American Museum of Natural History, which is the original
program site. Identifying key supports and obstacles in the pathways of high-
interest, under-represented youth towards STEM careers can help practitioners
design more inclusive and equitable STEM learning experiences and supports. In
this way, the project will capitalize on student interest so that students with
potential continue to persist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand
better the factors that influence these students, this research combines
longitudinal social network and survey data with interviews and case studies, as
well as an analysis of matched student data from New York City Public Schools'
records. The research questions in the study are a) how do youths' social
networks develop through their participation in scientists' communities of
practice? b) what is the relationship between features of the communities of
practice and youths' social networks, measures of academic achievement, and
youths' pursuit of a STEM major? and c) what are the variations in youth
pathways in relationship to learner characteristics, composition of social
networks, and features of the community of practice? The research design allows
for a rich, layered perspective of student pathways. In particular, by employing
social network analysis, this study will reveal relational features of
persistence that may be particularly critical for underrepresented youth, for
whom STEM role models and cultural brokers provide an otherwise unavailable
sense of belonging and identity in STEM. The study will also access a New York
City Public Schools data set comprised of student-level records containing
biographical and demographic variables, secondary and postsecondary course
enrollment and grades, exam scores, persistence/graduation indicators, linked
responses to post-secondary surveys, and post-education employment records and
wages. These data enable examination of inter-relationships between in-school
achievement and out-of-school STEM experiences through comparison of program
participants to similar non-participant peers. This project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.