* 1561550
* Assessment Literacy for the Development of Teacher Understanding with the Next Generation Science Standards
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2022
* James Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,499,856.00

This project examines how high school science teachers develop practices of
classroom assessment in order to make instructional decisions that optimize
student learning in light of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). In
implementing the NGSS, teachers are faced with performance expectations that
integrate cross-cutting concepts, practices and disciplinary core ideas in ways
that depart from more traditional content-focused goals. The practices entail a
range of science literacies including question generation, data representation,
explanatory modeling, and communication among scientists and with the general
public. To be successful, teachers must align these multi-dimensional student
performance expectations with instruction that supports these and assessments
that demonstrate students' progress. This project engages high school science
teachers to develop assessments that cover the multiple dimensions of the
performance expectations. Developing these assessments occurs as teachers focus
on the nature of the evidence in student work that would indicate progress
toward proficiency. Teachers work in learning communities so they can draw on
each others' content and pedagogical expertise as they iteratively refine their
assessment designs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon hypothetical
learning trajectories for teachers, comprising five dimensions of teacher
knowledge and practice: Assessment literacy and practices; views of student
roles in assessment practices; participation within collaborative design teams;
assessment design practices aligned with NGSS; and NGSS-aligned instructional
practices. These dimensions organize a three-year professional development
sequence for teachers from six different urban public high schools of a large
and diverse school district. The location of this work also enables
consideration of how teachers progressively address factors such as language
learning, student economic backgrounds, and the needs of special education
students. Throughout the sequence, teachers work within professional learning
communities focused on iterative cycles of assessment design, implementation,
reflection, and revision. The project applies mixed-methods to a variety of data
sources, including teacher surveys, documentation of assessment design cycles,
student work products, and observations of instructional practices. Analyses aim
to further develop the hypothetical learning trajectories, obtain additional
insights into teacher collaborative practices, and examine the relationship
between changes in teacher assessment practices, their instructional methods,
and student learning. Furthermore, engaging teachers in not only the
collaborative design of assessments but also in the co-design of the
professional development sequence reinforces this project's capacity to afford
and foster local innovations that mitigate or resolve tensions extant in science
education. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program.
The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field.