* 1561814
* Statistical Methods for Differential Network Biology with Applications to Aging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Daniel Promislow, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,188,872.00

Networks are widely used in molecular biology to model interactions among
components of biological systems and gain insight into changes in biological
mechanism associated with various diseases. Recent evidence suggests that
changes in biological networks, including rewiring or disruption of key
interactions, may be associated with the development of complex diseases. This
research project is motivated by the study of changes in metabolic networks in
association with evolution and aging. The project aims to develop new
statistical machine learning methods to determine whether evolutionary changes
are manifested through changes in how metabolites interact with each other in
metabolic pathways. More broadly, the methodologies under development in this
project and the accompanying software will provide novel tools for biomedical
researchers to infer differential patterns of connectivity in molecular networks
associated with complex diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies under
development in this project utilize the framework of graphical models to
estimate interactions among components of biological networks and identify
changes in such networks associated with evolution and aging. Probabilistic
graphical models provide a general framework for modeling interactions among
random variables. While recent methodological and theoretical advances have
facilitated the applications of graphical models to analysis of high-dimensional
biological networks, existing methods are not applicable to heterogeneous and
non-Gaussian observations obtained from mass-spectrometry-based metabolomics
profiling experiments in complex aging studies. The research project aims to
bridge this gap by developing new statistical machine learning methods for
learning graphical models from heterogeneous and non-Gaussian observations and
inferring changes in graphical models in different subpopulations. In
particular, the project will (i) develop a flexible framework for estimation of
multiple graphical models from heterogeneous populations with complex
structures, (ii) develop an inference framework for detecting differential
connectivity in biological networks, and (iii) provide a general framework for
estimation of non-Gaussian graphical models, with changes over time or
experimental conditions. Together, these tools provide a comprehensive framework
for differential network analysis and will advance the current state of
statistical machine learning methods for the analysis of high-dimensional
biological networks.