* 1561143
* The Role of Mechanistic Explanations in Learning about Science and Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Frank Keil, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2022
* USD 2,345,949.00

This project, led by a team of researchers from Yale University, will focus on
the role of causal mechanistic explanations in children's and adults' learning
of STEM content and will examine the relations to engagement with science
education. Learning the specific mechanistic details of natural phenomena and
devices is often envisioned as an ideal goal of STEM learning, yet such
information is typically forgotten soon after instruction by children, as well
as by adults. The researchers will pursue the hypothesis that such mechanisms
should still be taught because, after the specific details have been forgotten,
what remains promotes enduring representations and facilitates higher order
learning. This alternative view emphasizes learning that much more closely
mirrors how informal science (and often formal science as well) actually works.
This project will build on recent cognitive science discoveries about the kinds
of knowledge that are most robustly represented both in folk science and in
formal science. Four sets of experiments will explore developmental changes in
preferences for mechanistic explanations, what is retained from exposure, the
effects of different learning goals on the use of mechanistic information in
learning STEM content, and the development of abilities to infer internal
mechanistic structures. If the hypothesis is supported, the results will suggest
that exposure to causal mechanistic information is essential to early science
education and that such content should not be omitted even though its details
are forgotten. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which
supports fundamental research that advances the research literature on STEM
learning, and has implications for education in both formal and informal
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve four sets of
randomized controlled experiments, primarily with children at grades K, 2, and
4. Study Set 1 will explore the cognitive basis and development of children's
preference for explanations that involve a causal mechanism. The researchers
will use a choice paradigm that contrasts mechanistic explanations with other
forms of information. Children will be asked which explanation they would like
to learn more about for a given object. Strong preferences for mechanistic
information are predicted at all ages, but with developmental differences
relating to overall complexity, the domains queried, and kinds of mechanism
involved. Study Set 2 will present children with mechanistic explanations for
devices and biological entities. Children will then be assessed for retention of
mechanistic details, functional properties, non-mechanistic details, judged
complexity, broad causal patterns such as causal centrality and potency, and
which of two experts to consult to learn more about the entity. These children
will be compared to control children who will also learn about the same internal
parts but with no causal or functional language that reveals mechanism. Rapid
decay of detailed mechanistic information is expected in both groups, but the
mechanism group should show more enduring memories for information relating to
complexity, centrality, and expertise domains. Study Set 3 will focus on goal
framing. The researchers will first look at children's and adults' intuitions
about what is retained after exposure to causal mechanistic explanations,
expecting a strong explicit bias favoring retention of vivid details and a
neglect of what actually endures and is most often used. Later studies will ask
how different learning goals interact with mechanism instruction. Greater
enjoyment, engagement, feelings of accomplishment and retention of information
are predicted with learning goals stressing more cognitively feasible and useful
outcomes. Study Set 4 will focus on complexity intuitions. The investigators
will look at how internal complexity is inferred for devices and animals based
on behavioral diversity. They will also explore how mechanistic complexity is
instantiated in different domains.