* 1561748
* Securing the collection of University of Montana's Zoological Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Charles Janson, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,865.00

More than 20,000 biological specimens housed at the University of Montana
Zoological Museum will be relocated to a newly constructed building where museum
grade metal cabinetry will replace deteriorating wood-and-metal cabinets
accumulated over the past century. The larger space, more efficient storage and
more secure cabinetry will ensure the preservation and future growth of one of
the largest collections of historical and modern mammals and birds in the
Northern Rockies. The move will be combined with an update to the database,
making it compatible with international standards for collections data. Thus,
information from all specimens held by the Museum will become broadly accessible
to the general public. The Museum's extensive regional collection of birds and
mammals provides a unique historical perspective on modern species distributions
and genetic responses to landscape changes. The relocation and digitization of
this substantial collection will provide training and discovery opportunities in
biology and museum science for high school and undergraduate students, including
summer internships for four students from Montana tribal
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide urgently needed
curatorial upgrades to the collection of more than 20,000 specimens of modern-
day vertebrates at the University of Montana Zoological Museum (UMZM). As the
largest collection of modern land vertebrate specimens from Montana, and among
the largest such vertebrate collections in the northern Rocky Mountains, the
UMZM provides an important source of materials for research, formal education,
and outreach. Current University of Montana faculty are actively using the
collections to study diverse questions biological questions, however, the
potential for broader accessibility, ongoing specimen preservation, and future
growth is severely limited by current infrastructure. Securing the collection
will occur via transfer of all research specimens to new cabinets in an archival
space. This move will also result in a fourfold increase of the area available
to work with the specimens. Building on UM's active incorporation of the
collections into undergraduate teaching and research, this project will increase
outreach to the local public by new exhibits of UMZM collections centered on
seasonal themes, training of K12 teachers to help incorporate biodiversity
science into their curricula, and mentored internships at the UMZM of Native
American students from regional tribal colleges. The project's activities will
be documented at the UMZM's new website (hs.umt.edu/UMZM). The new database
will, for the first time, allow web-based access to specimen data from the UMZM
collections for academic and other researchers via VertNet and Arctos. These
data will be shared with and made accessible with iDigBio (idigbio.org).