* 1561192
* Patent Licensing, Technology Transfer, and Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Robin Feldman, University of California, Hastings College of the Law
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 09/30/2018
* USD 387,324.00

Patent reform is an important policy topic in the United States today,
particularly in the software, technology, and service industries where
Intellectual Property (IP) is a key asset. High litigation costs in patent
infringement cases favor licensing agreements and financial settlements,
regardless of the actual merits of the case. Some argue that non-practicing
entities, who have no production interests, harm innovative activity though
aggressive licensing and costly litigation. Others believe that non-practicing
entities facilitate innovation by licensing to companies that develop and
manufacture new products, creating jobs and economic growth. This research will
survey companies to gain information on the true value of patent licensing, with
a focus on licenses from non-practicing entities. Data will be collected on how
often licensing actually leads to innovation, technology transfer, and new
technical knowledge. The results will inform patent reform as Congress and
numerous state legislatures require reliable to maintain the strength of
American innovation system.

Detailed company surveys are among the best options for eliciting new
information in patent policy research, given that most patent disputes do not
progress to the litigation stage and therefore are not captured in existing
legal databases. In fact, some 90% of patent enforcement activity may take place
outside of court proceedings. Further, companies are unwilling to discuss
agreements publicly because of non-disclosure agreements and fears of
retaliation. This research will result in the creation of a large data set that
can be used for other projects focusing on patent licensing and royalty
agreements.