* 1561446
* TWC: Medium: Steganography in Empirical Sources Using Acquisition Oracle
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Jessica Fridrich, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2021
* USD 575,885.00

The project focuses on advancing the field of digital image steganography -- a
covert way of communication in which information is hidden in other objects,
such as digital media files, to assure privacy. For a secure steganographic
system, it should be impossible to prove the presence of hidden data. Achieving
this level of security in practice is extraordinarily difficult because digital
media is hard to describe using statistical models with accuracy necessary to
guarantee perfect security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project works with
devices that acquire an image to learn a sufficiently accurate model within
which it becomes possible to construct steganography with a verifiable level of
security and performance that can be contrasted with theoretically achievable
limits. The result is a novel advanced privacy tool needed in countries that
prohibit the use of encryption or in a hostile environment when there is need to
communicate without attracting attention via channels in control of an adversary
or via public, insecure channels. On the other hand, a deeper understanding of
the limits of covert communication will facilitate better defense against such
methods of deception, an effort recognized as steganalysis. The project explores
commercial applications of data hiding include signal authentication, integrity
verification, and secure data dissemination. This research contributes to
trusted information exchange, data mining, information assurance, network and
computer security, counter-deception, and intrusion detection and its
prevention.