* 1561493
* Exploring factors that shape education &amp; workplace training on essential 21st century competencies: A translational study in four high-STEM job regions
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Kelly Martin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 04/30/2021
* USD 649,626.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison and the Rochester Institute of Technology
will implement a collaborative project to investigate whether specific 21st
century competencies are being cultivated in postsecondary classrooms and
workplace training, and the cultural, organizational, and systemic factors that
support or impede such practices. Researchers will also examine how educators
and employers define critical workforce competencies, student and employee
experiences with education/training and the transition from school to work, and
types of cross-sector partnerships that bridge the gaps between higher education
and STEM industries. The fields investigated include photonics, information
technology, energy, and advanced manufacturing industries in four regions in the
U.S. with high concentrations of STEM jobs -- Seattle, WA, Raleigh, NC, Houston,
TX, and Denver, CO. The study will result in a comprehensive account of how
educators in a sample of 2- and 4-year institutions as well as STEM-related
industries think about and actively cultivate key 21st century competencies. It
will provide empirical evidence of how and when students and employees attain
transferrable skills that are critical for their success in school, life, and
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use a framework
integrating field theory, cultural models theory, and systems dynamics to guide
a mixed-methods study to investigate five research questions: (1) How do
educators and employers define, value, and incorporate into instruction and
workplace training the essential 21st century competencies of collaboration,
problem solving, communication, and self-regulated learning? (2) To what degree
do students engage in these competencies in the classroom? (3) How do students
and employees define, value, and think they are learning about these skills?,
(4) What is the nature of cross-sector relations between education and industry
in each region? and (5) Which individual, organizational, and sectoral factors
influence whether (a) these skills are cultivated in school and/or work, and (b)
active learning techniques are utilized? A concurrent mixed-methods design will
involve collecting interview data from faculty and administrators (n=80) and
business owners (n=80), classroom observation data from faculty (n=64), focus
group data from students (n=80) and employees (n=80), and survey data from a
larger sample of educators and employers (n=464). To study instructional
practices, a new module focusing on 21st century competencies will be developed
for the Teaching Dimensions Observation Protocol (TDOP), and data will be
analyzed using the ICAP (interactive, constructive, active, and passive modes of
learning) framework. Data will be analyzed also using inductive content, social
network, logistic and multiple regression, and causal network analytic
techniques as appropriate to the dataset and research questions. The research
team will hold one-day workshops for local stakeholders in each region, as well
as a summative national conference, to present regional field data, provide
training on how to integrate key 21st century competencies into existing
curricula and workplace training programs, and to open new lines of
communication between and among educators, employers, government, and other
community members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in three thematic
areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation, and
STEM workforce development.