* 1561423
* COLLABORATIVE: Women's Engineering Participation in the US: What can the US Learn from Women's Decisions to Pursue Engineering in Diverse Cultural Contexts?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Karen Bradley, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 39,018.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Women's participation in engineering is a
crucial national priority. The shortage of engineers in the US weakens the
country's position as a leader in the global market and restricts our capacity
to solve infrastructural challenges. This project involves research in four
countries (Jordan, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, and Tunisia) to assess the contextual
factors that encourage women's participation in engineering in tertiary
education and as a career. In three of the four countries identified (Jordan,
Malaysia, and Tunisia), women's participation in engineering is much higher than
in the US, despite social, political, and economic restrictions on women's
participation in public life. In the fourth country (Saudi Arabia), women's
engineering participation is also on the rise. This project seeks to understand
the links between cultural context and expanding women's STEM participation by
studying the drivers of women's participation in these contexts. The research is
significant because it promises to document factors that encourage women's
successful participation in STEM in social, political, and cultural contexts
that are very different from the US. These explorations of women's success, in
turn, promise to shed light more generally on how context shapes women's
participation in STEM in ways that inform our efforts to broaden participation
in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Women's
participation is engineering is a crucial national priority. The shortage of
engineers in the US weakens the country's position as a leader in the global
market and restricts our capacity to solve infrastructural challenges. This
project entails conducting research in four countries (Jordan, Malaysia, Saudi
Arabia, and Tunisia) to assess the contextual factors that encourage women's
participation in engineering in tertiary education and as a career. In three of
the four countries identified (Jordan, Malaysia, and Tunisia), women's
participation in engineering is much higher than in the US, despite social,
political, and economic restrictions on women's participation in public life. In
the fourth country (Saudi Arabia), women's engineering participation is also
rising. This project seeks to understand the links between cultural context and
expanding women's STEM participation by studying the economic, educational,
socio-cultural, legal, and political drivers of women's participation in these
contexts. This project will apply case study methods to collect rich data from
focus groups and in-depth interviews in each country with female engineering
undergraduate students, faculty members, and practicing engineers (total
N=208-325). The research is significant because it promises to document factors
that encourage women's successful participation in STEM in social, political,
and cultural contexts that are very different from the US. With its cross-
national, in-depth exploration of women's curricular and career choices and its
attention to mechanisms producing gender-differentiated curricular and career
decisions, this project promises to shed light more generally on how context
shapes women's successful participation in STEM in ways that inform our efforts
to broaden participation in the US.&lt;br/&gt;