* 1561041
* EAGER: Tadoop: A Dual-Purpose Framework Taming the Bipolarity of Storage and Communication for High-Performance Computing and Data Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 08/16/2015,07/31/2018
* Weikuan Yu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 204,767.00

High-performance computing (HPC) providers and applications need next-generation
solutions to process big data from scientific simulations. Conventional HPC
systems found in national laboratories and universities are constructed based on
the compute-centric paradigm while enterprise big data analytics applications
prefer a data-centric paradigm such as MapReduce. Distinct architectural
differences between these two paradigms demand unconventional approaches. This
project takes a radically different approach to investigate key architectural
components in compute-centric and data-centric paradigms, designs a
transformative dual-purpose framework called Tadoop that addresses their
bipolarity issues in storage and communication management, and unifies them for
both HPC and enterprise analytics applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This high-
risk Tadoop framework can enable a transformative data infrastructure for both
HPC and data analytics applications and lead to broader impact in several
aspects, such as demonstrating the transformation of existing HPC
infrastructures into dual-purpose systems for computing and analytics, improving
computer science curricula and instruction effectiveness, strengthening
multidisciplinary data analytics research, releasing open-source software code,
and transferring technologies for commercial service.&lt;br/&gt;