* 1561728
* Learning from Online Lectures in STEM: Using Multimedia Principles and Fostering Social Agency with Transparent Whiteboards
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Andrew Stull, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,118,310.00

A team of investigators from the University of California - Santa Barbara,
together with researchers from the University of Georgia, will conduct research
on how to improve the design of online undergraduate instruction in biology and
chemistry that involves video. The researchers will test the hypothesis based on
a leading theory of multimedia learning that when instructors face students
throughout the lesson (by using a transparent whiteboard), students should learn
more than when instructors turn their backs on the camera and face the board
while drawing, as is the case with conventional whiteboards. They should be
better able to integrate what the instructor is saying with visualizations such
as diagrams and graphs in real time. They should also be able to take advantage
of social cues and feel more of a connection with the instructor, increasing
motivation. Transparent whiteboards may be particularly beneficial for learning
in STEM disciplines where there is a heavy demand on connecting verbal
explanations with complex spatial and analytical representations. This project
will extend existing theories of how students learn from social cues
incorporated within multimedia lessons, and provide research-based principles
for improving the design of video-based instruction in STEM fields. The project
will also support best teaching practices for promoting STEM learning in the
burgeoning arena of online classrooms such as through MOOCs (massively open
online courses) for students learning outside of traditional courses and flipped
classrooms (presenting lectures via online lectures and using class time for
learning activities and discussion) for traditional courses. The project is
funded by the EHR Core Research program, which supports fundamental research
that advances the research literature on STEM learning, and has implications for
education in both formal and informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
studies will examine how two different whiteboard technologies affect students
learning in STEM domains. Students will learn about concepts in organic
chemistry or genetics with the aid of either transparent whiteboards (in which
the instructor faces the students while drawing and explaining) or conventional
whiteboards (in which the instructor does not). Dependent measures include
student accuracy of interpreting representations, solving spatial problems, and
learning transfer at immediate and delayed testing. In addition, eye-tracking
analytics (fixations and saccades), physiological measures (electrodermal
activity and heart rate), and individual difference measures (spatial and
reasoning ability) will be collected. This project will yield research-based (a)
practices for the development and delivery of video-based lessons that are
grounded in empirical research and that address limitations of conventional
practice, (b) guidelines for the design of instruction in STEM domains that
promotes learning transfer that are based on educational theory, and (c)
principles for the elimination of unnecessary barriers to learning and the
mitigation of difficulties in spatial learning and reasoning required for a
productive STEM workforce. The project expands research and theory related to
principles of multimedia learning and learning from social cues in multimedia
learning environments. Specifically, the efficacy of a potentially useful system
for delivering online lectures will be systematically evaluated.