* 1561217
* Collaborative Research: Foundations of Quantitative Thought: Number, Space, Time, and Probability
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Sara Cordes, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2021
* USD 177,496.00

Humans have an innate ability to estimate quantities yet their intuitions often
contain biases that interfere with learning new ways to think about quantity.
Weaving together strands of psychology, neuroscience, economics, and education,
researchers at Wesleyan University and Boston College shed light on the
cognitive processes underlying our abilities to estimate 4 kinds of quantities:
number, space, time, and probability. By comparing processes across these four
distinct areas, the researchers aim to provide a unifying account of how
children and adults estimate quantities, which has the potential to transform
current understanding of the cognitive bases of how people learn in and across
STEM disciplines. Achieving a simple unifying account is important because the
ability to think well about quantity in all of these areas is fundamental to
STEM learning. Other educational benefits include the establishment of
partnerships with local museums that allow the research team to collect data
from a diverse population while also supporting the museum's public education
efforts. This project also contributes to STEM workforce development by training
undergraduate students through a service-learning course offered at Wesleyan,
and through a summer research internship exchange across the two universities.
These aspects of the project, taken with its robust theoretical grounding, well-
formulated research questions and tests of competing models of how people reason
about quantity in childhood and adulthood, demonstrate its potential to guide
and improve the design of STEM learning environments for all
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exemplifies the Education and Human
Resources Core Research program's commitment to fundamental research on learning
in STEM that combines theory, techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of
disciplines and contexts. Specifically, it aims to provide a unifying account of
how children and adults estimate quantities across four distinct domains: the
development of numerical estimation; spatial categorization (remembering the
location of items in space); the theoretical neuroscience of time processing
(reproducing temporal durations); and decision making under risk (the processing
of probabilities). Through a series of behavioral studies with adults and
children, the researchers will test their hypothesis that proportion judgment
underlies basic quantity estimation across these domains, across development,
and across contexts (varying task constraints). This work is important because
-- despite striking similarities in behaviors described across research in these
literatures -- each one conceptualizes them quite differently, positing
different accounts of the underlying mechanisms that yield quantity judgments.
The project will advance and potentially transform our understanding of mental
representations and processes involved in quantity judgments while also
providing insight into how quantity biases may influence the processing of
numerical information in educational contexts and real-life decisions. In this
way the project builds a coherent, cumulative knowledge base, focusing on high-
leverage topics.