* 1561515
* CSBR: Natural History: Addressing Critical Needs in the Ornithology and Herpetology Collections of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Carla Cicero, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,856.00

CSBR: Natural History: Addressing Critical Collection Needs at UC - Berkeley's
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An award is made to the
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology (MVZ), a center for research and education at the
University of California, Berkeley. Its collections of over 700,000 specimens
are used for research, education, and to inform conservation decisions.
Implementation of the planned activities will secure this biodiversity data
resource for the advancement of scientific research. Specifically, the value and
security of the MVZ collections will be enhanced through upgrades to the storage
conditions of the ornithology collection. Also, rare specimens and associated
information will be cataloged and made accessible, potentially increasing their
use in research and informing resource management decisions. The collection
includes species that are protected and poorly represented in most museum
collections. Additionally, some samples are important for understanding disease
spread, reproduction, physiology, and population changes over time. The project
will leverage existing outreach efforts at the museum and continue the museum's
tradition of student mentorship and training. This will, in part, be achieved
through a workshop on the curation and use of museum data. Students and
postgraduates will be trained in curation methods, modern collection management
and data standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two major goals: (1)
Enhance pest protection of the MVZ Ornithology collection by replacing a subset
of the bird specimen cases to protect against future infestations. This aspect
of the project focuses on passerine skins as they comprise the bulk of the MVZ
bird collection, are the most actively growing part of the collection, and are
most heavily used by researchers. The work performed will also involve
reorganization of the collection to reflect current published taxonomies,
facilitating its use for research and teaching. (2) Provide long-term security
of Ornithology and Herpetology specimens and data by cataloging 14 special
acquisitions. Over 3,000 specimens in Ornithology and over 19,000 in Herpetology
have been accepted through special donations and specimen transfers of orphaned
collections since 1995. These acquisitions include: unique series or specimen
preparations not found in other museum collections; specimens of historic and/or
geographic relevance to NSF-funded research aimed at documenting faunal change
over the past century; and rare and/or endangered and globally diverse amphibian
specimens used for studying the effects of deadly chytrid fungus. These
acquisitions contain critically important, but currently inaccessible data for
scientific research and discovery and they enhance knowledge about biodiversity
and environmental change through species, data, and geographic areas that are
underrepresented in museum collections. By cataloging these collections, the
specimens will be secured long-term and available more quickly to the scientific
community. The MVZ is a leader in biodiversity data projects, and all data will
be made available globally through Arctos, VertNet, iDigBio, GBIF, and other
data portals. Broader impacts of this project include a webcast Digital Curation
and Data Quality Workshop and new public displays that further the MVZ's
mission. Plans are to develop new community outreach across multiple age groups,
and recruit and train new students, postgraduates, and interns. The principal
investigators will mentor and/or employ 20 individuals and train an additional
35 participants through the workshop and webcast.