* 1562051
* Collaborative Research: Resilient Decentralized Estimation and Control for Cooperative Rigid Body Multivehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Tansel Yucelen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

This collaborative research program will significantly advance autonomous
navigation and control capabilities for cooperative multivehicle systems, by
incorporating realistic vehicle and communication models, and resilient
decentralized estimation and control strategies. The results will be applicable,
for example, to swarms of micro air vehicles and formations of spacecraft.
Powerful analytic techniques exist to control individual vehicles, to represent
the interactions of networked systems, to accommodate communication delays, and
to account for uncertainty. This project will address the substantial technical
obstacles that stand in the way of integrating these various results in a
unified framework. The ability to exploit large numbers of interconnected
vehicles to perform practical operations is increasingly useful -- even
necessary -- in applications including exploration, search and rescue,
agriculture, weather monitoring, surveillance, satellite geodesy, and
environmental monitoring. Integrated educational efforts include demonstrations
to high school students of robotic vehicles and multi-agent network control
simulations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current approaches to multi-vehicle
estimation and control designs invoke strong simplifying assumptions, such as
modeling individual vehicle dynamics by a point mass or by a single- or double-
integrator; assuming that all vehicles have identical dynamics and uncertainty
characterization; and neglecting communication delays, or assuming that they are
known or constant. The resulting idealized controllers have limited
functionality under real-world conditions. This project strives to overcome
these limitations by using diverse techniques from robust, nonlinear, and hybrid
control theory, graph theory, and geometric mechanics. The multivehicle system
is described by a unique, global, and singularity-free representation, as a
network of heterogeneous rigid bodies evolving on separate copies of the special
Euclidean group SE(3) -- that is, on the space of rigid translations and
rotations in three dimensions. The inter-vehicle communication topology is
specified by a time-varying graph with heterogeneous, connection-dependent time
delay. Global, robust and resilient estimation and control schemes will be based
on a Lyapunov-Morse-Krasovskii functional approach, and implemented using
decentralized algorithms, that is, each vehicle will require only local
information to compute its control action. The results will be validated with
laboratory-scale experiments, and will advance the system-theoretical
foundations of decentralized estimation and control, and enable more capable,
robust, and autonomous multi-vehicle systems.