* 1562339
* Optimal Path Planning Among Mobile Sources of Threat in Complex Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Efstathios Bakolas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 273,835.00

This research effort will create novel algorithms for path planning and
trajectory generation by a controlled mobile system operating in an environment
populated by multiple mobile threats. These threats correspond to objects moving
unpredictably, or possibly maliciously. The chosen worst-case approach models
the mobile threats as pursuers actively and intelligently seeking a collision.
The specific objective of the algorithm is to safely steer the controlled system
to its destination, while minimizing the cumulative exposure to all threat
sources. Accounting for all possible actions by all pursuers quickly results in
a problem too large for even the most powerful computer. To make the
calculations practical, the problem is divided into two parts -- first a short-
term evasion strategy considering only the single most imminent threat, and
second a long-term steering strategy with the goal of safely steering the
controlled system to its goal destination while accounting for all threats. As
air travel and automobile traffic become more autonomous, it becomes imperative
for these systems to accommodate one or more uncommunicative, malfunctioning, or
malicious agents. Finally, undergraduate and under-represented students will
have the opportunity to work under the supervision of the PI in research
projects related to the scope of this research effort via two different research
programs which are offered every summer semester at the University of Texas at
Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems of capture-evasion in the presence of
multiple sources of threat are generally computationally intractable. This
project approaches such problems using a combination of a short-term evasion
strategy and a long-term steering strategy. The short-term strategy is based on
a suitably defined threat metric, which is a state-dependent metric that
measures the closeness of an evader from the highest-risk threat, while
accounting for the dynamic and input constraints of both parties. The long-term
strategy is primarily intended to steer the evader to its goal destination,
while its cumulative exposure to every pursuer along its ensuing trajectory is
kept low at all times. This project approaches these problems in the following
stages: 1) Formulate the differential game describing multiple, potentially
adversarial, decision makers as a path planning problem considering multiple
mobile sources of threat. 2) Define a computationally tractable solution
approach. 3) Leverage modern techniques such as sampling-based algorithms to
address the path planning problem subject to non-trivial dynamic and input
constraints, with time-varying state constraints to represent mobile obstacle.
4) Validate the solution to the capture-evasion problem by comparing its
performance, in terms of the likelihood of the evader safely reaching its
destination, against Monte Carlo simulations and other powerful but time-
consuming numerical solution techniques.