* 1562490
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Building Structural Resilience through Innovation in Steel Diaphragms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jerome Hajjar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 231,989.00

America relies on a robust and resilient building stock to minimize harm to its
citizens and damage to its economy due to extreme natural hazards such as
earthquakes and hurricanes. In the past, structural engineers have focused their
attention on creating stronger, more ductile, more reliable lateral-resistance
systems that can be used within the walls of buildings to resist the extreme
demands associated with these natural hazards. Comparatively little attention
has been paid to the role of the floor systems of buildings in resisting these
demands. The floor diaphragm acts as a critical element that distributes the
demands developed in a building during an extreme event to the lateral-
resistance systems and eventually to the building foundation. Steel deck, i.e.,
thin corrugated steel panels typically with concrete fill, forms one of the most
commonly used diaphragm elements in multi-story steel buildings. This project
has as its objectives: to develop fundamental understanding of steel deck
diaphragms as structural systems integrated within the overall building
performance, to develop improved strategies for accurate modeling of floor
systems within three-dimensional building models, and to develop new solutions
for steel deck diaphragms that enhance the overall structural resilience of
buildings.

Current lack of knowledge about floor diaphragm systems impedes a needed
evolution for building design approaches from focusing on two-dimensional frame
design to enabling creative solutions within three-dimensional building design.
The utilization of the diaphragm as an energy dissipating system has not been
harnessed nor optimized in buildings. This project will develop a series of
building archetypes appropriate to steel deck diaphragms. An integrated
experimental program will be conducted at the connection and diaphragm scale,
including novel non-contact measurement schemes for revealing damage and
deformations during testing, to bridge critical knowledge gaps that currently
impede three-dimensional modeling and design of buildings. To explore new
solutions for energy-dissipating diaphragms, this project will perform testing
of structural fuses and develop prototypes for integrating these fuses into
steel diaphragm systems. This project will also complete high fidelity material
and geometric nonlinear finite element models to enable detailed investigations
of the flow of forces in diaphragms and between the diaphragm and all connected
components. A series of lower fidelity, reduced order models will be developed,
appropriate for whole building analysis of selected building archetypes. Formal
optimization of the role of the diaphragm in building response, including a
novel two-level optimization scheme, will be performed. Taken together, these
activities will provide a significant advancement in the state-of-the-art for
design of building diaphragms. Through a comprehensive outreach effort with
industry, the findings will be transferred to engineers and utilized to improve
the structural resilience of the nation's buildings.