* 1562613
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: TribalNet: Expanding Internet Accessibility and Participation on Native American Reservations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Carleen Maitland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 108,333.00

Tribal communities represent the final frontiers of Internet access in the U.S.,
with fast (broadband) Internet access available to fewer than 10% of Native
Americans on tribal reservation lands. The lack of broadband access is caused by
a collection of challenges, including remote terrain, inadequate funding, and
complex telecommunication policies. Yet Native Americans need reliable avenues
for participation and contribution to Internet content to strengthen their
communities. This project investigates technologies that will increase Internet
availability on reservation lands. Further, it will develop new methodologies of
disseminating Internet content to reservation residents, prioritizing content by
relevance during periods of limited connectivity. Ethnographic methods and
interviews of Native Americans residing on the reservations will be incorporated
to ensure usability and utility of the proposed solutions. Through the trial of
the solutions within Southern California tribal communities, the work has the
potential to reach over 2,700 homes and 60 community anchor institutions. Within
the three participating institutions, the PIs will include in courses results
from the research that demonstrate the positive humanitarian impact of computer
science in order to increase the appeal of computer science to female and
minority groups.

The goal of the research is to make critical inroads to addressing the lack of
Internet access on tribal reservations, to increase the number of Native
American reservation residents who are able to engage with, create, and
disseminate Internet and on-line social network content. This project will
achieve this goal through four related elements: (1) develop an architecture
suitable for a multi-network setting comprised of cellular, wireless ISP and
whitespace networks, where coverage, cost and network speed varies; (2) develop
a tribal content distribution network, consisting of computation and storage at
cellular, wireless ISP and white space towers across the reservation, that
delivers content to and receives content from end users; (3) conduct a limited
empirical study of Internet use and organizational network technology use
capacity within the TDV community using ethnographic methods to inform the
content prioritization and distribution mechanisms. Interviews will also be
conducted and engaged in prototyping activities as needed to ensure that the
system interfaces support use and administration by members of the community;
(4) collect and analyze multiple years worth of traffic from the TDV network to
develop models of content relevance and consumption to prioritize content
distribution in the network.