* 1562587
* Understanding the Consequences of Cell-to-Cell Mechanical Variation in the Heart
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Stuart Campbell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 10/31/2019
* USD 412,473.00

The heart is made of millions of individual muscle cells that must contract
together in a coordinated way to pump blood. Because the cells must work
together, they are electrically connected to one another to synchronize beating.
It might have been expected that the strength and speed of contraction would be
the same in neighboring cells. However, when cells are separate, their
mechanical behavior is surprisingly different. It is not clear how these cells,
being so different mechanically, still work together to produce efficient
pumping. In this project, cell-to-cell mechanical variation will be measured in
small samples of heart tissue. From this information, an accurate computer model
of heart tissue can be created. The model will help explain how cell-to-cell
variation impacts overall tissue function. Finally, the predictions made by the
model will be tested in engineered heart tissues, which allow the amount of cell
variability to be adjusted and studied. This work is significant because cell
variability tends to increase with aging and in certain diseases. A clearer
understanding of how variation contributes to normal and abnormal heart function
could ultimately inspire effective treatments for cardiac disorders that are
currently incurable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New data suggest that adjacent cells
from healthy heart tissue display substantial mechanical differences. How this
'microscale heterogeneity' affects the mechanical function of bulk myocardium
has never been studied, but has far-reaching implications. This project examines
the impact of microscale heterogeneity by testing two hypotheses: (1) That it
has an appreciable influence on myocardial contraction even in normal hearts,
and (2) That increasing microscale heterogeneity beyond normal limits disrupts
tissue function. After measuring the nature and scope of microscale
heterogeneity, its effects on tissue mechanical behavior will be predicted using
a novel multiscale computational model. This model is comprised of a
biophysically detailed muscle contraction model embedded in a finite element
mesh for simulation of three-dimensional tissue mechanics. The predictions
produced by the model can be tested by genetically manipulating cellular
heterogeneity in engineered myocardial tissue mimics and measuring their
biomechanical characteristics. The aggregate behavior of a network of adjacent
but functionally different muscle cells has the potential of displaying new and
surprising emergent properties. If proven correct, these hypotheses would shift
current opinion on the determinants of myocardial relaxation and tissue
homeostasis while shedding light on disease mechanisms.