* 1562822
* Nanomanufacturing of Multicomponent Inorganic Functional Coatings and Fibers using Sol-Gel Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Chris Cornelius, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 297,543.00

Nanomanufacturing provides a novel route to large-scale creation of materials
with new form and function. This addresses a growing interest and demand for
technologies that are realizable at larger processing scales. These
nanomanufactured structural materials are needed for a range of applications
such as superhydrophobic surfaces that are self-cleaning and resistant to
biofouling, and birefringent reflective surfaces made with multilayered films.
While technical progress in such areas is continuing, a major nanofabrication
and industrial need is "process intensification," which is fewer processing and
energy steps to a final product with desired structural resolution,
manufacturing speed, scalability, and economic viability. This award will
contribute to future pathways to high-throughput nanomanufacturing of
multicomponent inorganic functional coatings and nanofibers derived by using
nanotechnology, colloid science, and sol-gel processing. This research involves
several engineering and science disciplines related to manufacturing at small
dimensions, modeling, nanoscale characterization, fluid dynamics, surface
chemistry, and process development. These research areas and disciplines will be
integrated into course curriculum, and research opportunities for undergraduate
and minority students. This is needed in order to increase STEM majors for our
nation's workforce pipeline into engineering and science.

The nanomanufacturing of inorganic derived sols is a complex process that
provides a barrier to the realization of many novel structures and materials. In
order to overcome this barrier, sol to gel processing needs to be studied and
understood, which this award plans to accomplish. Today, many colloidal sols
derived from metal alkoxides lack stability, which leads to gelation and
intractable materials that eliminates their ability to be processed. The
research objectives of this work will be the creation of fundamental knowledge
required to bridge the gap between scientific concepts and development of
nanomanufacturing processes. This will center upon the design and investigation
of innovative approaches needed to harness the processing potential of reactive
colloidal sols in order to "manufacture" functional coatings and fibers using
titania and silica sols. The intellectual significance of this proposed work
lies in process control of composition and physical properties at extremely
small dimensions, and advancing fundamental nanomanufacturing knowledge in order
to create novel form-factors with controlled composition and microstructure.
This level of composition and microstructural control will lead to new
structure-property-processing relationships. New science and engineering
concepts will be developed based on the advanced nanomanufacturing of functional
and multicomponent inorganic nanostructures via piezoelectric printing and
electrospinning.