* 1562831
* I-Corps: Ultrasensitive Fluorescence Biosensing Platforms for Diagnostics and Molecular Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2016
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Clinicians and researchers routinely use single molecule experiments and plate
reader based assays to determine the concentration or behavior of a molecule or
substance of interest. Currently, researchers utilize signal enhancing
substrates and expensive imaging systems such as total internal reflection
microscopes (TIR) to obtain better image quality and lower detection limits.
Clinicians perform patient diagnostics using diagnostic and test kits which
utilize emerging technologies to provide kits with lower detection limits and
faster assay times. Typically, these assays require well-trained technicians,
expensive equipment and good infrastructure in which to operate. This I-Corps
team is developing a platform that can be adapted to the currently used
equipment and provide much better performance by enhancing fluorescence signals.
This high performance platform is expected to reduce the burden of
infrastructure and expensive equipment significantly by eventually being
integrated into smartphones to create a point-of-care
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic gratings greatly enhance fluorescent
signal due to interaction of plasmons and fluorophores. The inexpensive
fabrication method of the gratings take advantage of commercially available
master molds in the form of CDs, DVDs, and HD-DVDs. Due to the fluorescence
enhancement, low detection limit and high signal-to-noise have been achieved.
This team envisions three products, slides printed with gratings, microwell
plates, and platforms integrated with a smartphone. The I-Corps grant will
provide valuable information and training about what is needed to bring this
plasmonic grating technology to industrial and clinical markets. During the
project, the team will have better understanding of market needs leading to
better product designs. The knowledge and experience gained through I-Corps
program will be shared with other potential entrepreneurs and students through
meetings and presentations. These activities would spread the knowledge and
experience to other potential entrepreneur leaders at the University of Missouri
as well as surrounding communities.