* 1562497
* Mathematical Methods to Infer Biological Mechanisms From Single Cell Data
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Johan Paulsson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 635,740.00

Living cells show a great deal of heterogeneity, even when they have the same
genes and grow in virtually identical environments. The underlying reason is
that molecules in the cell bounce around and collide with each other, and
sometimes randomly react. This process is unpredictable in much the same way
that the outcome is unpredictable when throwing dice. Cells can therefore differ
greatly in their behavior, which is a main reason that they respond so
differently to drugs and that sub-populations often survive e.g. cancer or
antibiotic treatments. Recent technological developments now make it possible to
measure the levels of components in individual cells, rather than just the
average level over a population of cells. This provides an incredible amount of
information, but also forces the data analyses to deal with many more
complications when trying to interpret the data. This project will develop
methods to analyze such data. Specifically, rather than basing the
interpretations on greatly simplified assumptions, which may or may not be
valid, it will develop tools to interpret data in terms of biological mechanisms
while remaining agnostic about all the processes that indirectly affect the
system dynamics. In previous treatments those indirect effects would completely
confound interpretations, whereas the approaches in this project eliminate such
problems entirely. The approach is broadly applicable and the project has broad
consequences in basic cell and molecular biology, in health and medicine, and in
ecology and population biology. Further, the project will train students at the
interface between scientific disciplines, and generate principles and approaches
that will be useful in undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single
cell data for fluctuations in abundances contain a great deal of information
about the underlying mechanisms. Conventional approaches to analyze such data
have relied on fits to specific models that try to make correct assumptions
about all processes that substantially affect the observed fluctuations. Whether
using simple toy models or detailed simulations, this poses a great problem
because so many indirect effects are not yet known that can greatly affect the
process of interest. It has also been shown that model uniqueness is a great
problem in this field, where very different feasible models produce the same
fit, yet produce very different concrete conclusions about the underlying
biology. In fact it has been exceedingly difficult to mechanistically interpret
the simplest single cell processes in the simplest organisms, suggesting that
there is little hope of interpreting more complex systems, such as human cells
embedded in tissue. Research through this project addresses this challenge by
considering large classes of processes collectively, allowing the models to
differ arbitrarily in all indirect effects. This is possible by considering
properties of marginal distributions that are provably unaffected by many model
assumptions, and makes it possible to rigorously dissect complex and sparsely
characterized networks subject to changing environmental inputs, nonlinear
feedback loops and unknown sources of fluctuations, despite only having access
to snapshots rather than time-series. Because the presented approaches are
analytical, and the marginal properties can be intuitively expressed in terms of
the few explicit mechanistic assumptions, the approach is also conceptually
transparent. Further, because the testable relations produced by the theory are
rigorously invariant of indirect effects, they are particularly well suited for
the analysis of sparsely characterized complex systems or the effects of drugs,
separating direct from indirect effects even when the latter are complicated and
dominant.