* 1562468
* Continuous-Flow Microfluidic Nanomanufacturing of Nanomedicines
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Don DeVoe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Nanoparticle-enabled drugs hold enormous potential for improving human health,
allowing drug designers to tailor the delivery of therapeutic compounds to
specific tissues or cells, and optimize the uptake of drugs into those cells. In
particular, the use of lipid vesicles or liposomes as nanoscale drug carriers
has resulted in significant advances toward the treatment of a range of cancers.
However, the transition of liposomal nanomedicines from the lab to the clinic
remains constrained by the lack of nanomanufacturing methods capable of scaling
across the full production range. This award will investigate continuous-flow
microfluidics technology as a unique scalable approach to bridge this gap. This
technology will leverage chemical and physical phenomena across multiple size
scales within a continuous-flow microfluidic system, resulting in nanoparticle
self-assembly, passive and active drug loading, nanoparticle functionalization,
and drug purification and concentration. Individual fluidic modules will be
developed and optimized, and sequential modules will be combined in a single
continuous-flow nanofactory. The multidisciplinary project will integrate
contributions from high school students through graduate researchers, and result
in development of a new nanomedicines designed for the treatment of recurrent
pediatric neuroblastoma, a high-risk cancer with dismal clinical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current techniques for liposomal drug synthesis
must be re-engineered at each production scale, introducing manufacturing costs
and engineering challenges that present significant barriers to the development
of new liposomal drugs. Overcoming this gap is fundamentally a nanomanufacturing
challenge. We will develop a multistage microfluidic flow focusing technology as
a highly scalable method supporting the full production of liposomal
nanomedicines in a continuous-flow process. The studies will yield new insights
into the underlying multiscale physics for each processing stage, resulting in
improved understanding of the chemophysical processes involved in liposome self-
assembly, drug loading, and targeting agent attachment within the microfluidic
system. The work will also result in new solutions to the key engineering
challenges associated with coupling diverse continuous-flow microfluidic modules
for advanced functionalized nanoparticle manufacturing. Performance of the
technology will be evaluated using a novel nanomedicine test-bed. Specifically,
the award will demonstrate a targeted polypharmaceutical comprising of an
amphipathic chemotherapeutic (doxorubicin) together with a lipophilic tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (erlotinib) for the treatment of pediatric neuroblastoma. Using
this test-bed, a combination of scale-up and scale-out will be explored to
provide a unified framework for multi-scale liposomal drug synthesis, vastly
increasing the speed and reducing the complexity of nanomedicine manufacturing.