* 1562941
* Processing of Advanced Foam Scaffolds for Iron-Air Battery Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2019
* USD 350,149.00

The generation, storage, and local use of hydrogen to generate electric power
via fuel cells are critical to reaching an electrical grid with low-to-zero
carbon dioxide emissions, benefiting the U.S. economy and worldwide society. In
recent years, iron oxide powder has attracted attention as an inexpensive, non-
toxic option to store and create pure hydrogen through the iron-oxide
reduction/oxidation ("redox") reaction. One of the main problems associated with
this cyclical redox reaction is powder pulverization and subsequent
agglomeration and consolidation. These effects drastically reduce the high
surface areas needed for the reaction. Thus, maintaining stability, high surface
area and high gas permeability in the powder bed after multiple redox cycles are
the main challenges for this promising technology. This award supports research
to develop a structure that takes advantage of novel processing approaches to
create iron scaffolds which can maintain structural integrity, high permeability
and high surface area during the redox cycles, thus enabling a novel,
inexpensive and non-toxic iron-air battery for large scale
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, the investigators will
directionally freeze an aqueous suspension of iron oxide nanopowders to create
ice dendrites, which will push the particles into interdendritic space, thus
creating a network of iron oxide powders walls. After hydrogen reduction, this
network is sintered into a continuous scaffold with directionally aligned
channels templating the original ice dendrites, surrounded by iron walls with
high surface area and enough internal free space to achieve the microstructural
stability needed to withstand multiple reduction/oxidation cycles without
sintering or pulverization. The scaffold stability will be further improved by
adding various materials to the iron oxide nanopowder suspension: (i) nickel
oxide powders which are co-reduced to form iron-nickel solid solution walls with
higher strength; (ii) space-holder powders such as strontium fluoride, which can
be evaporated from the scaffold walls to generate further porosity within the
walls and increase their surface area and the free volume to accommodate volume
changes and (iii) inert reinforcements such as ceramic particles, which will
strengthen and stiffen the scaffold walls. Mechanical testing will be used to
examine relative structural degradation of samples after reduction/oxidation
cycles, and x-ray tomography and finite element modeling will be used to map and
examine 3-dimensional scaffold structure and stress distribution within its
walls during the volumetric changes associated with the redox cycles.