* 1562376
* TTP: Medium: A Campus Pilot For A Privacy-Enabled Cloud Storage, Search, and Collaboration Portal for Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Radu Sion, Private Machines Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 999,802.00

As higher education institutions consider moving services to the cloud to save
costs and improve collaboration, significant challenges to successful large-
scale adoption still exist. Institutions are unwilling to risk cloud deployment
because provable technological defenses have thus far been lacking. Control over
sensitive data is relinquished without the institution's knowledge, liability is
shifted and data breach risks are significantly increased. Further, regulatory-
sensitive data has become an increasingly attractive target. Recent history
shows one major breach every few weeks, with an alarming increase in frequency.
This project directly addresses this significant challenge by transitioning to
practice -- through an educational campus pilot -- searchable cloud storage and
collaboration tools with full in-cloud privacy, at-runtime security and no shift
in liability for educators and students. The pilot provides secure cloud storage
to 24,500 students and 2,500 educators. It constitutes a testbed for deploying
secure protocols in a live environment via the participation of researchers and
students in its operation. Extensive data dissemination for academic research
purposes is an integral part of the pilot. Collected data points serve as
significant knowledge repositories not only in the security community but also
in the storage and cloud research communities. The project will result in the
creation of a significant number of trust and security-related information
technology jobs which must remain stateside to maintain the economic and
political security of the United States. The project trains students and
contributes to the creation of a skilled cyber-security domestic workforce
available to fulfill our nation's needs. The project provides new course
material and involves underrepresented groups, including at least one female PhD
student.

The technical underpinnings of the work rely on new mechanisms that ensure data
is strongly encrypted before leaving trusted client premises while allowing
users to still securely collaborate, query, share, synchronize, search, backup
etc. Contrary to conventional wisdom, the project constructs a secure design
that is also truly practical, but would not have been feasible with a server-
centric approach in which search operations are performed server-side on
encrypted data and are computationally expensive and necessarily limited in
expressiveness. Instead, the pilot is based on an efficient design in which
operations are distributed to client-side logic in a scalable, efficient manner,
operating orders of magnitude faster than the equivalent server code on
encrypted data. To further optimize processing, the system enables clients to
leverage each other's work (such as indexing) in a distributed secure manner,
through cloud-mediated conduits and mechanisms. Overall, the system ensures the
cloud cannot ever access user data or see user search queries. Ultimately,
clients receive all cloud benefits while ensuring full regulatory compliance.
Even if the cloud provider is breached, data is fully protected.