* 1562661
* Collaborative Research: Parallel, Adaptive Manufacturing of Nano-scale Electrical Interconnects Using DNA Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 115,948.00

Perhaps the most important technology to arise in the past 100 years has been
the integrated circuit, which is the key component of computers, smartphones,
tablets, and other widely used consumer electronic devices. Conventional
lithography and micromachining methods have made possible large-scale
manufacturing of integrated circuits. However, transitioning to increased
performance and functionality with smaller, nanometer-scale fabrication is
extremely costly and currently involves highly trained personnel and slow
methods that are not readily scaled up. We will use the selectivity of DNA
pairing to build connectors for circuit elements at the nanoscale at low cost
and without human intervention. These biomolecular connectors will be
subsequently coated with materials used in integrated circuits. This award will
show the feasibility of utilizing self-assembly with DNA as an automated
manufacturing technique that can be scaled up in the future to create nanoscale
electrical circuits in a highly parallel manner. This award will be carried out
by students at both universities and will involve extensive interaction through
videoconferencing and travel to respective laboratories to enable all students
to develop expertise in the different areas needed to complete this work. The
research will draw from ideas across engineering and science and will include
education and outreach programs for K-12 and undergraduate students that include
in-person interaction and mentorship of underrepresented minority students in
Baltimore City and the Provo Utah area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
develop a method for assembling conductive nanowires precisely between
molecular-scale terminals using DNA nanostructure assembly and post-
functionalization. Such a method could be used to self-assemble and position
many connectors in parallel. Importantly, this adaptive assembly method does not
require the positions and orientations of these terminals and the distance
between them to be known in advance. To explore the feasibility of this assembly
method and the functionality of the resulting connectors, the project will
develop a platform that will enable the simultaneous bottom-up assembly of many
interconnects between electrodes, such that the electrical conductivity of each
assembled interconnect can be characterized. The research team will build an
array of multiple conductive interconnects templated by DNA nanostructures such
that their terminals are precisely positioned on electrodes and use bottom-up
methods to direct the assembly of DNA connectors precisely between these
terminal molecules. Electroless plating and related methods will then be used to
assemble conductive connections between the terminals. The electrical
characterization of many such connectors simultaneously will provide valuable
information about the inherent variability in performance of such connectors,
while measuring the yield of assembly will increase our understanding of the
reliability of bottom-up assembly of electronic circuits and devices.