* 1562470
* Direct In Situ Analysis of Surface Flow Fields in Deformation Processing of Lightweight Structural Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2021
* Kevin Trumble, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 349,200.00

Light-weight structural alloys of aluminum, magnesium and titanium are of
technological interest for use in applications in the discrete products sector,
encompassing automotive, aerospace, energy systems and biomedical applications.
Deformation processes such as extrusion, rolling, sheet-metal working, and
forming methods are typically used to shape components from these metallic
systems during manufacturing. The surface quality attributes of components, such
as defects, finish and strength, created by the processes is to a large extent
determined by the nature of metal flow at the surface. This surface flow also
plays a major role in controlling friction and wear at the forming interfaces.
For these reasons, there is a critical need for studying the fundamental nature
of the flow in deformation processing so that component and product quality can
be enhanced by suitable control of the flow. This award will address this need
by supporting research to advancing the state-of-the-art of manufacturing
process technologies in key industrial sectors. Complementing the research is an
education program involving undergraduate researchers in creating a video
gallery of flows for industry, and a modest focus on fostering entrepreneurship
in graduate study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will study a model process
system - a hard die (wedge) sliding against a workpiece - with three coordinated
thrusts. Firstly, a deformation science initiative will utilize in situ
observational techniques for high-resolution analysis of flow at workpiece
surfaces and contacts. Flow phenomena (e.g., laminar, sinuous, instabilities),
strain and strain rate fields, at the surfaces will be analyzed as a function of
controllable process parameters. The interplay between flow type, friction, and
defect formation will be explored. Secondly, workpiece surface quality will be
examined in terms of microstructure, defect structures, mechanical properties,
and topography. The surface quality attributes will be correlated with the flow
fields. Thirdly, surface flow will be modeled using continuum approaches that
incorporate material heterogeneity and grain level structure. By integrating the
analyses results, a processing map, that demarcates flows and defects in terms
of key material and process parameters, will be created. The study will be
conducted specifically on model low-density structural alloys of aluminum,
magnesium and titanium, selected for their experimental suitability and direct
relevance to weight reduction in the discrete products sector. The techniques
and findings will impact areas as diverse as materials processing, tribology,
plasticity, and geophysical folding phenomena.