* 1562008
* Biology and Environmental Science Training (BEST)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Ulises Ricoy, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2021
* USD 999,999.00

The Northern New Mexico College Biology and Environmental Sciences Training
(BEST) project will provide annual scholarships to 25 full-time academically
talented and underrepresented students with demonstrated financial need majoring
in Biology or Environmental Science (ES). The BEST project will implement best
practice supportive curricular activities, including Peer-led Team Learning
study groups, Biology seminar series, faculty-mentored undergraduate research
experiences (URE), and conference participation; and a suite of non-curricular
activities including monthly cohort building activities, all known to foster
retention. BEST will also support the entry of participants into the STEM
workforce and graduate programs by providing paid summer workforce internships
and URE. This program is important for the advancement of scientific knowledge
and understanding of those practices and services that most effectively recruit,
retain and graduate underrepresented students in STEM, thereby increasing the
number of underrepresented students entering the STEM workforce and diversifying
the field.

The project objectives include: 1) increasing the number of students in Biology
and ES programs by enhancing recruitment and retention; 2) increasing degree
progress by increasing student credit hours taken per semester; 3) increasing
graduation rates; and 4) implementing a longitudinal study that will generate a
'Risk of Leaving STEM' scale; analyze math anxiety among STEM and non-STEM
majors; analyze student services that correlate with increases in a student's
self-identity and sense of belonging in a STEM program; and analyze correlations
between summer research/workforce internships and STEM career entry. The
research will assess whether the support services and activities impact
retention/graduation using a longitudinal cohort design. The measures employed
are derived from the NSF Common Guidelines for Education Research and
Development and involve qualitative and quantitative components. Early attrition
points are heavily targeted in the first four semesters to gain comparative
samples and establish baselines. Tracking will occur at key points to collect
additional measures to establish individual changes over time. Analyses will
determine the effect of faculty and peer mentoring, summer internships, and
engagement in professional activities as triggers for STEM leaving or enhanced
STEM self-identification. External evaluation will provide formative information
to ensure continuous improvement of support services to ensure they foster
retention and degree completion. Summative evaluation will gauge the project's
effectiveness in meeting its goals and inform long range planning.