* 1562536
* A Simplified Theory of Urban Congestion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jorge Laval, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 305,115.00

This award explores the premise that traffic congestion levels on large cities
may be well described with a theory that requires only three aggregate network
parameters: average red and green times for traffic lights and average block
size. This conjecture has been validated by the research team for a single city
where data are available; verifying it with additional empirical data is
therefore one of the main motivations for the proposed research. If successful,
this research will have profound implications in our discipline and for the
society at large. Current planning models might produce suboptimal results,
because they rely on detailed origin-destination tables that may be impossible
to estimate reliably, and traffic dynamics that must be simplified such that
they do not adequately capture the characteristics of congestion. The proposed
theory overcomes these deficiencies by employing a macroscopic approach whose
results are consistent with microscopic traffic dynamics. The proposed theory
enables large-scale field implementations of congestion-saving control
strategies for big metropolitan areas. These strategies are robust, and
independent of both origin-destination tables and of the details of the road
network. This project will enhance the educational and research infrastructure
by making available large amounts of empirical data and software tools for their
analysis and for simulation.

This project will seek to validate and expand the hypothesis that the
Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram of an urban network, which gives average travel
time as a function of average density, depends mainly on the proposed three
parameters. To test this hypothesis, the research will employ empirical data
from different cities around the world. The analytical framework from prior NSF-
funded research will be expanded to understand the conditions where this theory
is applicable. This will shed light on the effects in macroscopic network
performance of traffic signal control, route choice models and congestion
pricing. Stochastic processes techniques will be employed to generate bounds to
approximate network capacity reductions due to short blocks, which has proved
difficult in the past. The project will develop the concept of macroscopic
dynamic traffic assignment by formulating the assignment problem and its
solution through a partition of the network into a collection of subnetworks,
each described by a Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram. Closed form solutions will
be sought for simple configurations, which will be the building blocks to
develop numerical algorithms to tackle general networks. This will allow the
computation of congestion control strategies, traffic state estimation and
forecast over large urban networks and in real-time, all of which is intractable
with current methods.