* 1562912
* Analytical Probabilistic Traffic Models for Large-scale Network Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Carolina Osorio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 338,831.00

Major transportation agencies in the U.S. and Europe have recognized the
importance of measuring and optimizing the reliability and robustness of our
networks. Evaluating reliability and robustness metrics involves the use of
probabilistic network models. This project formulates, validates and uses
probabilistic network models. Case studies based on actual metropolitan areas
will illustrate the importance of accounting for uncertainty in large-scale
transportation network analysis. The use of these methods can inform the design
and operations of the considered networks, helping to mitigate congestion along
with its economic, environmental and health impacts. These case studies on
complex regional networks will illustrate the contributions to transportation
practice of the methodologies. The findings of this project will be shared
through various activities with transportation researchers, transportation
stakeholders, the general public and with young engineers interested in learning
about and contributing to the transportation challenges of the future.

This project formulates an analytical stochastic kinematic wave model for
general network topologies. It formulates a model that is suitable to address
large-scale network optimization problems. First, the project formulates
stochastic link models that are consistent with the kinematic wave model. Two
types of models are formulated: (i) models with a complexity that is linear in
the link?s space capacity, (ii) models with a complexity that is independent of
the link?s space capacity. This is achieved through a combination of ideas from
the fields of traffic flow theory, queueing network theory, transient queueing
theory, and more generally operations research. Second, the project formulates a
network decomposition approach that enables the link models to be used for
large-scale network analysis. Third, this project plans a technique to
approximate the joint network distribution of a given performance measure based
on lower-dimensional subnetwork distributions. The case studies of this project
contribute to the modeling of between-link dependency structures, as well as to
their use to mitigate congestion for large-scale networks.