* 1562515
* Collaborative Research: Living Building Information Model (BIM): A Layered Approach for Automatic and Continuous Built Environment Model Update
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ko Nishino, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,924.00

Infrastructure and buildings are designed to have long life cycles - on the
order of decades. Many buildings in the world are still in operation after
centuries amid numerous renovation efforts. This long operational phase
represents the majority of a building's lifecycle, yet the information regarding
maintenance and renovation is rarely kept up to date. Building Information
Models (BIMs) can alleviate this data shortage by centrally storing this data.
However, even with a BIM, building updates are not kept due to the difficulty of
continuous manual updates over a building's lifetime. This project will create a
method to automatically update a BIM by exploiting recent advancements in
machine vision. This automation process can systematically and continuously
analyze the built environment, detecting changes from a previous assessment. It
can distill and update the critical building information with minimal human
error and effort. This research will result in a fundamental change in
construction record keeping and benefit building operators by enabling
maintenance and renovation activities to more easily be planned throughout a
building's lifetime. The findings of this work will be integrated into
undergraduate and graduate educational modules. Videos created for YouTube will
also be developed to attract high school and underrepresented persons to a
career in civil engineering.

The project will generate contextual-data relationships for use by an active
illumination range camera-based, machine-vision system for automatically
updating a BIM database with construction changes and leveraging metadata
distilled from BIM object-oriented database models, the Computer-Aided
Facilities Management (CAFM) database, and expert knowledge input by human
operators. The project will tackle several intellectual challenges. A primary
challenge resides in the machine vision component of the work, which will need
to provide additional meta-data beyond a 3D geometric model of an object,
pushing the boundary of machine vision for the context of civil engineering
systems. Another challenge is to extend data modeling capabilities for the built
environment. Specifically, capabilities to translate meta-data from machine
vision to identify and obtain meaningful contextual data that is specific for
the objects will be created. A specific logical component, the Contextual
Decision Maker (CDM), will also be developed to merge meta-data from multiple
data sources. Finally, the entire system will be tested in an indoor renovation
project to provide a realistic machine-learning process that will grow more
robust over time.