* 1562134
* Phonetic and Phonological Documentation of Kalasha, an endangered Indo-Aryan language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Jeff Mielke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2021
* USD 323,319.00

The human vocal tract is the cavity in human beings where speech sounds are made
as air flows from the lungs upward and travels through where the vocal cords are
(the "larynx") and then the space above the laryngeal cavity (the "pharynx")
until it exits either through the nasal cavity or through the mouth. Different
parts ("articulators") modify the airflow to create speech sounds. Since many
articulators are hidden from view when the speech sounds are produced, linguists
have found other devices to investigate where and how articulators operate. This
is important because different sounds can be meaningful in a particular
language. For example, "p" and "b" are different sounds in English since "pit"
and "bit" mean different things. Instrumental tools like ultrasound and devices
that measure oral-nasal airflow enable the precise articulation of speech sounds
to be understood. As a result, sounds will be more accurately transcribed in
language documentation and produced by learners. Sound systems are also
researched by collecting and analyzing the language used in more stylized ways,
like rhyme or repeated consonant sounds ("alliteration") in different genres.
Understanding the sound system of a language is critical for compiling
dictionaries, developing a systematic orthographic system and language teaching
materials. This project will document the speech sounds of a highly endangered
language that has an unusually large number of sounds that are formed by curling
the tip of the tongue up towards the hard palate ("retroflex"). Broader impacts
include the production of linguistic and cultural materials for direct use by
the endangered language community, the training of a post-doctoral researcher
and undergraduate students, and a new international collaboration with a local
university and an NGO. USAID researchers working on education and literacy
projects in the region will also benefit from the products of this project. The
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering is providing support for
international activities associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together a team
of linguists and local language documentation researchers to describe the sound
system of Kalasha (3000-5000 speakers), an endangered Dardic language of
Northern Pakistan. Kalasha is of linguistic importance in part due to its many
retroflexed sounds, since the wide range of these and other speech sounds are
found in less than 1% of the world's languages. The project will document the
phonetics and phonology of Kalasha through instrumental techniques like lingual
ultrasound, and will use best practices in language documentation to compile an
online dictionary and to transcribe oral literature (songs, short stories,
narratives, poems). The researchers will also develop flexible speech analysis
tools, and make data and findings available through existing cross-linguistic
databases and archives. Lingual ultrasound and oral-nasal airflow are ideal
methods for describing the retroflex consonants, and nasal and retroflex vowels
of Kalasha. The instrumental phonetic investigation will enable a better
understanding of these uncommon speech sounds and will generate an audio-video
ultrasound corpus. The audio-video corpus and other spontaneous speech data will
be used to revise the orthography of Kalasha and to develop pedagogical
materials for the community.