* 1562254
* Non-Invasive Monitoring of Peripheral Artery Behavior via Wearable Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kevin Ward, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2020
* USD 374,999.00

The goal of this project is to monitor vascular tone and peripheral vascular
resistance of human arteries using non-invasive, wearable sensors. Vascular tone
refers to the relative dilation or constriction of arteries, while peripheral
vascular resistance refers to the resistance felt by the heart as it attempts to
pump blood through the arterial system outside the body's core. At present,
there are no effective means of monitoring these effects outside of the hospital
or other critical care settings. Nonetheless, changes in vascular tone and
peripheral vascular resistance are known to be key indicators of the progression
of various forms of shock, dangerous blood pressure changes during dialysis, and
post-surgical complications, among other potentially life-critical medical
conditions. This research will provide a means to quickly detect changes in the
condition of the peripheral arteries, allowing for more timely intervention and
more accurate assessment of treatment effectiveness. The project also includes
outreach at the secondary education level on topics such as electronic circuits
and fluid behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will include the creation
of a dynamic model capturing the most significant contributions of sensor,
tissue, and local arterial fluid dynamics to the response of an externally worn
compliant piezoelectric pressure sensor and associated pulse plethysmograph.
Advanced parameter identification techniques and viscoelastic hysteresis
inversion methods will be used to estimate properties of the underlying artery,
and correlate trends in sensor response with changes in arterial diameter. The
final objective will be to track changes in relative peripheral artery radius
without reliance on wearable sensor calibration to invasive cardiovascular
measurements. Results will be validated by comparing non-invasive to invasive
vascular resistance estimates in experiments with swine, and comparing
peripheral blood pressure and arterial radius estimates from the created sensors
to measurements from larger clinical systems such as blood pressure finger cuffs
and ultrasound. The intellectual significance of the work is expected to include
insight into key model features describing dynamic arterial behavior at the far
periphery of the arterial system, novel techniques for identifying parameters in
nonlinear, polynomial based models, and information on variability in peripheral
vascular response across individuals undergoing cardiovascular stresses.