* 1562057
* Atomic Layer Deposition for Large-Area Sub-10 Nanometer Patterning for Super Absorbing Optical Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Alexander Cartwright, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 333,999.00

Nanomanufacturing is an important driving force for many applications, including
nanomaterials, nanoelectronics, and nanophotonics. In the past decades, we have
witnessed significant advances in nanomanufacturing capabilities. Different pre-
designed patterns down to nanometer scale can be fabricated using various top-
down and bottom-up methods. However, it is still a great challenge to
manufacture nanostructures with sub-10 nanometer features over large areas using
conventional fabrication techniques. Such small-scale structures are needed for
the development of new applications. Using nano-scale antenna structures,
localized optical field enhancements or 'hot-spots' are possible. Smaller gaps
between the metallic nanopatterns will result in stronger 'hot spots'.
Therefore, an affordable manufacturing method for large-area nanopatterning with
sub-10 nanometer features is highly desirable. This award will employ the atomic
layer deposition process to develop an inexpensive nanomanufacturing method to
fabricate surface nanopatterns with accurately controlled gaps that can
efficiently concentrate light field down to sub-10 nanometer scales over large
areas. This interdisciplinary effort will link nanomanufacturing, computational
electromagnetics, optoelectronics and optical sensing, and will provide a great
opportunity for students to develop skills, values, and broad perspectives
necessary for success in the global marketplace and for leadership in complex,
multidisciplinary projects.

Building on recent successes in light management using nanostructures, this
award will explore the potential to use this new nanomanufacturing method to
fabricate super absorbing metamaterial surface structures or metasurfaces with
controllable, ultra-narrow (sub-10nm) gaps. Specifically, this award will
explore affordable fabrication processes to produce metallic nanopatterns with
controllable separation distances defined by atomic layer deposited (ALD)
dielectric films with the thickness accuracy of ~0.1nm. Such a capability will
result in revolutionary advances in light-matter interactions at extremely deep
subwavelength scales. Combined with pre-designed metamaterial cavity structures,
incident light can be trapped within the nanogaps efficiently, resulting in a
strongly enhanced localized field. By controlling the geometric parameters of
nanopatterns, especially the gap dimension, the ultimate limit for plasmonic
enhancement may be approached and be characterized conveniently over large
areas. In this project, ALD-defined films will be combined with periodic and
random nanopatterns to manufacture large area super absorbing metasurfaces,
which will enable the development of novel on-chip energy collection, conversion
and biosensing applications.