* 1562139
* Real-time Monitoring of Critical Quality Attributes of Bioprinted Constructs in Manufacturing of Engineered Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2019
* USD 302,583.00

Bioprinting is the process of automated deposition of biological molecules, such
as living cells and associated biomaterials, to form a 3D heterogeneous
construct. Several bioprinting techniques have been developed to fabricate
functional cellular and tissue constructs for applications in engineered tissues
and organs. Bioprinting process parameters can affect biological quality
attributes of encapsulated cells within fabricated constructs. Currently,
assessment of these critical biological quality attributes must be performed
offline by subjecting the constructs to destructive assays that require staining
and sectioning. This drawback affects the translation of bioprinting processes
to industrial practice. This award supports fundamental research to enable
predicting the quality attributes of the bioprinted constructs using a real-time
and in-process characterization technique. Research results will contribute to
US biomanufacturing strengths, particularly towards advancing personalized
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a bioprinting process, the electrical
impedance of encapsulated cells in response to an alternating current at
different frequencies can be measured, and any perturbations in the impedance
signals are affected by the biological attributes of the constructs. The first
research objective is to determine interactions between process parameters
(nozzle diameter, extrusion pressure, and hydrogel concentration) and critical
biological quality attributes (cell viability, density, and metabolic state) of
benchmark bioprinted cellular constructs. To achieve this objective, the
permittivity of printed constructs under the influence of an alternating
electric field (100 KHz to 20 MHz) will be measured by using a dielectric probe.
The obtained permittivity curves will be analyzed to extract beta-dispersion
attributes (critical frequency, capacitance drop, and rate of capacitance
change) which will be correlated to the bioprinting process parameters. The
second objective is to understand the mechanism responsible for alterations in
cellular membrane polarization of encapsulated cells in a bioprinting process
under an applied electric field. To achieve this objective, a multi-physics
model of the bioprinting process will be developed, combining the dielectric
properties of encapsulated cells, biomaterial properties, and cellular kinetics.
The model will be experimentally calibrated through state-of-the-art offline
characterization methods. It then will be used to predict the cellular
polarization states under the influence of an electric field. Simulations
results will be verified by measuring the biological quality attributes of the
printed constructs. The third objective is to determine the effects of
bioprinting process parameters on the dielectric properties of mammalian and
bacterial cells. The extracted permittivity attributes will be used to predict
the biological quality state of the constructs in real-time. These predictions
will be confirmed by offline construct characterization methods.