* 1562019
* Collaborative Research:  Forest Water Use and the Influence of Acid Deposition
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Howard Epstein, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 269,675.00

Forests sequester carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and take up water from
soils, thus regulating the flow of water in streams. Some evidence suggests that
the balance among these processes may have been fundamentally altered by high
acid deposition ("acid rain") in the eastern United States during the post-
Industrial Revolution period. During this period it is hypothesized that acid
deposition decreased nutrients in the soil such as calcium, magnesium and
potassium. This may have required trees to pump more water from the soil through
their systems to obtain an adequate supply of nutrients, causing a subsequent
loss of water flowing in streams. With the decline in acid deposition over the
last 20-30 years, forests soils are able to retain more nutrients. This may
reduce the amount of water that trees need to pump through their systems. Thus
while maintaining the same rate of growth, trees may release less water to the
atmosphere, improving their water use efficiency and leaving more water to feed
into streams. This hypothesized response of forests to changing levels of acid
deposition is not currently considered in the land surface components of global
climate models. Since carbon dioxide and water vapor are the two most important
greenhouse gases, it is vital to accurately model their land-atmosphere
exchange.

The proposed research uses a catchment-based approach to investigate the effects
of changing acid deposition on forest water use efficiency. Tree ring carbon
isotopes will be used to reconstruct historical forest water use efficiency time
series within six catchments that have been differentially impacted by acid
deposition due to distinctions between their underlying bedrock mineralogy and
geological histories. The research will also capitalize on experimental
treatments that have altered soil biogeochemistry in paired catchment designs
(Bear Brook, ME; Hubbard Brook, NH; and Fernow Experimental Forest, WV). Stream
discharge analysis and model-based approaches will be applied to detect the
impact of acid deposition on forest water use efficiency and streamflow.

The project will support a Ph.D. student, who will receive training in a wide
range of field, laboratory, and modeling techniques, and at least eight
undergraduate students. High school students will also be involved through
established programs, and will participate in both field and lab activities. All
senior members of the project team have track records of recruiting students
from underrepresented groups. Results will be communicated to the broader
scientific community through journal publications and conference presentations,
and a special conference session will be organized with an objective of sharing
research findings with the modeling community.