* 1562366
* Control of Screw Extruder Delay/Partial Differential Equation (PDE) Dynamics for 3D Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Miroslav Krstic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 01/31/2021
* USD 438,134.00

Motivated by both the potential for a technological, economic, and social impact
of additive manufacturing, the project is dedicated to the design of controllers
to remove some of the key bottlenecks to achieving high speed and product
quality in 3D printing. The project will build control and modeling
methodologies that are both of high research value and are suitable for
industrial use, going after improvements in the build speed and part quality.
Compared to the standard Fused Deposition Modeling and Syringe Based extrusion
processes, the novel configuration of the Screw Extruder process that we address
may allow continuous feeding, speed up production, and upgrade the mixing
capabilities, while efficiently reducing the thermal degradation of the melt and
the cost for such processes. The PI has supervised two dozen students from
underrepresented groups on past projects, such as women, Hispanics, and African-
Americans, and the present project will involve specific individuals from
underserved communities as advisees and collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial Differential Equation (PDE) models of mass and
thermal flows in the Screw Extruder will be used to design accurate and robust
controllers, to replace the existing control methods for 3D printing, which are
typically constructed using conservative black-box or lumped models, which
reduces their performance for a large range of materials. Moreover, control of
the melt thermal behavior that impacts viscosity evolution and the
solidification process will be addressed. The control design will be based on
infinite-dimensional models of screw extruders, including a bi-zone model
consisting of PDEs coupled through a moving interface described by an ordinary
differential equation. Novel control design techniques from the PI's infinite-
dimensional backstepping toolkit will be developed for this purpose.
Implementation of the designed controller will be performed on an experimental
platform developed in the PI's group. The project will provide advancements to
the general area of control of PDEs that are coupled through a moving interface,
which, besides extruders, arise in multi-phase flows, crystal growth, freeze-
drying, and distillation processes.