* 1562876
* Nanoscale Metal Network Enhanced Phase Change Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Hongwei Sun, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 431,773.00

Renewable energy sources such as solar energy, geothermal energy, and wind
energy require effective and efficient thermal storage systems. Latent heat
storage is an approach which can be accomplished using certain kinds of
materials, including those known as Phase Change Materials, which have the
ability to store energy at near constant temperature. However, most Phase Change
Materials have unacceptably low thermal conductivities, and therefore their
applications for high power, transient, and large-scale renewable energy systems
are significantly limited. This award supports the study of a manufacturing
process to synthesize and embed a nanoscale metallic network into phase change
materials, taking advantage of the high thermal conductivity of the metallic
network, to significantly improve thermal performance of Phase Change Material-
based energy storage systems. This new type of Phase Change Materials would
impact the renewable energy storage industry and diverse applications such as
flexible electronics, electronic cooling, and smart textiles. The knowledge
acquired from this project will also contribute to other industries such as
medical, automobile, food processing and semiconductor packaging. The
integration of fundamental research together with the educational efforts will
advance engineering education and promote this new and exciting field of science
at the high school senior and college freshmen levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to synthesize and study interrelationship among
structures, processing and thermal properties of a novel phase change material
embedded with a soldered metallic nanowire network. The major issues in
nanoparticle-dispersed phase change materials include the settlement during
melting-solidification cycling, and high interfacial thermal resistance of
particles. The research is focused on fundamental issues in exploiting the new
phase change material, such as soldering of nanowire-to-nanowire, nanowire-to-
sidewall surface, and interactions between magnetic field and nanowires in phase
change material fluids. A combined approach involving both modeling and
theoretical analysis, and well-designed sets of experiments will be adopted to
understand the relationships between network structure, processing parameters
such as magnetic field strength, nanowire loading, spacing and size of magnetic
pads, soldering temperature, and the resulting thermal properties of the new
phase change material.