* 1562450
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: A Sustainable Open Source Software Pipeline for Patient Specific Blood Flow Simulation and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Alison Marsden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 09/30/2018
* USD 812,810.00

The SimVascular package is a crucial research tool for cardiovascular modeling
and simulation, and has contributed to numerous advances in personalized
medicine, surgical planning and medical device design. SimVascular is currently
the only comprehensive software package that provides a complete pipeline from
medical image data segmentation to patient specific blood flow simulation and
analysis. This software now forms the backbone in cardiovascular simulation
research in a small but active group of domestic and international academic
labs. However, since its original release there have been several critical
barriers preventing wider adoption by new users, application to large-scale
research studies, and educational access. These include 1) the cost and
complications associated with embedded commercial components, 2) the need for
more efficient geometric model construction tools, 3) lack of sustainable
architecture and infrastructure, and 4) a lack of organized maintenance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing the above roadblocks through
the following aims: 1) create a sustainable and modular open source SimVascular
2.0 project housed at Stanford Simbios? simtk.org, with documentation,
benchmarking and test suites, 2) provide alternatives to all commercial
components in the first truly open source release of SimVascular, 3) improve the
image segmentation methods and efficiency of model construction to enable high-
throughput studies, and 4) enhance functionality by merging state of the art
research in optimization, flow analysis, and multiscale modeling. The project
leverages existing resources and infrastructure at simtk.org, and builds upon
the significant previous investment that enabled the initial open source release
of SimVascular. Access is further enhanced by cross-linking with the NIH funded
Vascular Model Repository. This project will increase the user base and build a
sustainable software platform supported by an active open source community.
Releasing the first fully open source version of SimVascular will enable greater
advances in cardiovascular medicine, provide open access to state of the art
simulation tools for educational purposes, and facilitate training of young
investigators. These efforts will also further promote diversity and attract
students to science and engineering by leveraging this software to enable high
school field trips to the UCSD StarCAVE to view simulation data using virtual
reality.