* 1562006
* Spatially Separated Redundant Magnetic Sensors and Nonlinear Observers for Enhanced Position Estimation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Rajesh Rajamani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 03/31/2020
* USD 390,000.00

This award supports the investigation of a novel sensing principle for
estimation of positions of ferromagnetic objects through a combination of
nature-inspired ideas. The spatial separation of identical sensors for enhanced
sensory perception (e.g. dual eyes and ears in animals and humans) will be
exploited along with the inherent magnetic fields of objects for determining
their position as moving objects. The new sensing principle will enable non-
contact measurement of position without requiring the placement of any sensors
or sensing components on the ferrous object. Moving ferromagnetic objects such
as cars, pistons, spool valves and a large variety of moving components in
various machines have magnetic fields which vary as a function of the position
around the object. The spatial variation of an object's magnetic field as a
function of position, the measurement of magnetic field at a few discrete
spatially separated locations and the use of novel estimation algorithms yield
accurate estimation of the position of the monitored objects, with no pre-
calibration required. This technology would have extensive applications in
automotive, industrial and off-road vehicle domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to exploit the "inherent" magnetic fields of common ferromagnetic objects,
a number of technical challenges need to be addressed. These include unknown
magnetic field parameters, the need to design nonlinear observers and the need
for estimation techniques that can account for constraints on states and
parameters. These challenges are addressed by using dual sensors with a known
separation distance between them and by formulating rigorous observer design
methods for nonlinear systems. The use of redundant sensors enables
observability and enables estimation of both parameters and states without
requiring pre-calibration. The design of nonlinear observers provides global
guarantees of stability, is computationally efficient, elegant, and yields
faster convergence. Constraints on states or parameters, and transient errors
due to unexpected magnetic disturbances, are addressed using a moving horizon
estimation method in which known bounds are imposed using a constrained
optimization formulation. Major project tasks include analytical study of
nonlinear observer design methods, development of disturbance rejection
techniques, and implementation of constraint imposition techniques. These will
be applied for position estimation for a free-piston engine, a hydraulic
cylinder, and an automotive imminent collision detection.