* 1562905
* Quantitative approaches for the mechanistic analysis of tumor cell killing by cytotoxic lymphocytes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Morgan Huse, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 535,000.00

Cytotoxic T cells function by selectively destroying virally infected or
cancerous target cells. In recent years, this targeted killing capacity has
emerged as a core component of several promising immunotherapeutic strategies to
fight cancer. A better understanding of how cytotoxic T cells operate is
therefore not only of biological interest but also of potential clinical
relevance. T cells kill by first forming a close cell-cell interface, called an
immunological synapse, with their targets. They then secrete a mixture of toxic
proteins into the synapse, which damage the target's plasma membrane and
intracellular contents. Recent biophysical studies have indicated that T cells
exert a substantial amount of mechanical force across the synapse, which could
potentially alter the shape and physical properties of the target cell. The
experiments in this research will investigate the hypothesis that these forces
boost killing by enhancing the activity of the toxic proteins secreted into the
synapse. The idea that mechanical force and chemical signals cooperate in this
manner is quite unappreciated and could represent an important new concept in
the understanding of intercellular communication and immune function. The
principal investigator will also develop a paid summer internship program in
mechanobiology targeting female students at both the high school and university
levels to provide them an entryway into a research career.

The studies will focus on potential synergy between synaptic forces and the
secreted cytolytic molecule perforin, which forms proteinaceous pores on the
target cell membrane. Preliminary results suggest that synapse formation
increases target cell membrane tension, thereby potentiating perforin pore
formation. Biophysical methods will be merged with immunological assays in order
to investigate this hypothesis. Polyacrylamide hydrogel substrates will be used
to explore the relationship between target cell tension and perforin pore
formation. Optical trap methodology will be used to quantify the effects of
synapse formation on membrane tension. Finally, polydimethylsiloxine micropillar
arrays will be used to examine the spatiotemporal coordination of force exertion
and perforin secretion. The successful completion of these research goals could
establish mechanopotentiation (i.e. the synergy between physical and chemical
signals) as an important avenue for intercellular communication, which would
broadly influence current conceptions and future studies of cell-cell
interactions and mechanobiology.