* 1562264
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Foundation and Design Framework for Incentives and Efficiency of Mobile Crowd Service Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/14/2015,09/30/2019
* Honggang Zhang, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 240,040.00

Recent advances in smart mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) have enabled many
powerful applications and services, fundamentally changing the way we live,
work, entertain, and communicate with each other. The project investigates a
broad range of emerging and fast-growing smart mobile applications, such as
smartphone-based cooperative streaming and data sharing, proximity-based dynamic
mobile clouds, mobile device-to-device computing, and opportunistic networking.
In those applications, services are provided and consumed by mobile users,
through the crowds formed by those users, and through the processing and
selling/reselling by service providers and resellers. The project introduces an
effective design framework for mobile crowd service (MCS) systems that support
those applications. The framework provides mechanisms to incentivize all users
and service providers to fairly participate in such systems, which are crucial
to the continuing success, wider adoption, and further innovation of smart
mobile applications. The outcome of the research will have a significant impact
on many aspects of our daily lives that are already permeated by smart mobile
devices and applications, and will be integrated with a strong education
component including curriculum development, student training, recruiting and
engaging underrepresented students.

The project develops a theoretic foundation and design paradigms for developing
practical algorithms and architecture that effectively manage the interplay
between service providers, resellers, and mobile users in a complete MCS
ecosystem. The project first designs a set of dynamic algorithms to incentivize
users to truthfully and fairly participate in the proximity-based MCS systems
that are formed mainly by dynamic mobile users. For systems where the
interaction among all players dominates system dynamics and performance, the
project develops an optimization formulation to achieve overall system
efficiency and stability. Furthermore, the project investigates scenarios where
players might game with the system in order to gain benefit. In a cooperative
setting, the project designs a fair revenue sharing mechanism through a
cooperative game model of a service provider and its resellers. For the case
where all players self-interestedly but rationally game with the system, the
project develops a non-cooperative game for static analysis, and a fluid model
for dynamic analysis. The research takes into consideration the characteristics
of mobile communications, and covers a broad range of MCS systems characterized
by their dynamic user mobility patterns, heterogeneous user types and service
quality, and distributed and asynchronous computation requirements. This project
constitutes a significant advance in the design of mobile networked systems and
applications based on smart mobile devices.