* 1562209
* Enhanced Numerical Methods for Constrained Nonlinear Model Predictive Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Assen Dontchev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 06/30/2020
* USD 325,000.00

This research project will create new, rigorously grounded, methods for
computationally efficient model predictive control. Model predictive control is
based on computing system control inputs in response to sensor measurements
through the use of real-time numerical optimization. It has proved invaluable in
many important applications, including in the aerospace and automotive
industries. Computational challenges stem from the need to optimize in real-time
the response of large systems of constrained nonlinear dynamic equations in the
presence of modeling errors and unpredictable disturbances. There are major
difficulties in applying model predictive control to complex engineering
systems, particularly when on-board computing power is limited. The most
effective ways to address these challenges exploit problem-specific structure,
in contrast to a "one size fits all" strategy. This project will produce classes
of computationally efficient solution methods that can be appropriately tailored
to specific problem characteristics. The developed theory and methods will be
applied to control problems for automotive engines and aircraft propulsion
systems, to address stringent performance requirements, growing system
complexity, and numerous constraints. The implications for spacecraft orbital
control will also be pursued to enable model predictive control solutions which
expand spacecraft autonomy and resiliency. Project personnel will build on
illustrations from automobile and aircraft engines and spacecraft missions to
amplify STEM outreach efforts to local high school students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project
is to develop advanced methods for reducing the computational cost of solving
nonlinear model predictive control problems, while maintaining acceptable
accuracy. Both a theoretical justification of these methods and their efficient
algorithmic implementation will be pursued. Inexact sequential quadratic
programming-type methods for solving variational inequalities/inclusions
associated with appropriate necessary conditions for optimality will be
developed. Some of these methods will compute derivatives just at the starting
point or at some selected iterations, while others will utilize inexact Newton
iterations. The interplay between cost functions, constraints, closed-loop
stability and performance will be studied in the context of these kind of
implementations. In addition, novel computational and constraint handling
strategies will be developed based on the analysis of Lipschitz stability and
sensitivity of nonlinear model predictive control problems considered.
Theoretically justified approaches to both offline and online constraint
transformations will also be developed as another general pathway to obtain
computational simplifications based on sensitivity analysis. Homotopy procedures
supplied with error analysis will be applied to achieve efficient computation of
model predictive control solutions.