* 1562522
* Exploratory Investigation of Thermally-Induced Water Flow in Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Zhen Liu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2018
* USD 96,751.00

This project aims to answer a very fundamental yet very old scientific question:
"Why and how does water move due to temperature gradients in porous materials?"
This thermally induced water flux ubiquitously exists in porous materials,
whenever both heat transfer and water movement are present. A scientific
understanding of this phenomenon is an essential base for many important
scientific and social challenges: climate effects on geomaterials, geothermal
energy applications, behavior of porous materials under extreme conditions, and
recovery of non-conventional fossil fuels such as gas hydrates and shale gas.
However, despite the significance, this phenomenon has been an historically
unsolved and perplexing issue affecting many science and engineering areas
involving porous materials from traditional applications in civil engineering,
soil science and petroleum engineering to emerging needs in microfluidics,
material processing and biomechanics. This award supports the exploration of a
new research concept/methodology and its application to reveal the physical
mechanisms underlying thermally induced water flux for a complete scientific
description and analysis framework for this phenomenon. As an exploratory study,
which pioneers a very high-risk but possibly high-return concept, the success of
the study may provide the geotechnical community a new understanding to tackle
many issues which are hard to solve in the existing frameworks, and also provide
a way to integrate porous material research which is currently distributed in
various disciplines. In addition to supporting a doctoral student, the project
will support outreach activities for rural, low-socioeconomic students and
native tribal communities in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. An annual summer
program will be established to engage K-12 students in hands-on-learning for
understanding of porous materials.

This project will utilize a new concept/methodology, multiscale-driven
multiphysics, to tackle the issue which appears difficult to solve with existing
methods. The research will first focus on the macroscopic mechanisms underlying
thermally induced water flux. For the purpose, thermally induced water flux will
be related to the temperature dependence of the contact angle by conducting two
sub-tasks: 1. measuring thermally induced water flux with a newly designed
research setup, and 2. measuring the contact angle using a modified capillary
rise method. Then molecular dynamics analysis will be carried out to reveal the
microscopic mechanisms underneath the temperature dependence of the contact
angle, which is hypothesized to be attributable to the temperature dependence of
vapor adsorption. Finally, adsorption isotherms will be measured to
experimentally validate the hypotheses and to couple the frameworks at both
macro- and micro-scales, aiming at a physically-based and practically
implementable framework for thermally induced water flux. The research is
potentially very important as it attempts at breakthroughs via innovations on
the theoretical (new theories at both macro and micro-scale), experimental
(contact angle and thermally induced flux measurements), and numerical aspects
(molecular simulations for water-mineral system). In the long term, the project
also serves as an exploratory effort to examine the concept of multiscale-driven
multiphysics, for the purpose of enabling solutions to critical historical
issues and pressing challenges arising from upcoming applications in
sustainability, energy and environmental protection, which more and more involve
non-isothermal behavior of soils, and in a broad sense, multiphysics in porous
materials.