* 1562701
* Meeting: Genomes to Phenomes (G2P) Workshop, Arlington, VA (October 25-27, 2015)
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2015,09/30/2017
* H Nijhout, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/2017
* USD 54,590.00

Biological systems are exceptionally complex, involving a multitude of
interactions among an enormous number of components at different spatial scales
(from molecules, cells and tissues, to organs, organ systems and whole
organisms) and occurring at different temporal scales (from molecular
interactions that occur in a fraction of a second, to developmental and
physiological processes that occur on time scales measured in hours to months).
What these biological processes are, and how they operate to produce particular
traits and properties (phenotypes) has been a subject of intense interest among
biologists. The past few decades have witnessed a virtual revolution in our
understanding of genes, genomes and gene regulatory networks. Ironically, this
great growth in the knowledge of genomes and phenomes has not been accompanied
by a deeper understanding of the mechanisms by which genes affect traits. A
deeper understanding of how genes affect complex traits has obvious practical
benefits for developing an improved understanding of the mechanisms underlying
genetic diseases and diseases that arise through the interaction of genetic and
environmental factors, such as cancer, diabetes, autoimmune diseases and the
impacts of aging. Likewise, a deeper understanding will improve our knowledge of
the consequences of genetic engineering with substantial benefits to animal and
plant agriculture. Finally a better understanding of how genes and environment
interact will improve our ability to educate citizens, at all levels, on
important issues such as the effects of climate change and personalized
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Genome to Phenomes (G2P) Workshop
is to solicit advice from the mathematical and biological communities about
opportunities to advance our understanding of emergent properties of biological
systems. The workshop will examine where the gaps are in our understanding of
genome-to-phenome relationships, how to fill these gaps, what kind of
infrastructure would be required to achieve this end, and how best to encourage
an integrated approach encompassing theory and experiment through new
interactions among experimental biologists and mathematicians. The workshop will
lay the foundation for new collaborations among biologists, mathematicians and
statisticians in developing a deeper understanding of the interactions among
genes and complex traits. The challenge to understand these exceptionally
complex relationships creates rich opportunities for interaction among
biological and mathematical scientists to develop new and sophisticated methods
of analyzing and understanding the processes that link genotypes and phenotypes.