* 1562538
* Experimental Investigation of Deep Penetration in Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Monica Prezzi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 466,434.00

This project examines the fundamentals of the problem of deep penetration in
sand. The deep penetration problem contains virtually all the challenges that
geomechanicians may face: large displacements, large rotations, large strains,
strain localization, crushing, and a moving soil-metal boundary. The impact of
the research therefore is dual: it will advance the understanding of a problem
with applications to diverse fields, including projectile penetration into the
ground, design of pile foundations and interpretation of the cone penetration
test, but it will also help advance the understanding of fundamental processes
that happen in granular (particulate) media, such as strain localization and
particle crushing and how all of these complex processes should be handled in
computational simulations. Benefits for society therefore are multiple,
including the general advancement of the science of granular media, economies in
foundation design, a better understanding of an application (projectile
penetration) that is vital to the defense industry, the production of a database
of images that can be used in education and research, and the training of
researchers in advanced technology and computer
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research specifically uses the powerful
combination of calibration chamber testing and the digital image correlation
(DIC) technique to study cone penetration in crushable sands. A unique half-
cylindrical chamber with a flat Plexiglass wall that allows observation of the
vertical motion of half-circular penetrometers will be used to acquire images of
the penetration process under various conditions with state-of-the-art high-
resolution digital cameras and microscopes. The images will be processed in two
ways: using DIC to obtain the displacement and strain fields in the soil and an
algorithm that produces the particle size distribution of the soil from an image
of it. The penetration resistance, local stresses, and the displacement and
strain field dataset may be viewed as an experimental solution to the
penetration boundary-value problem. Particle size gradation will be assessed
during the entire penetration process, thereby enabling the research team to
consider the relationship between crushing, wherever it occurs, penetration
resistance and the displacement and strain fields. The calibration chamber tests
are complemented by a complete laboratory testing program to produce data that
can later be used in validation of theoretical simulations and development of
methods of analysis and design. The high-quality experimental data will include
data from tests in a unique Hopkinson bar especially designed to test soil under
uniaxial or triaxial conditions. Work will also be done to advance computational
simulation capabilities of penetration problems using the material point method.