* 1562612
* Designing Certified Controllers to Prevent Falls for Legged Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ramanarayan Vasudevan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 06/30/2020
* USD 375,000.00

This project will investigate controllers for legged robots that work reliably
despite lacking full information about operating conditions, including
uncertainty about terrain and robot properties. The approach differs from
previous approaches in that the focus is entirely on maintaining balance. There
are three integrated research tasks. First is creation of a feasible algorithm
to determine starting positions of a legged robot from which falling can be
avoided. Second is pre-computation of a so-called "safe set" of control inputs
that is guaranteed to avoid falling. Both these tasks embed the hybrid,
nonlinear dynamics of walking into a linear partial differential equation, which
is propagated backwards in time from a set of acceptable final states to
incorporate the effects of uncertainty. The third task is experimental
evaluation of the results using a reconfigurable legged robot platform. As part
of the third task, a human operator will be allowed to give arbitrary commands
to a legged robot. A command filter will modify the user input so that it lies
within the safe set. Thus the operator will be able to give any command without
the robot falling. Legged robotic systems are an ideal candidate for search and
rescue missions or nuclear power plant repair or disassembly. However successful
teleoperation of such systems is challenging. Thus guaranteed safe operation
will make these systems a viable means of keeping first responders out of harm's
way. The techniques under study can be extended to other fields of robotics,
such as active prostheses or exoskeletons, thereby benefitting the lives of
those suffering from loss of mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
construct a novel optimization scheme for automated control synthesis to provide
deterministic guarantees on the safety of a legged robotic system in the
presence of model uncertainty. Rather than rely upon linearizations or assume
arbitrary control authority, the approach considered in this project will
address the following three aims: First, a new convex optimization tool to
efficiently compute the set of states of a legged robotic system that have less
than a user specified probability of avoiding falls in spite of uncertainty in
the continuous and contact dynamics. Second, a novel control synthesis tool to
pre-compute the set of controls that prevent falls for the set of states that
can avoid falling. Finally, an interactive real-world setup wherein users can
apply arbitrary inputs to a legged robot which are then modified to ensure safe
operation across a variety of terrains; this setup will validate the robust
synthesis method while allowing modelers to confidently explore configurations
of a legged robot that have been rarely considered to date due to the
limitations of existing control design techniques.