* 1562766
* Experimental Measurement of Tearing and Cutting in Highly Deformable Solids Relating to the Mechanical Origin of Crack Blunting-Mediated Toughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Shelby Hutchens, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2020
* USD 310,459.00

This award aims to determine the relationship between cutting and tearing
failure modes in order to re-examine and provide new insight into the mechanical
origin of tearing in highly deformable materials. Failure in these rubber-like
materials governs design rules in applications ranging from transportation to
biomaterials. Unlike many rigid materials, cracks in rubber-like materials can
blunt macroscopically as the material undergoes large deformations. This
complicates the stress state at the tip of the crack, which varies depending on
the material. Current understanding of the failure mechanism cannot explain the
energy differences in two different loading geometries, cutting versus tearing.
Potential benefits include design criteria to serve as targets to guide the
fabrication of new materials. Results can be generalized to describe puncture
and insertion of needles in soft tissue; these failure mechanisms play a key
role in diagnostics and guided-needle therapeutics. This project will provide
educational opportunities facilitated by the PI as many of the experiments in
this project are accessible to undergraduate researchers. The PI will recruit
female undergraduate students to participate in data-gathering throughout the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly deformable, crack-blunting solids exhibit
fracture energies many times larger than predicted by simple cohesive models.
Researchers have postulated more complex models that indicate fracture is
governed by the local mechanics of the tip. These local mechanics include the
material's large strain response, tip radius, and local fracture energy. To
fully characterize each of these important features, the PI will supplement
experimental mechanical failure data with in situ and post-mortem imaging,
documenting crack tip radius, near-tip strain, and fracture mechanism. The
mechanism map resulting from this experimental characterization will guide
examination and, if necessary, re-interpretation of existing models describing
the mechanical origin of tearing in highly deformable materials. Once
established for the standard plane stress geometry, the relationship quantified
in this project, between geometrically controlled (cutting) and remote-load
(tearing) failure energies, will be applied to relate needle-mediated failure to
standard, mode I fracture energy values.