* 1562027
* Enabling the Design of Failure-Tolerant Complex Engineered Systems using New Network-Based Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation Formalisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Irem Tumer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2020
* USD 466,430.00

Many engineered systems that form the fabric of our society, such as power
grids, commercial aircraft, or self-driving cars, are by nature difficult to
model and analyze. In such complex systems, many interacting subsystems are
often independently designed, managed and engineered. This "design-by-subsystem"
approach reduces the cost and complexity of the design process, but prevents the
discovery of unexpected, emergent interactions between subsystems until the
system is integrated and tested in operation. This award explores new methods of
failure analysis for complex engineered systems by focusing on how the failure
modes depend on the connections between subsystems and the variables and
parameters governing the physics-based behaviors of those subsystems. While in
previous research network models of complex engineered systems have been
introduced to address this issue, the fundamental limitation remains the
exclusive reliance on physical and functional dependencies between components.
This research aims to produce a set of indicators to assist engineers in
quantifying the failure tolerance of complex engineered systems without going
through the expense of a complete system simulation, which in many cases is
neither feasible nor practical. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically
introduces a new approach to robust design based on failure tolerance of
interdependent networks. The approach explicitly addresses both physical
architecture and behavioral, physics-based relations as contributing to the
system's tolerance to failure. The methodology incorporates a mesoscale property
of complex networks, namely modularity, to understand how the architecture of
components and their physics-based relations have an important function of
creating stability and failure tolerance. The project will first introduce a new
conceptualization of robust design based upon the relational stability between
design elements. This represents an important conceptual shift in thinking about
robust design, moving away from component reliability alone towards
consideration of the connectivity of the behavior of parts. The project will
then introduce a network-based methodology and simulation environment capable of
calculating the robustness of a complex engineered system. A set of measures
will be introduced, which, while being single quantities, holistically capture
the failure behavior of the complex engineered system not just at phase
transition between nominal behavior and failure but before and after that as
well.