* 1562863
* Mechanical Mapping of Neural Stem Cell Differentiation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Seok (Andy) Yun, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's are characterized
by an irreversible loss of neurons that can lead to severe cognitive and motor
deficits. These disorders generate an enormous burden on society, with
healthcare costs of hundreds of billions of dollars in the U.S. alone. Current
treatment options are generally not curative and can only provide temporary
relief from symptoms. Stem cell therapy is an emerging technology with the
potential of permanently replacing or repairing neural cells lost in
neurodegenerative disorders. Improving the efficacy of stem cell therapy
requires understanding of the factors that influence stem cell differentiation,
the process by which stem cells generate new neurons. While most research
efforts have been directed to analyzing the biochemical and genetic factors
involved in the differentiation process, recent discoveries have highlighted
contributions from mechanical properties of the cellular environment. This
project will investigate this aspect of stem cell differentiation by employing a
novel technique, Brillouin microscopy that can provide three-dimensional
information on biomechanical properties of tissues at the cellular level. The
objective is to determine the importance of mechanical cues in directing stem
cell differentiation, and provide critical information for improving the
effectiveness of regenerative therapies. This project provides an excellent
opportunity to educate and train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
at the interface between engineering and life sciences. In addition to advanced
students, undergraduate students enrolled in the Harvard-MIT Summer Institute
for Biomedical Optics will be given the opportunity to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current understanding of biomechanical
properties of stem cells is mostly based on cell culture studies, showing that
the mechanical parameters of the extracellular environment such as stiffness
have a significant influence in directing differentiation. However, the extent
to which these results represent the behavior of stem cells in brain tissues is
unclear. One of the major obstacles is the lack of techniques for investigating
the elastic properties of tissues with three-dimensional resolution down to the
cellular and subcellular level. Brillouin imaging can bridge this gap given its
non-contact nature and high spatial resolution. In this research, Brillouin
imaging will be validated as a tool to provide reliable measurements of elastic
modulus of neural cells and tissues. The technique will be used to map the
heterogeneity of mechanical properties in the mouse brain, both at the level of
the different brain structures and, in the different regions, at the cellular
level to understand the origin of such spatial variations. The effect of this
mechanical heterogeneity on differentiation will then be assessed by correlating
the lineage of stem cells introduced into the brain with the elastic properties
of the local microenvironment measured with Brillouin imaging