* 1562255
* Science of Pattern Coating onto Heterogeneous Surfaces Using a Hybrid Manufacturing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Tequila Harris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2021
* USD 328,475.00

Scaling the fabrication of thin films from the laboratory to manufacturing floor
has been a difficult and time-consuming process. This is due in part to a lack
of understanding important factors associated with the scalability of materials,
in addition to the lack of advanced manufacturing approaches to fabricate thin
films with desired properties, quality and/or functionality, at low cost and/or
high speed. This is due, in part, to the difference in scale and approach
between the discovery and development of new functional thin film materials, in
the lab, and the use of scaled manufacturing techniques. Multilayer thin film
devices are spread across many existing and emerging technological areas,
including organic solar cells, displays, sensors, solid-state lighting,
ubiquitous smart devices, and other applications. Thin organic films and film
multilayers will play an increasingly important role in the formation of new
products that demand high performance but low-cost. These thin films are
typically formed from liquid films deposited onto and wetting mechanical
supports or often flexible plastic substrates. In this research, the mechanisms
that limit the scaling of emerging devices due to the interactions of fluids
coated on dissimilar surfaces are elucidated and paths leading to
manufacturability developed. This work supports the need for decreasing
manufacturing costs and increasing the manufacturing rate of multilayer thin
films. The grant enables the participation of undergraduates, principally from
underrepresented groups, into the research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is to investigate the influence of material properties
and processing conditions on the ability to coat low viscosity electrode polymer
fluids onto flexible substrates, to produce complex multilayer heterogeneous
patterns, which will advance manufacturing knowledge for fabricating 3D thin
film structures used in flexible electronics. The diverse range of defects that
can be traced back to interfacial phenomena substantiates the importance of
understanding the process-structure relationship of patterned heterogeneous thin
film, when using scalable high-throughput processes. A unique manufacturing
method called slot die printing or extrusion on-demand will be used for this
experimental study. The investigation consists of three thrusts: Thrust 1 Thin
Film Formation, Thrust 2, Interfacial Phenomena and Thin Film Stability, and
Thrust 3, Thin Film Characterization and Analysis, to gain a basic understanding
of the interfacial phenomena (wetting, spread, and adhesion) during solution
coating onto heterogeneous surfaces, to elucidate mechanisms that impact the
process-structure relationship of multilayer thin films. The work will further
develop continuous roll-to-roll manufacture of complex multilayer films from
solution, using a monolithic approach, thereby inherently decreasing fabrication
cost and waste compared to traditional methods.