* 1562055
* Collaborative Research:  Forest Water Use and the Influence of Acid Deposition
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Lixin Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 137,145.00

Forest Water Use Efficiency (WUE) is defined as the ratio of carbon uptake per
unit water vapor loss via transpiration. Micrometeorological measurements
suggest that forest WUE has dramatically increased over the last two decades, in
excess of what would be expected from increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide
concentrations. Coinciding with observed trends in forest WUE have been marked
decreases in acid deposition throughout much of North America and Europe. There
is evidence that acid deposition may impact forest WUE, either by altering the
availability of nutrients in forest soils or by directly affecting foliar
physiology. Changes in WUE could also lead to changes in stream discharge from
forested catchments. The hypothesized response of forests to changing levels of
acid deposition is not currently considered in the land surface components of
global climate models (GCMs). Since carbon dioxide and water vapor are the two
most important greenhouse gases, it is vital to accurately model their land-
atmosphere exchange.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses a
catchment-based approach to investigate the effects of changing acid deposition
on forest WUE. Tree ring carbon isotopes will be used to reconstruct historical
WUE time series within six catchments that have been differentially impacted by
acid deposition due to distinctions between their underlying bedrock mineralogy
and geological histories. The research will also capitalize on experimental
treatments that have altered soil biogeochemistry in paired catchment designs
(Bear Brook, ME; Hubbard Brook, NH; and Fernow Experimental Forest, WV). Stream
discharge analysis and model-based approaches will be applied to detect the
impact of acid deposition on forest WUE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support a Ph.D. student, who will receive training in a wide range of field,
laboratory, and modeling techniques, and at least eight undergraduate students.
High school students will also be involved through established programs, and
will include their participation in both field and lab activities. All senior
members of the project team have track records of recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. Results will be communicated to the broader scientific
community through journal publications and conference presentations, and a
special conference session will be organized with an objective of sharing
research findings with the modeling community.