* 1562439
* Accurate Measurement of Micromachining Forces in Three Dimensions
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Burak Ozdoganlar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,938.00

Micromachining has been increasingly used to manufacture high-tech micro- and
miniature-scale devices from a variety of materials for many applications.
Realizing significant advances in the quality and productivity of micromachining
processes is vital to transform micromachining into an industrially-viable
process. Thus, fundamental knowledge on process and system characteristics are
urgently needed. Since micromachining forces embody and manifest critical
information on the mechanics, dynamics, stability, and health of the
micromachining processes and systems, accurate measurement of those forces is
paramount to gaining fundamental understanding on, and thus, to realize
transformative advances in, micromachining science and engineering. The state-
of-the-art force measurement systems are incapable of measuring micromachining
forces accurately, thereby hindering further advancements. This award supports
scientific and technological investigations on accurate measurement of three-
dimensional micromachining forces. The research will create a unique dynamic
modeling approach to inform next-generation dynamometer designs. They will
facilitate tremendous advances in the capability to manufacture a myriad of
micro- and miniature-scale devices for many fields, including
medical/biomedical, aerospace, military/defense, and consumer
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are (1)
to understand the relationship between structural dynamics and force measurement
characteristics of dynamometers; (2) to create compensation approaches to
significantly expand three-dimensional measurement bandwidth; and (3) to
construct/validate models to enable future dynamometer designs. To achieve
Objective 1, experimental modal analyses will be conducted on commercial
miniature machining dynamometers. The dynamic excitation will be provided using
a custom impact excitation system, and the dynamic response will be measured
using laser Doppler vibrometery. Both the excitation (from the impact system)
and the forces from the dynamometer will be collected and compared. Different
boundary conditions (solid, elastic) will be considered. From these tests, both
the receptance and force-to-force frequency response functions will be obtained
within the 0-60 kHz bandwidth. Towards Objective 2, inverse-filtering techniques
will be used to devise a compensation approach to expand the measurement
bandwidth by at least 20 folds. Both experimental validation and functional
evaluation (using micromilling and microdrilling processes) of the developed
compensation approach will be performed. For Objective 3, structural-dynamics
models of the dynamometer structure, including different boundary conditions and
workpiece dynamics, will be developed using the spectral-Tchebychev technique.
These models will also be experimentally validated using the same experimental
modal analysis techniques as those for achieving Objective 1.