* 1562062
* Multiscale Modeling of Water Absorption and Mechanical Strength of Polymer Matrix Composite Materials Containing Voids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* E Du, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2020
* USD 399,727.00

This award supports an investigation into water transport in composite materials
containing voids due to direct contact with liquid water, and the associated
degradation of the performance of the material. The potential degradation of the
matrix polymer and the interface will be measured and the test data will be used
to calibrate models for such degradation. Polymer matrix composite materials are
used in structural applications exposed to water. As polymer matrix composite
materials are gaining wide acceptance for several important structures, there
has been concern about possible degradation of the performance from exposure to
moisture in the form of humid air. Less considered is the influence of direct
contact of the composite with liquid water. Such exposure under the presence of
voids in the composite may allow water transport in the form of capillary flow.
Capillary flow represents a very rapid mechanism of transport which will elevate
diffusion into the polymer, and cause increased rate of degradation of the
organic polymer and fiber/matrix interface. A substantial fraction of the US
export and economy relies on the automotive, aircraft and ship building
industries, and results from this research will benefit the US economy and
society. This research involves multiple disciplines such as microfluidics,
materials science and solid mechanics. The multi-scale approach outlined will
involve students from underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and is
expected to impact the engineering education program in a very positive
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Voids and porosity are detrimental structural
imperfections in polymer matrix composite materials, not only due to strength
reduction, but they provide extra paths for water absorption and filling beyond
moisture diffusion in matrix. This project specifically addresses the
fundamental problems of the interferences between structural defects, moisture
uptake, and mechanical strength and fracture mechanisms of underwater composite
materials. Specific objectives are: (1) quantify structural defects in composite
materials using scanning electron microscope and micro-computed tomography
methods, establish a reliable water uptake model and validate with microfluidics
testing; (2) characterize the fiber/matrix interface strength of dry and water-
aged composite materials, using in situ scanning electron microscopy on
miniature transverse single-fiber and composite tensile specimens; (3) establish
a multiscale micromechanical model for prediction the strength of a macroscopic
composite exposed to water aging. Predictions will be compared to and validated
by the experimental measurements for water-aged glass/vinylester and glass/epoxy
composites.