* 1562694
* Effect Of Small Size, Stress Localization And Stress Gradient On The Strength Of Silicon
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2020
* USD 370,668.00

This award supports an investigation of the failure behavior of silicon at small
scales. Most micro-nano mechanical systems use silicon beams as their structural
components. These beams are typically subjected to bending during operation. But
silicon is brittle at room temperature. This limits the design space of silicon
devices. Bending, however, localizes high stresses near the surface of the beams
close to the anchors. In addition, the stresses decrease from the surface
towards the middle plane of the beam, giving rise to stress gradients. The
effects of small size, stress localization and stress gradient on the failure
mechanisms of silicon remain elusive to date. Recent evidence suggests that
silicon at small scale can be ductile (i.e., not brittle) at very high yield
stresses. If so, then small size, stress localization and stress gradients
together may offer the virtues of both ductility and high strength to silicon.
Such failure resistance would present a yet untapped paradigm to the design
space of silicon devices. A detailed understanding of the failure and
deformation mechanisms of silicon at small scale under bending would be
transformative for both semiconductor physics and industry, and will be a
fundamental advance for the field of mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to explore the mechanics and mechanisms of deformation and
failure in small silicon samples under bending by combining theory and
experiments. The working hypothesis of the project is that dislocation is the
primary mechanism of deformation in silicon under bending at small scale. Small
samples are dislocation free. Small size and stress localization in bending
offer high flaw tolerance against fracture. This is due to the low probability
of flaw incidence in the small stressed region. Bending results in dislocation
nucleation from the surface before any flaw induced fracture. These dislocations
enter the bulk yielding the silicon. But the yield stress increases with
decreasing size due to stress gradient. This hypothesis will be tested by
undertaking three tasks: (1) mechanistic modeling and molecular dynamics
simulations of silicon samples under bending, (2) bending experiments on micro-
nano fabricated single crystal silicon samples with various sizes and at
different temperatures, and (3) in situ bending experiments in transmission
electron microscopes (TEM) to reveal the mechanisms of deformation (in
collaboration with Max Planck Institute at Dusseldorf, Germany). A novel micro
mechanical stage will be developed for tasks 2 and 3. The research will be
integrated with education and outreach activities involving K-12 to graduate
students.