* 1562579
* Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchical Colloidal Nanomaterials Using Multi-scale Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

An important nanomanufacturing challenge is to develop rapid and continuous
manufacturing schemes to control material structures from the dimensions of
individual nanoparticles (nanometers), to assembled microstructures
(micrometers), to device features on the order of the electromagnetic
wavelengths of interest (micrometer to meters). Such multi-scale materials are
routinely observed in nature in photonic architectures within butterfly and
beetle wings, or in common mechanical elements within wood, silk, and sea
shells. Unfortunately, synthetic approaches to create large scale materials that
encompass both the complexity and hierarchical features found in natural
materials are still lacking. The objective of this award is to develop the
fundamental understanding necessary for the creation of a method to fabricate
multiscale colloidal nanomaterials. The project will result in advancements in
critical scientific and technological areas such as transport, assembly and
polymerization. The development of assembly processes to produce colloidal
nanomaterials is useful for any application that aims to manipulate
electromagnetic radiation, for example, sensors and solar cells, and more exotic
emerging applications like optical computing and optical cloaking. Outreach
efforts include engagement and participation of high school and undergraduate
students in the laboratory. Students participating in the project will be
encouraged to present at conferences and be involved with additional outreach
efforts at local elementary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hierarchical
colloidal materials nanomanufacturing project is based on combining strong and
weak interactions towards a processing method that continuously assembles
nanoparticle structures over a large area. This approach relies on coupling
hydrodynamics and capillary interactions for rapid transport and organization of
nanoparticle-loaded droplets on predefined patterned surfaces, balancing bulk
convection and local diffusion-mediated assembly of nanoparticle microstructures
via field-mediated interactions, and rapidly arresting or immobilizing
structures through polymerizable media to quench nanoparticle configurations.
Individually, these steps can be met with existing technologies, but combining
them brings significant engineering and scientific challenges. For example, it
is necessary to orchestrate the disparate time- and length-scales associated
with diffusive, capillary, and hydrodynamic transport to enable multiscale
structure formation in a single step. Given the imperfect separation between the
scales at which these processes operate, understanding of how to control
interactions in regimes where they compete and/or are coupled will be
accomplished via optical microscopy, and simulations.