* 1562656
* Emergence of New Properties at the Large-Scale on Elastic Surfaces due to  Small-Scale Adhesion and Waviness
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Haneesh Kesari, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2021
* USD 375,000.00

This award supports the study of the physical mechanisms that underlie friction
using mathematical modeling and experiments. Friction is the resistance to
sliding between two solid surfaces that are in mechanical contact. These
mechanisms operate at sub-micrometer length scales and involve complex
mechanical interactions that are dictated by the surfaces' adhesion and
roughness. The specifics of these mechanisms, however, remain poorly understood.
The new knowledge will lead to new strategies that can reduce energy wastage,
for example in engines, due to friction. Additionally, the new knowledge in
alliance with micro-fabrication techniques will allow engineers to create
surfaces with tailored or tunable surface properties. Specifically, it will
inform them which sizes, shapes and arrangements of surface features should be
used in order to produce the desired frictional effects. Such "structural
surface engineering" has the potential to galvanize scientific and technological
breakthroughs in many disciplines. For example, it can drive the development of
prosthetics that are capable of the human sense of touch, and increase the
agility of the next generation of climbing robots for search and rescue
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new knowledge will be derived by
investigating the hypothesis that a significant fraction of friction involving
elastomeric material surfaces is caused by the energy dissipated by mechanical
instabilities that take place at the small-scale due to adhesion and surface
roughness. The hypothesis will be investigated by studying a model family of
continuum mechanics-based contact problems. Equations that connect the mean
transverse contact force to the net normal contact force, adhesion and roughness
parameters will be derived. By performing an asymptotic analysis of these
equations it will be determined whether the mean transverse force remains
finite, that is, whether friction type behavior emerges at the large-scale, as
the roughness length scale in the problem is made infinitesimally small. New
adhesive contact simulation techniques and experiments will be developed and
used to guide and verify the theoretical work. Currently, surface mechanical
phenomena, such as friction, are considered intrinsic properties and are
described with phenomenological models. There is a very limited understanding of
how surface phenomena are connected to small-scale mechanisms and parameters.
The project aims to derive a micro-mechanics based, mathematical theory of
friction. It will lead to fundamental advances required for creating a general,
theoretical methodology for understanding how surface properties emerge at the
large-scale as the smeared out effects of complex interactions that are hidden
at the small-scale.