* 1562915
* Collaborative Research: "Green" Nanolithography Using Protein-based Photoresists
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Mengkun Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 49,712.00

There is an urgent need to reduce the use of noxious chemicals as photoresists
and developing solvents during lithographic processes in conventional
nanofabrication. This collaborative research award addresses this fundamental
issue in nano-manufacturing by using bio-compatible protein as the photoresist,
eliminating the need of hazardous chemicals during micro/nano-lithography and
reducing the associated safety costs. It will also facilitate the understanding
of the fundamental mechanism of the interaction between biopolymer proteins and
incident radiation, that is, changes in proteins upon exposure to light. The
knowledge obtained of the physical and chemical properties of protein-based
biopolymers is expected to be widely applicable to protein-photon, protein-
electron and protein-ion lithography processes, paving the way for the next
generation "green" nanomanufacturing. The collaboration between the two
institutions combines their strengths in nano-fabrication and nano-
characterization, respectively, and provides unique educational opportunities to
a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students. This includes
educational activities comprising curriculum development, recruitment and
retention of under-represented students, and outreach to schools. The
collaborative research results will be broadly disseminated through technical
publications, conferences and workshops, regular and short
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A set of protein-based biopolymers - including
regenerated natural and recombinant proteins - will be analyzed in thin-film
form to evaluate their suitability as the resist materials for nanolithography
with only water as the developing solvent. Comprehensive studies of the physical
and chemical properties of these biopolymers will be conducted at the nanoscale
using scanning electron microscopy and scanning near-field optical microscopy to
assess their resist performance under different lithographic conditions. The
uses of protein-based biopolymers as resist and template materials for large-
scale nanomanufacturing (e.g. roll-to-roll nanoimprinting) will be investigated
as well. The research will also provide a new, cost-effective and eco-friendly
methodology not only for pattern transferring but also for fabricating
nanostructures that can serve as biointerfaces with the same or better
resolution than conventional lithographic methods. This research, when
implemented with high resolution characterization and lithography procedures,
will find numerous applications including but not limited to biosensors,
biophotonics, and biostructures for tissue engineering owing to the inherently
superior biocompatibility compared to synthetic counterparts.