* 1562634
* Study of Surface Templates Nanomanufactured for Growing Single-Crystal Semiconductor Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Nobuhiko Kobayashi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

An increasing interest and a strong need exist for technologies that enable
highly scalable manufacturing of high-quality, large-area, low-cost substrates
for manufacturing semiconductor films to meet the growing markets in a range of
applications such as power electronics, optoelectronics, and energy harvesting
with benefits of high performance and economies of scale. Examples include
substrates to improve overall cost-performance of power transistors that handle
a large amount of electrical power, of light-emitting-diodes that replace
incandescent and fluorescent light bulbs, and, of solar cells that are
affordable yet have exceptional performance. Despite the progress made at
various levels for decades, a versatile manufacturing technology that meets a
wide range of requirements for such substrates is still lacking. This project
will pave the way for future deployment of a substrate manufacturing technology
by utilizing materials with microstructures controlled through nanomanufacturing
approaches. This research involves multiple disciplines of science and
engineering including inorganic film synthesis, semiconductor film deposition,
and material characterization. These disciplines will be integrated into
curriculum development to provide hands-on research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at the home institution and at other local
educational institutions that foster a large number of minority and economically
disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pioneering demonstrations
continuously emerge in search of innovative approaches for heteroepitaxy of
semiconductor films, which may offer a practical path for heterogeneous
integration of dissimilar semiconductors in the future. The concept of employing
a buffer layer inserted between a substrate and a film has been established as
the most engaging approach from both technological and scientific standpoints.
However, it relies upon the availability of single-crystal semiconductor
substrates with physical properties not vastly different from those of films to
be grown. This project aims at demonstrating a new perception of growing a
single-crystal semiconductor film on a non-single-crystal arbitrary substrate
using a single-crystal epitaxial template. The key lies in the single-crystal
epitaxial template on which crystallographic registry is provided for the
subsequent growth of a semiconductor film regardless of the properties of the
underlying non-single-crystal arbitrary substrate. Two critical issues to be
addressed are the formation of engineered-nanometer-surface structures that
promote the formation of a single-crystal epitaxial template and the subsequent
growth of a semiconductor film on the template, which provides an opportunity to
acquire new knowledge in kinetics and thermodynamics governing the formation of
a single-crystal epitaxial template on engineered nanometer surface structures
and growth mechanisms of group III-V compound semiconductor films on the
template.