* 1562904
* Multiscale Mechanics of Cell Interactions With Flexible Nanofilaments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yuri Bazilevs, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 459,087.00

Flexible nanofilaments are fundamental components of man-made materials, living
cells and of viruses such as Ebola. The importance to human health of
nanofilaments is highlighted by the recent outbreak of Ebola virus disease in
West Africa, which began in 2013 and continued for over two years. Understanding
how nanofilaments enter living cells, therefore, has important relevance to
society. This project is aimed to understand how flexible nanofilaments interact
and enter human and animal cells, thereby helping address the urgent societal
needs to understand the life cycle of filoviruses as well as the potential
health hazards of engineered nanomaterials. Results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society, as engineered nanomaterials are becoming a
significant fraction of material flows in the U.S. and most of the manufactured
nanomaterials will eventually end up in landfills, hence impacting our ecosystem
and health. The multi-disciplinary approach of the research will positively
impact engineering education and outreach activities at Brown University. The
educational programs will provide training for graduate students and visiting
scholars, as well as research experience for undergraduate students.

This work will address the following fundamental mechanics issues that underlie
a vast variety of experimental observations in the field: (1) attachment of
flexible nanofilaments onto a cell membrane, (2) fusion of membranes that
envelop nanofilaments, (3) biopackaging of flexible nanofilaments, and (4)
budding of nanofilaments from a cell membrane. The technical approaches will be
based on a number of theoretical and simulation techniques developed by the PIs
research group in cell mechanics. This work will provide useful insights into
the kinetics of cell processing of nanofilaments through theoretical modeling
and large scale coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations of protein-
mediated nucleation of adhesion domains with considerations of receptor
diffusion, binding kinetics and membrane undulation, membrane fusion focusing on
the effects of size, shape and bending rigidity of enveloped nanofilaments and
compositions of lipid membranes, determination of phase diagrams of cell
packaging of nanofilaments and filament networks with respect to the length,
elastic properties and interaction between nanofilaments and cell membranes, and
effects of mechanical properties and cell interactions on modes of nanofilament
budding. The ultra-large scale simulations in the work will be performed at the
National Institute for Computational Sciences, and the rest of the computational
work will be performed at the Center for Computing and Visualization at Brown
University.