* 1562774
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A reference grammar of Potawatomi, A Native American language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Hunter Lockwood, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,037.00

The essential elements that constitute the minimal scientific documentation of a
language include a reference grammar, a dictionary, and transcribed narratives
with translations and linguistic analysis. Reference grammars constitute a more
comprehensive, highly detailed set of explanations and involve extensive
linguistic analysis, so often the initial preliminary attempts at describing a
language's patterns result in a short description known as a "sketch," with a
later publication of a reference grammar following subsequent scientific
research. In some cases, linguists develop the sketch but never circle back to
publish that reference grammar, creating a large gap in the documentation. This
is the case for numerous languages that were described and analyzed in the first
half of the twentieth century, including Potawatomi (also called Bodéwadmimwen
or Bodwéwadmimwen), a critically endangered Algonquian language. The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. It is estimated that there are less than 10 fluent native speakers of
Potawatomi today, all elderly. Considerable effort is being made towards
language revitalization, but materials for training advanced speakers are in
short supply. This project will fund dissertation research that will produce a
reference grammar for Potawatomi. Broader impacts of the project include making
the planned documentation will be useful to both linguists and community
members, by producing an example-driven, digital presentation version of the
grammar for language teachers and students.



In this dissertation project, doctoral student Hunter Lockwood will research and
produce the first grammar of Potawatomi since Charles Hockett's 1939 sketch of
the language in his own dissertation. Data from Hockett are often cited in
theoretical linguistics; this dissertation will add depth and breadth to the
contribution the language can make to linguistic science. For example, almost no
work has been done on Potawatomi syntax or semantics; this dissertation will
fill those gaps in the documentary record. This reflects the continued
collaboration between the Forest County Potawatomi Community and the University
of Wisconsin-Madison. Previous collaboration between these two institutions,
also with funding from the National Science Foundation's Documenting Endangered
Languages Program, has resulted in a bilingual dictionary and a corpus of
transcribed stories and natural speech. As a result, the dissertation research
will utilize methods relying on modern digital tools for building and analyzing
large sets of language data collected in a corpus, integrating data from the
corpus and dictionary in the analysis.