* 1562871
* Flocks of Swimming Micro-robots with Long-range Hydrodynamic Interaction and Objectives
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2019
* USD 475,000.00

This project will create flocks of swimming robots that operate in, and
cooperatively influence, highly viscous fluid environments. Because of the
effect of size on the relative contributions of different fluid forces,
micrometer-scale robots in water behave similarly to centimeter-scale robots in
viscous fluids such as corn syrup or motor oil. High viscous fluids can also
model movement in granular media like sand. One effect of high viscosity is that
the movement of one robot may affect other robots many body lengths distant.
Thus this project will create new methods of trajectory planning and motion
control for large flocks of swimming robots that take these interactions into
account. Two selectable modes of control will be the focus of this study. The
first is to maximize the long-range effects of the swimming flock, so as to
enhance mixing of the fluid environment. The second is to minimize long-range
effects, so as to allow stealthy movement of the robot flock. Some potential
applications of these flocks include robotic inspection of oil tanks,
environmental monitoring and remediation, and multi-agent drug delivery systems
in blood vessels. This project is multidisciplinary covering from fundamental
fluid mechanics to robot design and control. The research and educational
activities associated with this multidisciplinary proposal are expected to make
the subject accessible to a broad audience including traditionally under-
represented groups and engineering community affiliated with national
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of artificial swimmers capable of
moving and tumbling in highly viscous environments poses numerous fundamental
challenges. Swimming in viscous regimes is significantly affected by long-range
hydrodynamic interactions that nonlinearly couple the propulsion function of
swimmers in a swarm. Long-range hydrodynamic interactions can easily induce
chaos, and lead to unpredictable collective behaviors. This project addresses
the first three-dimensional controlled flock of swimmers under nonlinear
hydrodynamic interactions. As a benchmark, experiments will be conducted using a
swimmer called Quadroar, and the capability of this swimmer to switch between
(quasi) periodic and chaotic group behaviors will be investigated. Two
fundamental missions will be implemented: (i) Active optimal control of a flock
to achieve the highest mixing efficiency in the background fluid (Chaotic Mixing
mode); and (ii) Active control of a flock such that hydrodynamic interactions
cancel each other, that is, swimmers flock with minimally disturbing the
surrounding fluid, and remain stealth (Concealed Swarm mode). These modes define
new group objectives for environment-mediated robotic swarms.