* 1562838
* Statistical Structural Health Monitoring and Damage Detection for Highly Variable Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Daniel Adams, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2020
* USD 325,000.00

Structural health monitoring aims to detect damage and assess critical, physical
infrastructures over long periods of time. The infrastructures assessed can
include pipelines, bridges, steel cables, aircrafts, trains, and power plants.
Due to the significant complexity and variability of structural health
monitoring data, current technology can only reasonably assess limited amounts
of information. Yet, as structural health monitoring expands to more complex
problems and its data includes hundreds of terabytes of structural data over
several decades, big data strategies become essential. This award supports
fundamental research to integrate statistical, big data strategies with
structural health monitoring systems. The new, integrated framework will enable
the tracking and the anticipation of structural damage in harsh, highly variable
environments over many years. This study will provide tools for the detection of
structural damage before catastrophic failures occur. Results from this research
will benefit the U.S. economy and society by improving safety and reducing life-
cycle costs of many civil and mechanical systems, from airplanes to bridges to
pipelines. The research also promotes highly interdisciplinary collaboration as
the research employs methods and solves problems found across the disciplines of
electrical and computer engineering, computer science, mechanical engineering,
and civil engineering. This diverse subject matter will promote a
multidisciplinary engineering education and help to recruit and broaden the
participation of underrepresented students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will statistically identify barely
visible, critically important trends in large (gigabyte to terabyte size)
structural health monitoring data sets. Three primary challenges are addressed:
(1) distorting environmental conditions, (2) poor scaling to large data sets,
and (3) no standard statistic for reliability. This project addresses these
three challenges through the creation of a modular big data structural health
monitoring framework based on dynamic time warping, singular value
decomposition, factor analysis, and maximum likelihood statistics. The big data
structural health monitoring framework is assessed through several short-term
(hours to days) and long-term (multi-year) structural health monitoring
experiments that introduce composite panels to a variety of damage and
environmental conditions. These experiments provide statistical validation as
well as a unique opportunity to study the effects of environmental parameters on
composite structural health monitoring data.