* 1562075
* Rational Design and Processing of Multifunctional Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2019
* USD 305,000.00

Nanocomposites composed of polymer matrix and nanoparticles offer a vast design-
space of potential material properties, depending greatly on the properties of
the two constituents and their spatial arrangement. Composites inherit good
flexibility and processability from the polymer matrix and desirable features
such as mechanical strength, unique optical, electrical, or magnetic properties,
as well as conductivity and catalytic activity from nanoparticles. More
importantly, they often impart new properties due to the strong coupling effect
and strategic arrangement of the nanoparticles in the polymer matrix. This award
supports fundamental research on rational design and processing of
multifunctional nanocomposites composed of multiferroic core/shell nanoparticles
and block copolymers. This research will enhance the current understanding of
the structure-property relationships for these novel polymer-based,
multifunctional nanostructured materials. These materials will be used in
devices for applications such as advanced spintronics, capacitors, actuators,
transducers, electromagnetic sensors and communication. The research project
will be integrated with nanoscience education through the involvement of
graduate students, undergraduate students, high school science teachers, and
high school students in a multilevel learning experience.

Magnetoelectric multiferroics exhibit both magnetic order and electrical
polarization in the same compound. They are recognized as next generation
multifunctional materials. The strong coupling between the ferroelectric and
ferromagnetic orders in these materials renders a magnetic field-induced
electrical polarization, and conversely, an electric field-induced
magnetization. The ability to selectively incorporate multiferroic core/shell
nanoparticles into the desired block copolymer domains to yield block
copolymer/multiferroic nanoparticle multifunctional nanocomposites with long-
range hierarchical order may open up a new avenue for developing miniaturized
multifunctional electromagnetic materials and devices with controlled dielectric
permittivity and magnetic permeability. This research aims to rationally design
and process multifunctional nanocomposites with long-range hierarchical order.
The research team will design and engineer monodisperse multiferroic
nanoparticles tethered with polymers on the surface, process multiferroic
nanocomposites via incorporating multiferroic core/shell nanoparticles within
the target block of block copolymer, and explore the ferroelectric and
ferromagnetic properties of nanocomposites.