* 1562545
* Collaborative Research: Ultrasound, Oxide, and Oxygen: Microscale Mechanisms for Next-generation Alloy Casting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Douglas Kelley, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 285,769.00

More than 90 percent of U.S. manufactured goods contain cast metal components
made with a process involving multiple steps, which include melting of the
original metal, and solidification in casts. The commercial viability and energy
efficiency of the entire operation require controlling and predicting product
quality while maximizing the rate of casting. Unfortunately, measuring
the properties of the melt during processing is difficult, and to date quality
tests occur only after solidification. This award supports research aimed at
providing a new tool to evaluate the melt properties using sound waves at very
high frequency (ultrasound). The anticipated results are expected to enable
real-time monitoring of the casting process, and lead to new processing methods
that will increase the energy efficiency of casting.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
metal casting, precise control of the melt properties prior to solidification
can be achieved after identifying and characterizing features like grains,
inclusions, and bubbles. Ultrasound metrology could track those features,
while also imaging solidification fronts and measuring melt flow. Unfortunately,
prior implementations of ultrasound in liquid metal have often been unreliable
and intermittent. The physical mechanisms impeding ultrasound metrology are not
understood. This collaborative project will couple advanced physical and
chemical science to enable real-time imaging and flow measurement via ultrasound
metrology, before solidification. Combining electrochemical and ultrasound
techniques for melt measurements, the project will determine the microscale
mechanisms of interaction among ultrasound, metal, oxide, and dissolved gas in
order to enable the further development of real-time monitoring of molten metal
properties.