* 1562659
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Message Passing for Parallel Programming: Resiliency, Time-to-Solution, Performance-Portability, Scalability, and QoS
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Anthony Skjellum, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2018
* USD 283,173.00

Parallel programming based on MPI is being used with increased frequency in
academia, government (defense and non-defense uses), as well as emerging uses in
scalable machine learning and big data analytics. Emerging supercomputer systems
will have more faults and MPI needs to be able to workaround such faults to be
appropriate to these emerging situations, rather than causing an entire
application to fail. Collaborative, transformative message passing research for
High Performance Computing (HPC) critical to performance-portable parallel
programming in new and forthcoming scalable systems (with a strategy of "best
practice-first, standardization-later") is being reduced to practice. A
substantial subset of the Message Passing Interface (MPI-3/4) application
programmer interface is being made fault tolerant through extensions with weak
collective transactions that synchronize between parallel tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies the novel model that localizes
faults, provides tunable fault-free overhead, allows for multiple kinds of
faults, enables hierarchical recovery, and is data-parallel relevant. Fault
modeling of underlying networks is being studied. Application developers control
the granularity and fault-free overhead in this effort. Performance and
scalability results of the middleware prototype are being demonstrated
principally through compact applications that relate to real use cases of
practical and academic interest. The impact of this work ranges from users of
the largest supercomputers in government labs to practical clusters that have
long-running, time-critical applications, and to space-based and other parallel
processing in "hostile" environments where faults occur more frequently than in
past years. The project is producing usable free software that will be widely
shared in the community as well as guidance on how better parallel programs can
be written in academia, industry, and government. The project also provides
guidelines for how to update existing or legacy programs to use the new
capabilities that are being reduced to practice.