* 1562499
* Experimental and Computational Statistical Investigation of Microstructurally Small Fatigue Crack Growth in Nickel Microbeams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Olivier Pierron, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2020
* USD 480,001.00

This award supports fundamental research to perform small scale tests that
quantify the crack growth rate in metals within grains and computational
simulations of comparable spatial resolutions, yielding unprecedented level of
integration. The assessment of the structural health of components and
structures usually requires understanding their mechanical response under
periodic repetitive loads. Under these conditions, the so-called fatigue cracks
initiate and propagate, and they may lead to catastrophic failures. The need for
cost-efficient research that prevent fatigue failures has pushed towards
integrated computational materials engineering approaches as a means to improve
national competitiveness. The understanding of the interaction between cracks
and material structure improves the safety assessments of structural components
by increasing confidence on response predictions and reducing unnecessary
conservatism. In addition, planned outreach activities are designed to create
unique opportunities to promote motivation, learning and academic success in the
STEM fields for high school students.

The research will unravel the parameters that influence the shape and intensity
of the crack growth rates within grains. We research will follow a truly
integrated microstructure-sensitive fatigue approach for nickel that combines
3-dimensional crystal plasticity models and a novel in situ scanning electron
microscope microresonator-based experimental technique. The experiments will
characterize the early growth of microstructural small cracks in nickel
microbeams, yielding critical results such as the morphology of grains that
nucleate cracks, crack growth rates, and 3-dimensional topography of the
microstructural small cracks. The measured initial crack growth rates will be
employed to calibrate the computational fatigue model, both in vacuum and air.
The calibrated simulations will provide insight into the parameters that
dominate crack growth, including sub-surface microstructural attributes. Thanks
to the high throughput experimental technique, a statistically significant
analysis will be carried by comparing a large number of experimental and
computational realizations (crack length vs number of cycles), which will
identify sources of epistemic uncertainty. The results have the potential to
reshape the current understanding of the synergy between cracks and
microstructure.