* 1562911
* A Geometric Control Framework for Enabling Behavior-Based Planning and Locomotion of Undulatory Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Patricio Vela, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 381,423.00

Equipped with a slender and over-actuated body, snake-like robots have the
ability to maneuver through complex environments. These platforms have been
heralded for their locomotive advantages when navigating through rubble, tight
spaces, and other areas hard to reach with standard robots. Yet, without a
reliably systematic feedback control framework, snake-like robots cannot make
the transition from teleoperation to full autonomy. This award will support
advances in the dynamic modeling of snake locomotion from fundamental mechanical
principles. These models are important for controlling robotic snakes, and other
undulatory systems, and will remove a key obstacle to autonomy. The award will
also support fundamental research into the role that scales play in snake
locomotion, including the creation of robotic snake skin that will enable snake-
like robots to realize the locomotive advantages of actual snake scales. The end
goal of the project is to demonstrate autonomous snake operation through an
unknown environment. Doing so will bring robotic snakes significantly closer to
being deployable for search and rescue, inspection, and operation in hazardous
environments. The research findings will also apply to similar biologically-
inspired robots, such as swimming and flapping-wing flying robots. The
popularity of robotics will be leveraged to create engaging educational and
outreach activities in promotion of engineering
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Snake-like robots are high-dimensional,
articulated limbless robots that exploit control over a continuous morphological
feature to achieve locomotion in a variety of ways. Science has exposed the
physical principles underlying locomotion, while engineers have reproduced the
fundamental mechanisms and can teleoperate these robots. However the creation of
actionable feedback control policies is not fully resolved. What is missing is
the physical and mathematical formulation that bridges the gap from achievement
of undulatory gaits to the controlled execution of motion along a planned path.
To address the gap, this project will design, and demonstrate the performance
benefits of, biologically inspired scale fabrication for robotic snakes. The
designed scales will reproduce the structural and anistropic friction properties
of snake scales. Further, the research will use spatio-temporal averaging to
derive reduced control equations for undulatory robotic systems where the body's
internal degrees of freedom are modeled in the continuum. Achieving these two
objectives will resolve a long-standing achievement gap between biologically
inspired, undulatory robots and traditionally engineered robots.