* 1562109
* Collaborative Research: Non-Additive Network Routing and Assignment Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Avinash Unnikrishnan, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 211,636.00

Network assignment models are widely used to study the flow of commodities on
infrastructure with a network structure (such as roadway drivers or freight
shipments) and form the basis of transportation planning for urban areas.
Currently, most network assignment models assume that the travel costs for a
route is simply the sum of the travel costs of the roadway segments comprising
that route. While true for some costs (like trip time), this assumption is
invalid when accounting for costs due to unreliability, late arrival penalties,
and risk preferences. This award will develop new network assignment models
which can capture broader user objectives in route choice decision making,
particularly related to reliability. Accurately representing such objectives in
network optimization models will lead to better infrastructure planning and
management strategies in large-scale urban areas, ultimately leading to reduced
emissions and other related health benefits. The research will support
participation and training of graduate and undergraduate students from minority
and underrepresented groups in research. The results of this research will be
incorporated into several undergraduate and graduate courses and high school
lesson plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate efficient
algorithms for different variants of non-additive shortest path, minimum cost
flow, and traffic assignment problems, with potential applications in freight.
These algorithms will exploit and advance recent progress in cutting plane and
decomposition-based global optimization algorithms, and the underlying network
structure. The project has three specific research aims: (i) Develop efficient
solution algorithms for non-additive shortest path variants and their time-
dependent extensions. (ii) Develop mathematical models and solution algorithms
for non-additive network flow models. (iii) Develop analytical formulation and
solution algorithm for the non-additive traffic assignment problem. The
researched work draws on and integrates principles of network optimization,
transportation network analysis, bi-criterion search, and global optimization.
The key contribution of this work is the potential to exploit the synergies and
integrate theoretically rigorous decomposition and cutting plane based
algorithms developed for convex mixed integer nonlinear programs and existing
network optimization algorithms.