* 1562037
* SusChEM: Metal-Catalyzed Asymmetric Synthesis of P-Stereogenic Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Glueck, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports Professor
David S. Glueck at Dartmouth College for research on new methods to prepare
phosphines with a chiral phosphorus stereocenter. Such chiral phosphines are
useful in asymmetric catalysis, which is commonly employed in the pharmaceutical
industry to make single-enantiomer drugs. However, the development of chiral
phosphines ligands has been relatively slow because of a lack of general
synthetic methods. This project further improved the methods to form phosphorus-
carbon and phosphorus-phosphorus bonds, providing new and potentially useful
synthetic approaches to this problem. This project also provides training for
graduate and undergraduate student researchers, and broadens the participation
of underrepresented groups, especially Native Americans, in chemistry, education
and research. The results are disseminated broadly in publications and
conference presentations, and are integrated into outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-catalyzed asymmetric synthesis, useful in
the preparation of single-enantiomer drugs, often requires chiral phosphine
ligands. Many are known, but their limited structural diversity and ligand-
dependent selectivity in catalysis makes new types of chiral phosphines and new
routes to them valuable. This award focuses on P-stereogenic phosphines, which
despite their commercial success have been relatively unexplored because of a
lack of general synthetic methods. Chiral phosphines are usually prepared either
by resolution or by using a stoichiometric amount of a chiral auxiliary.
Catalytic asymmetric synthesis allows more economical use of expensive chiral
reagents. Expanding the scope and improving the selectivity of such processes
make this unusual approach to a class of industrially important compounds more
valuable. The research addresses these problems while investigating two
fundamental topics in catalysis: (1) use of earth-abundant metals and (2)
positive cooperativity. The targets are P-stereogenic heterocycles, which are
useful both as ligands and as building blocks for other P-stereogenic
phosphines. Catalytic asymmetric synthesis of P-stereogenic phosphines has been
reported using platinum group metals, which induce rapid pyramidal inversion in
the metal-phosphido groups and makes them nucleophilic. Professor Glueck and his
group hypothesize that precious metals are not required and instead use copper
catalysts. Their weaker metal-ligand bonds may result in faster ligand
substitution and turnover. To prepare P-stereogenic heterocycles, they
hypothesize that intramolecular processes to make bonds between two
stereocenters result in higher selectivity via positive cooperativity. The
carbon stereocenter in chiral epoxides are used for dynamic P-stereocontrol in
synthesis of phosphiranes by P-C bond formation. The configurations of two
P-stereocenters are controlled simultaneously as they are connected to make
P-stereogenic diphosphines. Students who carry out the research receive training
in synthesis and characterization of inorganic, organometallic, and organic
compounds, mechanistic studies of their reactions, in catalysis, and in the
presentation of their results both to other scientists and to the public.