* 1562557
* Design Optimization of Sustainable and Resilient Concrete Mixtures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Joseph Kasprzyk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Worldwide, concrete is the most prevalent construction material and the second-
most consumed material on Earth after water. Given the global environmental
implications of its increased use, structural engineers are now faced with
critical decisions regarding the design and specification of concrete mixtures
that meet environmental, economic, structural, and durability performance
criteria. Conventional concrete mixture design methodologies employ time-
intensive, trial-and-error approaches, which ultimately yield acceptable (but
non-optimal) designs of concrete mixtures. This Design of Engineering Material
Systems (DEMS) award will support fundamental research to create, validate, and
test a new paradigm for the design of concrete mixtures that are most
economical, resilient, and environmentally sustainable for specific
infrastructure applications. Optimized concrete mixtures will simultaneously
reduce environmental impacts and ensure long-term durability of civil
infrastructure by promoting responsible, economical natural resource
utilization. This project will involve industry professionals in the
development, testing, and validation of the new design methodology, which will
accelerate its implementation in practice. In addition, the complementary
education and outreach efforts will help cultivate the next generation of
engineers who will be committed to ensuring both the sustainability and
resilience of civil infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a many-objective
optimization testbed, this work will define, formulate, and link mathematical
models that relate concrete mixture proportions to fresh- and hardened-state
properties. These properties, along with in-service exposure data, will be used
to characterize and quantify in-service performance as it relates to
sustainability (e.g., environmental impact) and chronic-hazard resilience (e.g.,
corrosion resistance, freeze-thaw resistance) in multiple spatial and temporal
domains. Multi-dimensional visualizations will be developed to quantify and
elucidate design-decision tradeoffs between performance, cost, and environmental
sustainability for candidate design solutions that meet specific design goals.
Concrete material producers, materials scientists, and professional structural
engineers will participate in a series of design-related workshops that will
help inform, test, and rigorously validate the novel design methodology. In
addition to considering decision-maker preferences, a significant effort will be
placed on improving the optimization approach, quantifying uncertainty, and
conducting global sensitivity analyses to identify and manipulate the most
influential parameters for the design of sustainable and resilient concrete
mixtures.