* 1562929
* Atomistic Simulations of Acoustic Activation of Surface Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2021
* USD 310,569.00

This award supports computational research into the fundamental mechanisms of
the energy transfer from strong acoustic waves to the atomic-scale surface
features. Surface acoustic waves are elastic waves that propagate along the
surfaces of solid materials. Their ability to transfer energy long distances
with little losses are actively used in many practical applications, ranging
from nondestructive evaluation of mechanical properties to micro-scale
manipulation of fluid flow in microfluidics devices. The ability of surface
acoustic waves to influence atomic-level surfaces processes, however, remains
largely unexplored. The results of this research will facilitate the development
of new applications in the areas of chemical catalysis, low temperature thin
film growth, and mass spectrometry of heat sensitive molecules. At a more
general level, the results of this study may open up an exciting range of
opportunities for using the acoustic waves as an alternative source of energy
for non-thermal activation of surface processes under conditions where the
temperature increase must be avoided. The involvement of students into all
aspects of high-performance parallel computing and close interaction with
experimental and computational collaborators will create a fertile educational
environment in the quickly expanding area of scientific computing.

The goal of revealing the mechanisms responsible for the acoustic activation of
surface processes will be achieved through the development of advanced
computational methodology for atomistic modeling of free nonlinear propagation
and dissipation of strong surface and bulk acoustic waves, as well as their
interaction with surface structures and adsorbates. The new computational
methods will be applied for a systematic investigation of frequency up-
conversion, nonlinear sharpening of the wave profiles, shock formation and the
onset of rapid dissipation of acoustic waves, acoustic energy coupling to
surfaces adsorbates, sub-surface crystal defects, and nanoscale heterogeneities.
The conditions leading to the diffusion enhancement, desorption, or atomic-level
structural rearrangements in the surface region of the substrate will be
elucidated in the simulations and the domains of applicability of the
acoustically-assisted surface processing will be established for several
material systems of practical interest.