* 1562357
* Collaborative Research: Computational Strategies for Resolving Schallamach Waves in Flexible Multibody Dynamics Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Hazim El-mounayri, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2021
* USD 155,027.00

This research project addresses the need for enhanced modeling and simulation of
flexible multibody dynamics (FMD) that can accurately capture friction-induced
behavior, including stick-slip motion and Schallamach detachment waves. Such
system-level frictionally excited vibrations can greatly degrade efficiency and
lifetime, and may be especially significant where compliant materials are in
frictional contact with relatively rigid bodies, as in soft robots, engineered
biological systems, and other emerging engineering areas. In addition to
modeling and simulation, this research will apply the enhanced FMD formulations
-- together with complementary experiments -- to study biomimetic surface
patterning for influencing and controlling undesired frictionally induced
behavior. The FMD simulation tools arising from this project will reduce the
need for expensive and time-consuming design prototypes in important US
industries, including automotive, manufacturing equipment, and robotics. The
project includes outreach activities to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering through K-12 internship and training
opportunities in the investigators' labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research objective is to explore the applicability and enhancement of flexible
multi-body dynamics simulation tools for analyzing Schallamach waves, and
related stick-slip contact dynamics. Resolving such frictional behavior will be
accomplished using new and efficient contact formulations, together with
efficient implementations and solution procedures. Detailed experiments will
test the multi-body dynamics predictions and suggest directions for further
refinements. In later stages of the research, both computation and experiments
will be exercised to demonstrate new capabilities for exploring design changes,
such as various micro- and macro-scale patterns, that can regularize sliding and
limit detrimental stick-slip and vibration behavior. Successful completion of
the research effort will greatly increase our ability to design and tailor
multi-body systems incorporating soft elements while significantly extending the
reach of flexible multi-body dynamics simulation to new and important research
areas.