* 1562107
* Multiscale Mechanisms of Force Transfer in Tendon
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Spencer Lake, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2021
* USD 325,001.00

Tendons are soft tissues that connect between muscles and bones to serve two key
functions for joints: provide mechanical stability and enable seamless mobility.
Tendon injuries are very common and are difficult to treat successfully, in part
because of the limited understanding of how mechanical loads transfer through
the structures within tendons. Forces applied at the large-scale are transmitted
down to the level of cells, which changes the tendon responds biologically.
Unfortunately, it remains unclear which components within the complex tendon
structure are responsible for force transfer. At the smallest level a tendon has
long collagen molecules connected together by other molecule one group of which
is flexible and another that is quite stiff. The relative amount of stiff and
flexible connections between the collagen molecules determines how strong and
stiff the tendon is. However, how the two types of molecular linkages interact
to make the tendon strong and stiff mechanically is not properly understood.
This gap in knowledge has made it difficult to completely determine how healthy
tendons function and how their force-transmission capabilities change after
injury. The project will measure the properties of tendons with different
amounts of the two linker types and create a model of the tendon built up from
the molecular level in order to understand how it functions mechanically at a
very basic level. The better model for the tendon has the potential to benefit
society by reducing pain, disability, and healthcare costs associated with
tendon injuries. This research project includes a number of educational goals.
Among them is to build an interactive class section on how mechanics is
important in understanding biological materials for a K-12 audience to attract
students into STEM fields. Another is to improve a graduate biomechanics course
using fundamental concepts of multi-scale mechanics such as are used in this
research project. The advanced material in that improved course will train the
next generation of scientists needed to continue research in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine the role of
two specific linking components in tendon mechanics: enzymatic collagen
crosslinks and elastic fibers. These tissue constituents are important for
mechanical load carriage in tendon, however how they change mechanical
properties is not understood in a detailed way. This project will use a combined
experimental and computational approach to determine the multiscale mechanical
role of these linking components in tendon. Animal models of altered collagen
crosslinks and impaired elastic fiber assemblies will be evaluated using
biomechanical testing combined with two-photon microscopy and polarized light
imaging. Experiments will be complemented with a collagen network computational
model to determine individual and coupled mechanical effects of linking
components, and evaluate hypotheses on force transmission across length scales.
This study will greatly improve understanding of: (1) fundamental tendon
mechanics, including the role of linking components across structural levels;
(2) effects of complementary or coupled interactions between linking elements;
(3) how altered quantities/types of linking components lead to impaired
mechanical function; and (4) potential therapeutic applications of controlled
modifications to linking components to prevent tissue damage or injury
progression. The experimental approach and computational framework provide an
excellent system to study fundamental relations that extends to other soft
tissues. These concepts could also motivate new ideas in material design and
inspire new ways to think about force transfer and assembly of multiscale
materials.