* 1562884
* Template-based Fabrication of Three-dimensional, Chiral Plasmonic Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Chirality describes the structural handedness of objects which are distinct from
their own mirror images. Chirality is ubiquitous in nature and best known in
looking at our own left and right hands. It is also found in many sugar
molecules, amino acids and in larger proteins, nucleic acids and viruses, where
chirality has a profound effect on function; for example chiral molecules behave
differently in chemical reactions and in their interaction with polarized light.
Inspired by natural chiral molecules, artificial chiral plasmonic nanostructures
are explored to exploit their strong light interaction and realize 'giant'
optical responses for applications including biosensing, light emission, and
light manipulation. The realization of chiral plasmonic nanostructures requires
plasmonic materials to be shaped into complex, subwavelength, three-dimensional
architectures. However, it is not trivial to fabricate high densities of these
nanostructures over the large areas required. This award will unite top-down
fabrication and bottom-up assembly to realize chiral plasmonic nanostructures
that have strong, polarization-dependent optical properties. By exploiting the
disparate physical properties of bulk and nanocrystalline materials, chiral
materials that are responsive to optical and magnetic stimuli will be created.
The team will utilize the simplicity of these fabrication technologies to design
a new optical device fabrication lab to make the field accessible to K-12 and
undergraduate students participating in science festivals, camps, and formal
curricula. The team will also share career experiences to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Optical
metamaterials enable unprecedented control of light by engineering the size,
shape, and physical properties of matter, artificially structured from plasmonic
and non-plasmonic building-blocks with nanometer scale precision. Among them,
chiral plasmonic metamaterials combine strong light-matter interactions with the
unique polarization selectivity created by their structural handedness. This
award aims to advance the nanoscale manufacturing of large-area, multi-
functional, three-dimensional, chiral plasmonic nanostructures by exploiting
size- and shape-engineered templates defined by nanoimprint lithography and the
different deposition processes and properties of bulk and nanocrystal thin
films. By combining angle-selective, shadow evaporation of bulk metal thin films
with the isotropic deposition of colloidal nanocrystal thin films, hierarchal,
chiral nanostructures will be created. Taking advantage of the distinct chemical
and structural properties of bulk and nanocrystal thin films, stress will be
exploited to drive buckling of bulk metal/nanocrystal nanostructures and thereby
turn planar two-dimensional into three-dimensional, chiral nanostructures. By
integrating different bulk and nanocrystal materials, strong polarization-
dependent and optically and magnetically responsive chiral materials will be
realized.