* 1562040
* CAREER: Constructing Modern and Inclusive Trajectories for Computer Science Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2015,03/31/2022
* R. Benjamin Shapiro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2022
* USD 542,749.00

Tufts University proposes a CAREER award that will investigate new ways of
teaching computer science to middle- and high-school students. Many of the
computing technologies that youth use every day are built using ideas and
techniques from computer science that are well outside of the standard
introductory curriculum. Everyday activities like sending text messages,
performing search queries, checking the weather, and playing online games all
use systems that employ networked communication, parallelism, concurrency, and
distributed systems. Yet, these techniques are not taught in existing K-12
Computer Science curricula, and they are barely covered in typical
undergraduate-level computer science education. This has two consequences: Many
youth perceive computer science as not relevant to their daily lives,
perceptions that are not well challenged by current approaches to broadening
participation; and many programmers apply these techniques poorly, which can
have devastating consequences (e.g., the Northeast U.S. Blackout of 2003). This
research aims to both counter perceptions of computer science?s relevance to
everyday life, and to design new approaches to teaching computer science that
train programmers to apply these techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate how new ways of teaching computer science to middle- and high-
school students can simultaneously broaden participation in computing and
develop a generation of computer scientists who are able to correctly reason
about and implement concurrent, distributed, networked systems. The hypothesis
is that by creating their own concurrent, connected physical and virtual
technologies, students will come to better appreciate the role of computing in
their lives, and, at the same time, learn advanced computational problem solving
and engineering skills. The qualitative and quantitative design-based research
methods will enable a better understanding of (1) what project genres can excite
youth to learn about networked communication and parallel, concurrent, or
distributed computing, (2) in what ways engineering systems in those genres
differentially enable learning of relevant computer science topics, (3) how
student thinking about these computer science ideas develops over time, and (4)
how students' participation and conceptual development can be supported by new
programmable technologies for learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
be conducted in close collaboration with local partners, including community
centers and schools. It will specifically recruit youth from populations and
communities that are under-represented in computer science, that is, girls,
African-Americans, and Latinos. Youth and participating adults (e.g., teachers)
will be partners in all phases of the work, and will guide the efforts on
crafting engineering projects, curriculum, and tools that respond to their
interests and preferences. All of the software, curriculum, and other products
of our work will be open sourced in order to maximize their dissemination.