* 1562297
* Vibration Assisted Nanopositioning: An Enabler of Low-cost, High-throughput Nanotech Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 02/28/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Nanotechnology is one of the most promising areas of technological development,
and among the most likely to deliver substantial economic and societal benefits
to the U.S. in the 21st century. Nanopositioning stages are mechanical devices
used for precise positioning in a wide range of nanotech processes, ranging from
spectroscopy to micro additive manufacturing. Hence their positioning speed and
cost are critical to the throughput and scale up of many nanotech processes.
Stages that use roller bearings are currently the only commercially viable
option for a growing number of large-displacement nanopositioning applications
performed in ultrahigh vacuum environments. However, roller bearing stages
suffer from very low positioning speeds due to the adverse effects of so-called
pre-rolling friction. This award supports a scientific investigation into a
novel approach for mitigating the effects of pre-rolling friction on roller
bearing nanopositioning stages by applying high frequency vibration to the
stage. Results from this research will increase the positioning speed of roller
bearing nanopositioning stages without significantly increasing their costs,
hence enabling the scale up and increased throughput of a wide range of nanotech
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on vibration-assisted
nanopositioning: a novel approach for applying high frequency vibration,
combined with active vibration control, to nanopositioning stages. The objective
of this research is to understand the interactions between high frequency
vibration, pre-rolling friction, controller dynamics, and positioning speed. The
method of direct partition of motion will be used to determine the influence of
vibration parameters (vibration frequency and amplitude) on pre-rolling friction
and stage position control, under ideal conditions where there is no active
vibration control. Perturbation analyses (e.g., using the Poincar√©-Lindstedt
method) will then be carried out to understand the effects of active vibration
control combined with high frequency vibration on the vibration of the stage.
Control techniques that will be investigated include sliding mode control and
harmonic cancellation control. In all analyses, pre-rolling friction will be
modeled with increasing levels of complexity, starting from the simple Dahl
model and building up to the Generalized Maxwell Slip model, in order to gain
progressive insights into the effects of each model and its parameters on the
results of the analyses. A simple roller bearing nanopositioning stage will be
used to conduct point-to-point positioning experiments, with various high
frequency vibration frequencies/amplitudes, friction conditions, and control
techniques, to validate the theoretical analyses.