* 1562288
* Fundamental Understanding of Deformation in High Entropy Structural Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2020
* USD 374,561.00

Alloying of metals has been the method of producing considerable strength to
withstand high service loads in engineering applications. However, the
resistance to fracture (often termed the toughness), i.e. the ability to
tolerate cracks without catastrophic fracture, is often compromised upon
increase in strength. This is especially true at low temperatures where
toughness is substantially lower. Another important measure, the ductility - the
ability of the material to sustain large elongations or deflections - also
suffers upon raising the strength in conventional alloys. This award
supportsÂ fundamental research to provide understanding towards the development
of a new class of alloys called the high entropy alloys (HEAs) which have the
capability of possessing both a high strength, high toughness, and high
ductility. These alloys involve multiple elements but derive strength through
interactions of elements at small scales, and circumvent the loss of ductility
even at very low temperatures, broadening their potential use. These alloys can
enable wide-scale deployment in areas critical to the US economy including
mechanical, civil, and materials science sectors. The work will educate graduate
students and also help broaden participation of underrepresented groups through
outreach at the high school level, including summer programs with demonstrations
of alloy behavior and hands-on activities making useful devices with
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the most important mechanisms in plastic
deformation of metals are slip and twinning. Exceptional properties can be
achieved for cases where slip deformation and twinning deformation can occur
simultaneously with unprecedented strain hardening. Their mutual synergism can
produce superior properties. In this work, first principles simulations of
potential new high entropy alloy compositions will consider the energy
landscapes for slip and twin deformation, and develop models that encompass both
continuum and atomistic effects. The most promising alloys will then be
manufactured and tested. Experimental methodologies will then be developed to
measure the onset of slip and twin events at low temperatures where the
tremendous benefits of these materials will be realized. The experiments will
also consider finite temperatures and aim to advance digital image correlation
methods (a technique for measuring local displacements and strains) to subgrain-
submicron scales to understand precisely the deformation phenomenon in these
alloys.