* 1562578
* Sparse Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Santanu Dey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 293,712.00

Mixed-integer linear programming is a mathematical optimization framework that
allows modeling discrete optimization problems that arise in various fields of
engineering and business, such as chemical engineering, finance, forestry,
health care, power systems, and supply-chain design. Most mixed-integer
programming formulations that appear in these different areas of application
involve very sparse constraint matrices. Many areas of scientific computing and
optimization have been very successful in harnessing the effect of such sparsity
of input data to improve the efficacy of algorithms. However, the use of
sparsity of input data is a very under-explored direction of research in the
context of mixed-integer linear programming algorithms. This award supports
fundamental research for advancement of mixed-integer linear programming solver
techniques for instances with sparse constraint matrices. Any improvement of the
solvers obtained could result in significant gains to a large number of
different applications. This project will support and train one PhD student who
will be involved with all aspects of the research and dissemination of the
results.

The goal of this research is to systematically investigate the mathematical
implications of sparse data matrices and to use this as a starting point for
development of new and improved algorithms for solving mixed-integer linear
programs that exploit sparsity in a holistic fashion. If successful, this
project will be able to uncover formal mathematical explanation for various
empirically observed behavior of mixed-integer linear programs, such as: Why
does selection of sparse cutting-planes for mixed-integer linear programs with
sparse constraint matrix work well in many cases? Why does feasibility pump, an
important primal heuristic, work much better on average for mixed-integer linear
programs with sparse constraint matrices? Why does the proportion of integral
vertices to the total number of vertices of the linear programming relaxation of
binary mixed-integer linear programs increase on an average as the formulations
become more sparse? Using such insights, the research project will explore
various avenues of improving mixed-integer linear programming solvers in order
to better exploit sparsity, such as a new paradigm for sparse cut selection,
increasing sparsity by use of extended formulations and combining new and
different types of heuristics targeted towards better performance on sparse
mixed-integer programming instances.