* 1562204
* Collaborative Research: Designing Thermophotonic Materials for Passive Radiative Cooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Shanhui Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Passive radiative cooling allows for cooling below ambient conditions without
the input of external energy. It involves a radiative thermal body directly
exchanging electromagnetic thermal energy with outer space, an enormous and
extremely cold heat sink. Passive radiative cooling can make refrigeration and
climate control run more efficiently, saving significant amounts of energy.
However, traditional radiative cooling does not work during the daytime because
of the absorption of sunlight. The difficulty in realizing effective passive
radiative cooling lies in controlling the energy exchange for the competing
mechanisms of thermal radiation, optical absorption and heat transfer in the
cooling system. This award supports fundamental research to provide the
knowledge for the design and processing of thermophotonic materials that can
meet the stringent optical and thermal requirements. These new thermophotonic
materials will be realized through optimally designed, microscopically
structured materials that can be tailored through micro- and nano-fabrication to
produce the desired optical and thermal responses. With such material, the cold
darkness of outer space can be leveraged as a renewable thermodynamic resource
for providing passive cooling here on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will involve predictive modeling of optical reflection and absorption and heat
transfer behaviors of sub-micro- and nano-structured materials in order to
understand the nature of thermophotonic coupling and the nonlinearity of
material properties. A topology optimization-based method will be created to
systematically explore the design space and to identify the viability of
multiple nano-structured materials. This method will account for thermophotonic
coupling, spectral selectivity, and manufacturability constraints. It will lead
to the discovery of new micro- and nano-structured material systems that have
effective material properties meeting the stringent thermal and optical
requirements for passive radiative cooling during daytime. The resulting designs
will be validated with experimental prototyping. If successful, this research
will result in disruptive thermophotonic material systems that can lead to
cooling below ambient temperature during the day without the need for external
energy input.