* 1562907
* Controlling Microstructure of Hybrid Thin Films through Flow-Induced Orientation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Montgomery Shaw, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2021
* USD 583,172.00

Composite materials are designed and processed to take synergistic advantage of
the combined properties of the two component materials. Biomineralization, the
process by which living organisms produce minerals, typically results in a
composite system where the mineral forms the structural frame while an organic
component assumes the biological function. Nacre, a shell material also known as
mother of pearl, is a representative example, being composed of a large fraction
of inorganic calcium carbonate (hard and brittle) and a small fraction of
protein (soft and tough). Their combination in a layered structure leads to the
outstanding mechanical properties in contrast to the individual components. Such
carefully organized composites have inspired scientists to synthesize materials
with a similar structure at a large scale for practical applications, but their
efforts have not yet proven successful. The basic challenge is the difficulty of
incorporating a large concentration of inorganic nanomaterials into a polymer
system, and simultaneously achieving a high level of organization. This award
supports fundamental research to explore a facile approach to prepare hybrid
materials with a nacre-like microstructure and to achieve similar outstanding
mechanical properties and other important functionalities. By taking advantage
of flow-induced orientation of disc-like particles, the manufacturing of
materials at a high rate appears to be possible. The composite films prepared
through this approach should find application in packaging with improved barrier
properties and corrosion resistance. Fully integrated within this project are
activities to increase the interest in science and technology among the younger
generation, particularly those in underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to a thorough understanding
of the fundamental mechanisms for the flow induced orientation and stacking of
platelets that can help lead to optimal alignment of these particles in
composite films to mimic the nacre structure. Factors such as flow rate, system
viscosity, nanosheet concentration and aspect ratio, and related chemistry will
be systematically investigated to address two fundamental questions. First, how
do these factors affect the alignment and packing of nanosheets? Secondly, how
will the interface between the nanosheets and the polymer binder affect the
final thin film properties? In addition to the nacre-like structure and
properties, the researchers also aim to further expand the scope to the
formation of three-dimensional hybrid materials, such as bones, by properly
tailoring the microstructure of the organic and inorganic components.