* 1562078
* Collaborative Research: Early Mammalian Embryo Development: Stochastic Modeling and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* William Holmes, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 418,562.00

A critical event in mammalian embryo development is construction of embryonic
versus extra embryonic structures. Initially, a single cell divides multiple
times to generate an aggregate of 10-20 similar cells. Soon after, the progeny
of these precursor cells differentiate and self-organize to form other
structures. The remarkable feature of this process is its high level of
reproducibility despite a number of sources of stochastic variation. In recent
years, experimental interrogation has suggested multiple theories for what might
be responsible for this process. It is still unclear, however, what drives
organization, and in particular, what is responsible for its robustness. This
project takes a joint experimental and modeling approach to address this issue.
On the modeling side, a novel computational modeling platform will be developed
that incorporates known and hypothesized physical and genetic processes to test
their influence individually and jointly on development. On the experimental
side, imaging and image analysis will be performed on mouse embryos to inform
this model and test its predictions. This framework will be initially developed
in relation to mouse development and later extended to determine how known
differences between early mouse and human cells influence organization, which
evidence suggests is less robust in developing human
embryos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will shed new light into how
mammalian pre-implantation forms from a single cell. The research will also
establish new principles for how the interplay between physical and biochemical
regulatory processes leads to development of tissues an organisms of exquisite
complexity. A multi-scale and stochastic computational framework to study both
mouse and human early embryo development will be developed. In addition, this
project will develop new training activities involving graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students with an emphasis on promoting quantitative thinking and
developing modeling and simulation skills. This training will equip students
with computational and system-level approaches needed to investigate complex
systems. The activities will take advantage of the strengths of the
undergraduate and graduate training programs in computational systems biology at
the University of California, Irvine and the strong interdisciplinary training
programs and ties with minority serving institutions at Vanderbilt University.
These programs will be cross-pollinated to promote diversity at all educational
levels.