* 1562925
* I-Corps:  Kytopen: Expanding the language of biology with pulsed electric fields
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Cullen Buie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The potential to solve many of mankind's most pressing challenges including the
needs for alternative fuels, enhancing oil recovery, and even treating cancer
could involve engineering the numerous bacteria currently beyond one's reach.
There are many types of bacteria that can be grown in the lab but their
potential impact on people's lives has not been realized. New tools are needed
to unlock bacteria?s true potential to solve many challenges of interest to
mankind. Creating tools to accelerate discovery of new cancer treatments,
alternative fuels, or low cost biomaterials will significantly impact human
life. Population growth and increasing lifespans are putting ever increasing
demands on the environment, driving need for alternative sources of fuels, food,
and medicines. Bacteria have been a bit neglected as sources for innovation;
however, they already have the internal machinery to help do industrial
processes in a fast and efficient manner.

Pulsed electric fields (i.e. electroporation) can be used to deliver genetic
material into many types of cells including bacteria. The goal of this proposal
is to substantially expand the successful application of pulsed electric fields
to bacteria and enable discovery of new applications in genetic engineering and
synthetic biology. A major limitation of synthetic biology is the inability to
incorporate genetic material into many bacteria due to the challenge of
permeating the cell envelope while maintaining high cell viability. This team's
goal is to reduce the time required to develop tools to genetically manipulate
bacteria from months or even years to days. This I-Corps team has developed a
proof-of-concept microfluidic device to enable the characterization of the
critical electric field for bacterial electroporation under specific
experimental conditions in a single experiment. The team is devising a technique
to test several thousand unique conditions within a single day, spanning the
entire parametric space. This will be done using a microfluidic platform, or
several in parallel, to test small aliquots of cells at varying experimental
conditions. Therefore, the proposed microfluidic system enables quantification
of the critical electroporation parameters in a single experiment, which would
otherwise require months of experimentation. The proposed innovation will allow
two significant advancements: 1) the ability to quickly determine high yield
electroporation conditions and 2) the ability to utilize many of the more than
10,000 bacterial strains that have been heretofore intractable or difficult to
genetically manipulate.