* 1562859
* Creating a lexical database for Tututni, Coquille and Galice, three Native American languages of Oregon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Scott DeLancey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2019
* USD 274,371.00

Just like biologists have methods to investigate the relationships between
species, linguists have methods that allow them to determine the relationships
between languages. Linguists do this by comparing a set of languages along
various dimensions, such as words or language structures that may have a common
origin. Documentation of a language plays a key role in how scholars reconstruct
the family relationships between languages, but when the documentation exists in
archives, in "analog" forms, like handwritten field notes or cassette
recordings, this creates challenges in doing reconstruction of family
relationships. This project will address this challenge focusing on three
underdocumented languages, whose archival materials have received little
attention in the linguistic literature. The research team will digitize
materials, and then process and analyze them by creating a database of the three
languages. This research infrastructure will create digital access to the
materials and will create a lexicon of use to both linguistic science and to
learners. Tututni, Coquille and Galice, the focus of this project, are three
severely endangered Native American languages of the Oregon Coast. Broader
impacts include the dissemination of the lexicon to Native communities and the
scholarly community, and the education and training of three budding Native
social scientists, broadening participation in the linguistics by
underrepresented groups.

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. The Athabaskan language family includes many languages and
has an expansive geographic distribution, ranging from Alaska and the Yukon and
Northwest Territories of Canada and to the southwest including Arizona, Texas
and Oklahoma. Southwest Oregon Athabaskan language communities were extremely
fragmented following the forced relocation of members to reservations during the
1850s-60s, termination of tribes in the 1950s and boarding school language
policies. However, Tututni, Coquille and Galice have extensive documentation,
most of which neither easily accessible nor linguistically analyzed, a gap in
the scientific understanding of an important branch of Athabaskan languages. By
digitizing and databasing this archival documentation, this project will
increase the linguistic understanding of relationships in the Athabaskan family.
Methods include the linguistic analysis of verbs, notoriously complex in this
language family, and transcription of legacy recordings. These materials,
collected between the 1880s and 1980s, will be analyzed and synthesized into a
single database. Scientific hypotheses can be tested against the large bodies of
research to yield new discoveries and explanations for Athabaskan languages and
their family relationships, especially those of the Pacific Coast branch.
Results will also promote language use in Oregon Athabaskan communities and
advance education of diverse groups, as these Native citizen scientists engage
with the lexicon and the disseminated resources in a host of initiatives,
including language and cultural revitalization.