* 1562232
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: A CPS Approach to Robot Design
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2015,08/31/2016
* Aaron Ames, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 76,013.00

In many important situations, analytically predicting the behavior of physical
systems is not possible. For example, the three dimensional nature of physical
systems makes it provably impossible to express closed-form analytical solutions
for even the simplest systems. This has made experimentation the primary
modality for designing new cyber-physical systems (CPS). Since physical
prototyping and experiments are typically costly and hard to conduct, "virtual
experiments" in the form of modeling and simulation can dramatically accelerate
innovation in CPS. Unfortunately, major technical challenges often impede the
effectiveness of modeling and simulation. This project develops foundations and
tools for overcoming these challenges. The project focuses on robotics as an
important, archetypical class of CPS, and consists of four key tasks: 1)
Compiling and analyzing a benchmark suite for modeling and simulating robots, 2)
Developing a meta-theory for relating cyber-physical models, as well as tools
and a test bed for robot modeling and simulation, 3) Validating the research
results of the project using two state-of-the-art robot platforms that
incorporate novel control technologies and will require novel programming
techniques to fully realize their potential 4) Developing course materials
incorporating the project's research results and test
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the aim of accelerating innovation in a wide
range of domains including stroke rehabilitation and prosthetic limbs, the
project is developing new control concepts and modeling and simulation
technologies for robotics. In addition to new mathematical foundations, models,
and validation methods, the project will also develop software tools and
systematic methods for using them. The project trains four doctoral students;
develops a new course on modeling and simulation for cyber-physical systems that
balances both control and programming concepts; and includes an outreach
component to the public and to minority-serving K-12 programs.