* 1562927
* Collaborative Research: 3D Printing of Civil Infrastructure Materials with Controlled Microstructural Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2021
* Jan Olek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,604.00

This collaborative project is to use additive manufacturing (3D printing) to
engineer the microstructure of cement-based materials and fabricate cement-based
structures with otherwise unachievable, controlled local composition of the
material and spatial arrangement of its components. The goal of the research is
to understand the major factors controlling the 3D printing process of cement-
based materials and how to design interfacial interactions between printed
filament layers and between filament inclusions and solid matrix phases. Though
the use of additive manufacturing, the proposed research project has the
potential to enable significant progress in the fields of high-performance
infrastructure materials by providing materials that exhibit paradigm-shifting
properties allowing new functionalities that are not achievable with existing
materials. Ultimately, the 3-D printing processes will enable the fabrication of
light-weight and modular structures and buildings for rapid deployment in cases
of natural disasters and product applications wherein cement-based materials
have not previously been competitive. The educational component will leverage
existing programs of each of the three institutions and includes the development
of instructional materials for undergraduate and graduate students and research
opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative research is to
fundamentally understand (1) the intertwined mechanisms between chemistry,
printed filament layer solidification, and 3D printing successive-layering-
deposition process conditions and (2) the interfacial interactions between
printed layers that control the bonding mechanism. 3-D printing is anticipated
to enable the controlled spatial variation of material properties through
continuous gradients in functional components. Experimental investigations of
the filament layer solidification process and of the interfacial characteristics
will be integrated with computational analysis, including molecular dynamics
simulations of the molecular scale structure, energetics, and mechanical
properties of the inter-filament and interfaces to unravel the physico-chemo-
mechanical mechanisms that underpin the processing/manufacturing-microstructure-
property relationship of the architectured materials. The research will (1)
provide a molecular to nanoscale picture of the chemo-mechanical interactions
between filament layers and between the filament inclusions and matrix
interfaces, (2) identify key aspects of the structure at interfaces necessary to
enable refinement of surfaces and printing media chemistry, and (3) provide
insights into the development of a new approach to understanding and developing
cementitious systems.