* 1562485
* TWC: Medium: Digital Healthcare-Associated Infection: Measurement, Defense and Prevention in a Modern Digital Healthcare Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Shigang Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

The pace of digitization and interconnection of hospital systems has increased
tremendously as recent healthcare legislation has encouraged the interoperation
of medical record systems. In addition to ordinary business operations data,
hospital enterprise networks now carry patient record data and life-critical
data streams from therapy systems (e.g., nuclear medicine, dialysis clinical
systems). Unfortunately, the security implications of interconnecting such life-
critical systems has been largely unstudied. This project is performing a large-
scale analysis of the University of Florida Health System to detect the presence
of malware and security weaknesses and determine whether security best-practices
and techniques are sufficient to protect life-critical and privacy-sensitive
medical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While multiple recent studies have shown
that individual medical devices are vulnerable to attack, none have assessed the
current state of security at scale across medical organizations. This project is
conducting a large-scale analysis of the current security posture of the
University of Florida Health System to inform a data-driven approach to
vulnerability mitigation. The researchers are first characterizing the security
posture of the system through network-based measurements of malware presence
(via Domain Name System (DNS) resolutions) and use of proper encryption
practices (via inspection of X.509 certificates). The project is next developing
techniques to dynamically fingerprint and limit risky communications patterns
and inject strong certificates into communication flows. Finally, the project is
developing techniques to predict devices at risk using algorithms that detect
abnormal communication patterns via contact graphs.