* 1562713
* Longitudinal patterns of organic carbon storage in mountainous river networks
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2020
* USD 257,828.00

Rivers play an important role in the global carbon cycle that is not fully
understood. This project will collect measurements of a form of carbon found in
rivers to better understand how its storage varies across diverse biomes and
geographic settings, river networks, and land-use histories. This information
may improve predictions of the contribution of rivers to CO2 emissions and large
scale carbon budgets. The project team will engage resource managers of the USDA
Forest Service to inform their decision making, participate in the science
learning network and seminar series of Olympic National Park, develop a website
to disseminate research outcomes, train a graduate student, develop online, in-
class, and public lectures on rivers, and develop educational materials in
collaboration with a local 5th grade teacher that address the State of
Colorado's common core standards for geomorphology and climate change.

This project aims to quantify hypothesized differences in riverine organic
carbon (OC) storage as functions of position within the river drainage network,
climate and biome, and land-use. It will develop a geomorphic context for
understanding watershed-scale OC dynamics that could inform future estimates of
OC budgets and CO2 emissions from land. The primary objectives are to
quantitatively assess (1) downstream patterns of OC storage in floodplain
sediment and downed wood within mountainous river networks draining up to about
400 km2, (2) compare the OC dynamics of disparate mountain river basins to
assess the sensitivity of mountain river basins to potential changes in OC
storage that could affect global climate, and (3) compare magnitudes of OC
storage between otherwise similar mountainous river networks that differ with
respect to land use. A fourth objective is to estimate age of OC in river
corridors.