* 1562181
* Support for USA participants in the Dynamics of Evolution Equations conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Luca Dieci, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kitchens
* 02/28/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports participation of US-based researchers in the conference
"Dynamics of Evolution Equations" to be hosted by the Centre International de
Rencontres Mathematiques in Luminy, France from March 21 through March 25, 2016.
Dynamical systems is an all-encompassing field, which has thriven through the
continuous interaction with other sciences and engineering. The present
conference has a blend of presentation of current research and tutorials
covering the interaction of dynamical systems and biology, control engineering
and other applied subjects. The format, small size, and location, of the
Conference are perfectly suited for learning and scientific exchange, and
particularly appropriate for young researchers, who will be able to interact
with senior researchers and gain both scientific knowledge and international
experience.

The scientific focus of the conference will cover the following topics:
Differential equations and their discrete time analogues, Partial Differential
equations, Stochastic differential equations, Functional differential equations
and equations with delayed effects, Problems on networks (problems on graphs),
Discontinuous and hybrid systems, Control theory, and Modeling in biological and
social systems. These are subjects which are timely and widely important. It is
anticipated that interactions among participants will lead to the development of
new directions of research and to the strengthening and fostering of
international collaborations. More information can be found on the conference
website: http://scientific-events.weebly.com/1335.html