* 1562065
* Collaborative Research: Performance Analysis and Design of Systems with Interconnected Resources
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Atilla Eryilmaz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Many information processing, service and manufacturing systems can be viewed as
networks of interacting resources. Examples include data centers for cloud
computing, online advertising systems, electronic chip manufacturing lines, the
Internet, and health care service systems. Requests for services from such
systems are processed by an interconnected set of resources such as computers,
manufacturing stations, and human servers. In such applications, a common
objective is to identify service policies (routing, service order, and server
control algorithms) that minimize delays for customers using the system. Except
in a few special cases, currently there are no mathematical tools available to
compute performance metrics such as the delay experienced by the customers,
especially when the system size is large. The goal of this project is to advance
the mathematics tools needed to compute performance metrics of large systems of
networked resources. These mathematical techniques will enable the design of
good service policies for the myriad of applications mentioned earlier. The
results from the project will be incorporated into courses. Outreach efforts
will be made to include students from underrepresented groups and minorities in
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Often the problem of optimal control of
networks of interacting resources can be modeled as a Markov Decision Problem
(MDP), but the state-space is prohibitively large to obtain optimal solutions.
Therefore, it is common to study such problems (under some appropriate scaling)
either as fluid control problems, or Brownian control problems, or large-
deviations problems. The objective of this project is to enable an alternative
approach, which involves studying the drift of appropriately-chosen Lyapunov
functions, in transient and steady-state modes. The specific challenge involves
developing lower-dimensional models for high-dimensional systems, and using the
lower-dimensional models to study the optimality, or lack thereof, of specific
architectures and algorithms. If successful, this project will result in (i) new
analysis tools based on the drift-based arguments, which provide tight bounds on
the steady-state performance of control and decision algorithms in large
networks, and (ii) design of optimal or near-optimal algorithms that perform
well at all traffic loads.