* 1562671
* Increasing Sugar Yield in Biofuel Manufacturing through Control of Cellulosic Biomass Particle Size
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Donghai Wang, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2020
* USD 315,569.00

Today's economy and society are highly dependent on liquid fuels for
transportation. Currently, more than 90 percent of the liquid transportation
fuels used in the U.S. are petroleum-based. It is imperative to develop
alternative liquid fuels that are domestically produced and environmentally
benign. Biofuels, derived from cellulosic biomass such as agricultural and
forestry residues and dedicated energy crops, offer one of the best near- to
mid-term alternatives. Size reduction of cellulosic biomass is the key step in
the manufacturing of biofuels. Size reduction is an energy intensive process,
and particle size dictates the energy consumption in this process. This award
supports research to understand the relationship between cellulosic biomass
particle size and biofuel yield. Successful completion of this research will
build a foundation for future biofuel manufacturing technologies. This research
will have a significant impact on the overall cost and energy balance of biofuel
manufacturing, greatly benefiting the U.S. economy and energy security, as well
as the environment and society, in general. This project will have a positive
impact on engineering education. A new course accompanied by hands-on lab
sessions will be created to strengthen the undergraduate engineering curricula
and engage students in participating projects on renewable energy manufacturing.

The research objective is to test three hypotheses to explain inconsistency in
the relationship between cellulosic biomass particle size and enzymatic
hydrolysis sugar yield. In this research, it is hypothesized that the
inconsistences are caused by the use of different sugar yield definitions,
particle size ranges, and pretreatment methods. The prevailing biofuel
manufacturing technology and the three most widely used cellulosic biomass
currently in the industry, wheat straw, corn stover, and switchgrass, will be
used in the research. Experimental investigations on both lab and pilot scale
biofuel conversion facilities will be conducted to test the hypotheses.
Additionally, structural features, morphological changes, and chemical
compositions of cellulosic biomass will be characterized by using electron
microscopy, x-ray diffraction analysis, UV spectrophotometry, high performance
liquid chromatography, IR spectroscopy, Simon's stain, and nuclear magnetic
resonance techniques. Based on the experimental results, a sugar yield model,
incorporating all the significant structural, morphological, and chemical
features, will be developed and validated. The outcome of this research will
provide insights in the dynamic degradation of sugar compounds during
hydrolysis. It will advance the knowledge base needed to make both strategic and
operational decisions in biofuel manufacturing.