* 1562459
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Framework for the Investigation of Time Series Using Topological Data Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Firas Khasawneh, SUNY Institute of Technology Utica-Rome
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 11/30/2017
* USD 196,499.00

Recent advances in sensor technology and computer hardware have led to a shift
towards data-driven analysis and modeling of engineered and natural systems. The
study of the resulting streams of data currently requires extensive expertise
and often utilizes methods that are not guaranteed to be optimal. This leads to
an overly qualitative analysis that can miss a significant portion of the
information hidden within the signal. This project aims to utilize and advance
tools from topological data analysis, an emergent field focused on providing
quantitative measurements of the shape of data, and to elucidate invisible
features and structure of signals which current methods cannot detect.
Therefore, the resulting framework will be able to provide insight into the
systems that generated the data while providing a strong mathematical footing
for automating the analysis of systems and processes. The knowledge gained from
the work will benefit a wide variety of scientific fields where analysis from
sensor feedback signals is needed such as additive manufacturing and smart drug
delivery systems. Furthermore, the interdisciplinary nature of this project will
offer students rich opportunities for collaboration and cross-training in a
variety of areas in engineering, applied math, and signal analysis. The PIs will
also continue and expand their efforts to identify and recruit graduate students
from under-represented groups with relevant interests by working with the
Association for Women in Mathematics and the Society for Women
Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort that
seeks to investigate an innovative framework for time series analysis through
advancing and linking signal processing, dynamical systems, and topological data
analysis. The research team will pursue a topological approach that utilizes the
recently developed persistent homology to study the time series of dynamical
systems. Specifically, they will (1) derive a solid mathematical foundation
based on applied topology which enables a more robust and quantitative
investigation of dynamical systems, (2) research innovative methods for studying
the topology of the underlying manifold in dynamical systems from collected time
series using topological data analysis, and (3) demonstrate and assess the
validity of the theoretical results using numerical and physical experiments.
The theoretical underpinning of the research is especially suitable for
detecting and describing dynamical signatures such as underlying attractors,
chaos, and self-similarity using lower dimensional descriptors, rather than
lower dimensional representation. Therefore, this work is capable of providing a
new perspective into our understanding of time series analysis particularly for
dynamical systems with complex behavior.