* 1562861
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Reconfigurable Photonic Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Curtis Taylor, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The microelectronics revolution sparked by the invention and the very-large-
scale integration of transistors has affected almost every aspect of our daily
lives. As the 50-year-old Moore's law is approaching its limits, scientists are
now turning to light as the information carrier. Unfortunately, our ability to
control light in nanoscopic volumes is in many ways in its infancy, compared
with how we can manipulate electrons. A new class of optical materials known as
photonic crystals may hold the key to continued progress towards all-optical
integrated circuits. However, traditional nanomanufacturing technologies for
producing photonic crystals with three-dimensionally ordered nanostructures
suffer from low throughput, small sample areas, and high cost. By integrating a
simple, fast, and inexpensive colloidal self-assembly methodology with a new
type of shape memory polymer, this project will explore a novel scalable
nanomanufacturing approach for wafer-scale production of photonic crystals with
reconfigurable optical properties. This interdisciplinary research will be
closely integrated into curriculum development, new demonstration module design,
and training of underrepresented high school and undergraduate students through
a few successful programs at the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
various colloidal self-assembly technologies have been developed, most of these
bottom-up approaches are only favorable for low volume, laboratory-scale
production of photonic crystals. Moreover, self-assembled photonic crystals with
fixed microstructures are only appropriate for fabricating passive nanooptical
devices. Smart shape memory polymers that can memorize and recover their
permanent shapes from structurally stable temporary sates are promising for
developing active photonic crystal devices. Unfortunately, most of the existing
shape memory polymers are thermoresponsive, and they suffer from heat-demanding
shape memory cycles. The research team aims to conduct simultaneous experimental
and theoretical investigations to address the key scientific and engineering
barriers faced by the current colloidal self-assembly and shape memory polymer
technologies. In-situ nanoscopic mechanical and mechanochromic tests, along with
multiphysics mechanical finite element analysis simulations will facilitate the
basic understanding of the unusual shape recovery mechanisms of the new type of
shape memory polymer that enables unconventional all-room-temperature shape
memory cycles. The stimuli-responsive microstructure-optical property
relationship of the self-assembled photonic crystals will be elucidated by
optical characterization and finite element optical simulations. Large-area
macroporous polymer photonic crystals with optimal crystal structures and
multiple memorizable optical states will be fabricated by the scalable bottom-up
nanomanufacturing technology.