* 1562353
* Doctoral Dissertation Award:   Human Adaptation To Environmental Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 16,349.00

Little is known about the sensitivity of marine mammal species and their human
predators to environmental changes. Iñupiaq people of the northwest Alaskan
coast today rely on marine mammal hunting for a large portion of their
subsistence as they have for millennia, but it is uncertain how observed and
expected changes in the marine ecosystem might affect future food security.
Archaeology is uniquely situated to provide perspective on this problem because
it can consider human activity over long periods of time, and investigate how
past changes affected marine mammals and their human hunters. This research will
examine if and how environmental variability in the Arctic over the past 2,000
years affected marine mammals that in turn influenced human hunting patterns.
This project will compare evidence for changes in marine conditions and their
timing to variation in human diet based on the remains of animal bones from
archaeological sites. This research will also contribute long-term baseline data
enabling broader understanding of marine ecological dynamics in the Arctic.
Results of the study will be incorporated into National Park Service public
media and curriculum that is shared with northwest Alaska schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hunter-gatherers generally focus on capturing resources
that provide the highest energy return compared to energy expended. The diet of
northwest Alaskan peoples has varied over the past two millennia, but it is
unclear if these shifts are in any way linked to the health of marine mammals,
on which contemporary communities rely. It is expected that variations in marine
mammal health, brought about by changes in the marine environment, should drive
these shifts. To evaluate this claim, the co-PI will identify and tally animal
remains to asses changes in human diet over the study period. The marine
environment will be reconstructed by measuring isotopes of carbon and nitrogen
present in archaeological marine mammal bones throughout the same period. The
analysis is complemented by an existing radiocarbon chronology that will be
augmented where needed to ensure tight control over the ages of analyzed
samples. By comparing the timing of changes in human dietary preference to
changes in the marine environment, this study will assess the influence of
marine health on the diets of coastal Alaskans. Results of this research will
provide time-depth and broader context to studies of current environmental
changes and their impact on communities reliant on marine mammal hunting.