* 1562130
* Documenting the endangered Indonesian language of the Baduy Dalam
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* William Davies, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,400.00

What are the structural properties of closely related languages when separated
for more than four centuries? What kinds of properties do these languages share
and where do they diverge? Documenting and studying the intricacies,
particularly in syntax ("sentence structure"), increases our understanding of
the complex properties in a particular language as well as in closely related
languages. While isolation caused by mountains or bodies of water has been one
variable, this study asks these questions in an entirely different context by
documenting the speech of a community that went into seclusion in the 16th
century. With rapid change in the area in the linguistic and social landscape,
there is urgency to document the language of this isolated area now, while there
are still speakers. Investigating the grammar of such a language variety will
show how it is both structurally similar to and different from related languages
and contributes to the knowledge of relationships between languages in the same
family tree. The project will train University of Iowa graduate and
undergraduate students in cutting-edge technologies and methods for language
documentation, digital file management, linguistic fieldwork and research
methods in the language sciences. The collection and analysis of a publicly
archived, wide variety of language materials will generate data of scholarly
interest to other disciplines that depend on language-related material
(anthropology, biology, history, geography), while increasing our scientific
knowledge of the unique aspects of this language and its
relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;William Davies of the University of Iowa leads
an international collaboration with researchers at Universitas Pendidikan
Indonesia, teaming up to document the language of the Baduy Dalam 'Inner Baduy,'
a small group of about 1170 living in a remote area on the island of Java in
Indonesia. The team will record natural speech (narratives and conversations)
and lexical items to produce an audio and video transcribed corpus of Baduy
Dalam speech, a dictionary (with special focus on culturally distinctive
concepts), and a grammar sketch. Recordings, data files, and field notes will be
archived at the University of Iowa and the Pacific and Regional Archive for
Digital Sources in Endangered Cultures, where they will be accessible to other
researchers and the general public. Broader impacts include producing print and
video materials for direct use by the Baduy as linguistic and cultural education
resources. Baduy Dalam is of linguistic importance in part due to how its syntax
manifests the Austronesian 'voice' system, which involves how predicates (e.g.
"subjects" and "objects") pattern in sentences based on the verb and sentence
type. These results will contribute to understanding of the micro-syntactic
variation in the Austronesian language family, the second largest language
family in the world. The implications are thus important for typology, syntax,
and linguistic studies of variation, especially the micro-variations in syntax,
which have in many cases focused on larger world languages, like English, or
Indo-European language subgroups, like Italian, Spanish and closely related
Romance languages. This project will also support international research and
training opportunities for a graduate student and it will stimulate new
international collaborations between U.S. and Indonesian academic institutions.
The NSF Office of International Science and Engineering is providing support for
international activities associated with this project.