* 1562533
* Collaborative Research:Investigation of Material Removal in Impact Machining by Loose Abrasives
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Ma, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 66,001.00

Existing nanomachining processes that rely on lithographic and energy beam based
methods often need cleanroom environments and huge capital investments. Their
shortcomings include limited choice of work materials, chemical hazards, and
thermally induced defects on machined surfaces. This award supports a study of
material removal in brittle materials by the impact of nano diamond particles.
Research results can lead to a low cost alternative for nanomachining at room
temperature without the shortcomings of existing nanomachining processes. The
new process can improve the nanomachinability of a wide variety of both
conductive and nonconductive materials, and may have applications in biomedical,
electronic, automotive, energy, and metal working industries. Potential
applications in these industries include nanostructured scaffolds for artificial
tissue engineering, nanostructured switches and wireless transmitters, ultra-low
friction layers for thermal barrier coatings, and nanostructured proton exchange
membranes for fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The experimental platform for
the new process is an atomic force microscope where workpiece is vibrated at the
frequency of 20-160 kHz. Machining is achieved by the impact of loose nano
diamond particles in liquid medium. The research objective is to understand
effects of kinetic energy on material removal mechanism (plastic deformation or
brittle fracture). The level of kinetic energy is determined by machining
conditions (primarily diamond particle size and vibration frequency). The
research plan consists of computer simulations and experimental studies.
Extended finite element methods will be used to simulate the machining process.
In these models, to mimic the impact given by the diamond particle on the
workpiece at different kinetic energy levels, the workpiece is fixed and the
diamond particle is treated as a vibrating rigid body (at the frequency of
20-160 kHz). Drucker-Prager constitutive law will be employed to describe the
behavior of brittle materials. Finite element models will be validated by
comparing model predictions with experimental results. Machining experiments
using graphene, silicon, and glass samples will be performed at different levels
of kinetic energy by varying the mean size of diamond particles (5, 10, 15 nm)
and vibrating the workpiece at different frequencies in the range of 20-160 kHz.
Machined surfaces will be examined using electron microscopy, and optical
microscope to determine if the material removal is done by plastic deformation
or brittle fracture.