* 1562503
* Research Data Centers: Kentucky Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Eugenia Toma, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

SES - 1562503 James P Ziliak Christopher R Bollinger Glen Mays Eugenia F Toma
Derek Young University of Kentucky

This project establishes the Kentucky Research Data Center (KRDC) in Lexington,
Ky. as a partnership between the Bureau of the Census and the University of
Kentucky, and will join an existing network of over two dozen such RDCs
throughout the nation. In addition to faculty and students at the University of
Kentucky, inaugural consortium partners are Indiana University, The Ohio State
University, the University of Cincinnati, and the University of Louisville. The
establishment of KRDC will have a broad impact on the infrastructure available
to scholars and students in the East-Central consortium region, whose
translational research will impact economic, social, and health policy both
regionally and nationally. Moreover, because many researchers at KRDC's
consortium schools currently collaborate with colleagues at universities across
the country with an RDC, the establishment of KRDC will significantly ease those
collaborations, improve research productivity, advance the dissemination of
published data products, and foster new research networks.

Research that informs evidence-based policy is in heightened need in this era of
fiscal austerity and economic and demographic change. For purposes of preserving
respondent confidentiality, many major social, health, and business surveys
suppress identifying information such as state or county of residence from
publicly released data. This inhibits certain forms of research, including
tracking the health and economic status of individuals across states and over
time, characterizing urban growth and decline using address-level unit status
records of living quarters and nonresidential units, and the more formal
statistical evaluation of the effectiveness of public policies. However,
restricted-access research data centers (RDCs) permit the study of issues having
scientific and social import within a secure environment that ensures respondent
confidentiality.

The investigators affiliated with KRDC reflect the cross-disciplinary expertise
of the consortium schools with the areas of economics, sociology, public health,
public policy, statistics, nutrition, education, social work, and medicine
represented. They will conduct research on topics spanning income inequality,
poverty measurement and anti-poverty policies, education, health disparities
across geographic regions, race and gender, domestic violence and substance use,
food insecurity, immigration, and firm dynamics and government procurement
processes. In the secure data environment, the projects will utilize nearly
twenty different Federal statistical datasets supported by the Bureau of the
Census, the National Center for Health Statistics, the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, and other federal agencies that contribute data to the RDC
network such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics, Housing and Urban Development,
Bureau of Labor Statistics, and Department of Agriculture.