* 1562883
* Expanding the dictionary and database for Lenape, a Native American language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* James Rementer, The Delaware Tribe
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 05/31/2018
* USD 29,120.00

The essential elements that constitute the minimal scientific documentation of a
language include a reference grammar, a dictionary, and transcribed narratives
with translations and linguistic analysis. Dictionaries involve extensive
linguistic analysis, and contemporary dictionaries are constructed via
electronic databases, which structure a set of data and allow multiple routes to
search for information. With the advent of digital dictionary tools, entries
include sound files, photographs, grammar information, and entire stories.
Dictionaries contain historical knowledge, and even serve as learning tools.
This project will expand the existing dictionary and database of an endangered
Native American language, Lenape. The Native American Languages Act, passed by
the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique
status and importance of Native American languages. Dictionaries and databases
for Native American languages advance knowledge by increasing access to
linguistic and cultural materials, especially when disseminated in online and
mobile formats. This project will add otherwise inaccessible recordings, stories
and historical examples, and it will fund professional audio restoration to
improve quality of sound files. Broader impacts include the support of tribal
citizens studying their heritage language and the interest of a larger public
audience Native American languages, culture and history.

Lenape, the Delaware Indian language, was once spoken over an area of about
20,000 square miles - all of New Jersey, eastern Pennsylvania, northern
Delaware, and southeastern New York states. The Lenape people were gradually
displaced from their homeland in the 1600s and 1700s but the language continued
to be spoken, including as the first language of many Oklahoma Lenape born in
the early 1900s, but a variety of factors have reduced the language's use. The
Lenape Talking Dictionary of the Oklahoma-based Delaware Tribe was among the
first online, audio-enhanced dictionaries for a Native American language, thanks
to support from the National Science Foundation. The Lenape Talking Dictionary
serves as a rich repository of linguistic knowledge of Lenape for tribal members
studying their language and history, and for scholars researching the language
and its relatives in the Algonquian language family. The dictionary is usable in
web and mobile format and includes a wide range of material besides words and
accompanying audio files, including a significant number of transcribed and
translated sentences and stories, often with audio. Lenape employs highly
complex morphological structures in its syntax. Expanding this database to
increase the number of recordings, stories and lexical examples will benefit
tribal members and linguists who focus on morphology, syntax, Algonquian
languages, and other areas. The large compendium of bilingual examples, audio,
grammar discussion and lessons increase the accessibility of the morphosyntax of
Lenape to a broader public audience and tribal citizens, and to folklorists,
anthropologists and historians with interests in Native American history,
traditions and culture.