* 1562335
* Collaborative Research: Compressive Robotic Sensing Systems: Gaining Efficiency through Sparsity in Dynamic Sensing Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Mac Schwager, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

This project investigates autonomous control and coordination of a group of
robots that are tasked to explore, map, or monitor the environment they are in.
The project aims to enhance the capabilities of such a group of robots by
integrating Compressive Sensing for data compression. Compressive sensing
enables robots to quickly extract information from their environment,
efficiently communicate that information to each other over a wireless network,
and intelligently direct their motion to obtain relevant sensing data in the
future. Significant theoretical and technical challenges must be addressed in
this project to realize the potential of a compressive robotic sensing system.
The project will demonstrate results in two specific applications, (i) driving a
group of aerial robots to monitor their environment, (ii) driving robotic micro-
probes to measure processes inside a living cell. The project also seeks to
disseminate its findings through educational and outreach activities. Results
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate level courses in control
theory at both Boston University and Stanford University. The researchers will
also work with high school students and undergraduates through research
mentorship programs and through lab demonstrations for
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of the project is to create
rigorously analyzed algorithms that take advantage of sparse signal descriptions
to create efficient motion plans for a team of sensing robots that monitor the
environment. The driving hypothesis is that sparsity can greatly extend the
performance of robotic sensing systems by saving battery power, computation,
storage, and communication bandwidth---all critically limited resources for
robotic platforms. The research team will take a Bayesian approach to
Compressive Sensing, which allows for sensing quality to be quantified with
information theoretic metrics such as entropy. A receding horizon control
approach will be developed for driving robotic sensors to collect the most
valuable sensor data, in order to reconstruct a sparse representation of their
environment using Compressive Sensing. Such control strategies will be adapted
to both static and dynamic environments, and both centralized and distributed
solutions will be sought. The concepts developed in this project will be applied
to two specific sensing domains: (i) networks of quadrotor sensing robots
sensing environmental data and (ii) confocal fluorescence microscopy for three-
dimensional imaging of dynamics in bio-molecular systems. These two application
domains have radically different length and time scales, dynamical properties,
and information content. A successful application of the ideas developed in this
project to both these domains will prove the generality of the Compressive
Robotic Sensing System concept.