* 1562223
* Conversion Processing of Functional Oxides to Oxyfluorides
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Steven May, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,738.00

Complex oxides play a critical role in wide-ranging technologies that underpin
modern society with applications in the energy, communications, and health
sectors. The ability to make thin films of these materials will enable new
applications in electronics and energy conversion. However, in order to fully
harness the potential of oxide films, new processing approaches are required
that will enable a wider range of material compositions to be manufactured. This
award supports fundamental research focused on developing and understanding
strategies for the controlled substitution of fluorine for oxygen, thereby
enabling new means to engineer electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of
thin films and nanomaterials. The processing methods to be studied are scalable,
require minimal capital investment, and can be carried out on a broad range of
oxide films, independent of how the materials were first processed. As such, the
research will directly support the nation's strategic goal of developing agile
new approaches for materials processing that can reduce the time from material
discovery to technological deployment. The research will also benefit the U.S.
economy by contributing to the advanced engineering education of the
participating students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While advances in deposition
techniques have enabled the processing of perovskite oxide films with monolayer
precision, expanding access to new material chemistries remains a challenge.
This project is focused on the substitution of fluorine for oxygen, which allows
for control of the transition metal cation valence state and the covalency of
the metalanion bond, both effects having profound implications for electronic,
ferroic, and optical properties. This research will elucidate fundamental
scientific mechanisms in the synthesis of oxyfluoride mixed-anion perovskites
based on post-growth conversion reactions of oxide films. The conversion
processes to be studied utilize vapor transport and anion diffusion from
fluoropolymers. The team will deposit oxide films, carry out fluorination
reactions, and utilize spectroscopic and structural characterization techniques
to develop a predictive understanding of how the resultant anion composition can
be engineered through processing conditions to tune functional properties.