* 1563002
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Material Microstructure Evolution and Fatigue Life of High Strength Metal Components Produced by Laser Melting Additive Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jing Shi, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 149,906.00

Additive manufacturing can enable industry to produce on-demand parts at a
remote site, in space, or in a battlefield, with minimal inventory, delivery
time, and tooling cost. It can also enable researchers to explore new material
compositions leading to customized novel properties. To ensure quality of
components in laser melting (one of the additive manufacturing processes) and
reduce the lead time, it is critical to be able to evaluate material
microstructure changes in response to the dynamic high thermal gradient in the
process, and the strength of constructed materials under static and dynamic
loads after the process. This award supports fundamental research to enable
modeling and simulation methods that allow for realistic predictions, process
design and optimization, and equipment design of laser melting additive process.
The obtained knowledge provides the foundation for researchers and manufacturers
to engineer new materials in small lot size at low cost by using laser melting
additive process. It can also contribute to understanding the behavior of a
broad range of materials in laser melting. Research results will enhance current
engineering courses, and provide cross-disciplinary training opportunities for
graduate students.

The research objectives are to: (1) acquire knowledge on the mechanism of non-
equilibrium solidification in laser melting, (2) determine the effects of non-
uniform cyclic thermal history due to multilayer construction on microstructure
changes, and (3) establish the relationship between the microstructure resulted
from laser melting and the material performances. To achieve the first
objective, a thermo-mechanical finite element analysis will be constructed to
simulate the material addition process of laser melting, a phase-field approach
will be created to calculate the time-dependent growth of alloy phase field
based on the computed thermal history, and single-pass and multilayer laser
melting experiments will be conducted on a medium carbon steel. The correlation
between high thermal gradients from computation and the solute trapping
phenomenon from experimental observation will be made to reveal the non-
equilibrium solidification mechanism. To achieve the second objective, the
microstructure evolutions under both single pass and multilayer laser melting
processes are compared using the phase field approach, and verified by
experiments. Microstructure variations in terms of grain size, phase composition
and distribution will be obtained, resulting from different thermal histories of
material points. To achieve the third objective, the analytical models for
estimating strengths will be established based on the obtained material
microstructure, and the fatigue crack initiation life will be estimated based on
the minimum energy principle applied when a crack is created along the weakest
material point and path.