* 1563580
* Engineering the Anisotropy of Magnesium Alloys for Enhanced Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 431,473.00

Magnesium is the lightest metal that can be used in load bearing applications in
various alloy forms. However, current processing techniques for forming and
shaping are limited to elevated temperatures, which drive high production costs
and a negative environmental footprint. This award supportsÂ fundamental research
to provide strategies for producing fracture-resistant Mg alloys, including
during forming operations. A key departure from current thinking is to engineer
an essential feature of these materials, the directionality of their properties,
which is conventionally thought of as deleterious, hence to be mitigated.
Accelerated insertion of Mg alloys is potentially transformative in a multi-
billion dollar economy of the transportation industry. In addition, use of these
lightweight structural materials will lead to reduction in fuel consumption and
emissions with a positive impact on the environment, including in manufacturing.
The project activities will create an interdisciplinary research environment for
both undergraduate and graduate students and investigate teaching methods in
processing and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will elucidate
the relationship between the plastic anisotropy of Mg alloys and their fracture
resistance and formability. The underlying hypothesis is that the anisotropy of
Mg alloys can be engineered to develop materials with unprecedented strength and
ductility. To test the hypothesis, materials sharing the same chemical
composition and microstructure but having different textures will be produced in
bulk and sheet form and characterized for their plastic strength, formability
and fracture properties. A metrics-based methodology will be developed for
correlating plastic anisotropy with measures of fracture and formability.
Discrete dislocation dynamics, continuum damage mechanics analyses and
simulations as well as investigations of microscopic damage mechanisms will be
carried out to gain further insight into the success or failure of such
correlations. The project will therefore help answer important questions such
as: (i) Is material anisotropy intrinsically deleterious? If not, how can it be
engineered for enhanced performance? (ii) Does enhanced ductility translate into
cost-effective formability? (iii) Are there any achievable textures that result
in types of anisotropy that prevent shear failure? (iv) How does the anisotropy
manifest at dislocation scales? Inquiry into these issues will follow a holistic
approach that brings together materials science, mechanics and manufacturing.