* 1563845
* CSR: Medium: Supporting Real-Time Data Flows on Heterogeneous Multicore Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sanjoy Baruah, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,131,580.00

This project addresses the challenges of implementing software upon
heterogeneous multicore platforms, particularly in application domains where
verified timing correctness is required. The multicore revolution is currently
undergoing a wave of innovation in the form of heterogeneous processing elements
-- processing elements that may differ with respect to functionality or
processing speed. The presence of such heterogeneity means that choices must be
made when allocating hardware resources to software components. The need to
resolve such choices adds considerable complexity to resource allocation, and
inhibits the adoption of such platforms by the embedded computing industry
despite significant potential benefits in terms of balancing performance and
energy usage requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
methodologies for implementing time-critical software upon heterogeneous
platforms by systematically examining different models of heterogeneity,
devising efficient real-time scheduling algorithms for each such model, and
obtaining appropriate analysis techniques for each model that enable real-time
constraints to be verified. Workloads will be modeled as data-flows that enable
the representation of varying degrees of parallelism, with various possible
combinations of constraints on preemptivity, inter-processor migration, et
cetera, considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project both addresses fundamental
scientific challenges in resource allocation theory, and seeks to develop
appropriate software tools and methodologies to facilitate the adoption of
results and insights that are obtained. Such results, tools, and methodologies
are expected to accelerate the adoption of advanced heterogenous multicore
platforms by embedded systems industries.