* 1563227
* Wear-Resistant Thin Polytetrafluoroethylene Coatings through Nanoscale Interface Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2021
* USD 465,993.00

Polytetrafluoroethylene, better known by its brand name Teflon®, is widely used
as a coating material on many products, for example, the coating on cookware to
make it non-stick. However, polytetrafluoroethylene coatings are easily worn
because of their poor adhesion to the substrates, severely limitating their
applications. This award supports fundamental research on a novel approach to
significantly improve the wear resistance of polytetrafluoroethylene coatings
through nanoscale interface engineering by incorporating polydopamine as an
adhesive underlayer and polydopamine coated nanostructures in both the
underlayer and coating. This new approach will allow wear-resistant thin
polytetrafluoroethylene coatings to be deposited on any substrate materials
without changing the underlining surface topography, thus providing potential
solutions to retain a wide range of surface properties that rely on both surface
topography and chemistry, including, but not limited to, self-cleaning, anti-
fogging, anti-icing, anti-corrosion, anti-biofouling, drag reduction, and solid
lubrication. These properties are critically important for applications in
energy, aerospace, automotive, oil and gas, healthcare, and biomedical
industries. Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy
and society. Comprehensive education and outreach activities will be implemented
which will significantly stimulate the next generation?s interest in
nanomaterials and their applications and will improve America?s future
competitiveness in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
research are to significantly improve the wear resistance of the
polytetrafluoroethylene coatings through: (1) increasing the bonding strength
between the polydopamine underlayer and the polytetrafluoroethylene coating and
(2) increasing the bonding strength among the polytetrafluoroethylene
nanoparticles within the polytetrafluoroethylene coatings. Polydopamine-coated
nanostructures of various materials, shapes, and sizes will be incorporated into
both the polydopamine underlayer and polytetrafluoroethylene coatings. The
effects of adding polydopamine coated nanostructures into the polydopamine
underlayer and the polytetrafluoroethylene coating, as well as the effects of
nanostructure material, shape, size, and concentration, on the adhesion
strength, mechanical properties, and wear resistance of the
polytetrafluoroethylene coatings will be studied. This research program will
establish fundamental understanding of the roles of the polydopamine underlayer
and the polydopamine coated nanostructures in improving the wear resistance of
the polytetrafluoroethylene coatings for potential surface wetting and
tribological applications. This research will provide valuable information
necessary to guide the rational design of wear-resistant thin
polytetrafluoroethylene coatings enabled by a polydopamine adhesive underlayer
and polydopamine coated nanostructures.