* 1563785
* III: Medium: Adaptive Information Extraction from Social Media for Actionable Inferences in Public Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Daniel Hsu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,196,617.00

Social media is a major source for non-curated, user-generated feedback on
virtually all products and services. Users increasingly rely on social media to
disclose serious real-life incidents, such as a food poisoning incident at a
restaurant, rather than visiting official communication channels. This valuable
user-generated information, if identified reliably, may have a dramatic positive
impact on critical applications related to public health -- the family of
applications of interest in this project -- and beyond. For example, a local
health department might launch an investigation of a potential foodborne disease
outbreak at a restaurant if compelling evidence supporting the investigation can
be inferred from social media. This project will address fundamental research
challenges associated with processing social media to produce actionable
inferences, where the output of the process leads to concrete actions in the
real world. In addition to producing broadly applicable research results, the
project will have as its centerpiece a critical public health application,
namely, detecting and acting on foodborne disease outbreaks in
restaurants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this project will develop (1)
strategies for entity-centric modeling and selection of social media, to cover
the vast volumes of user-produced content across sources; (2) non-traditional
information extraction strategies over informal, noisy, and ungrammatical text,
as well as learning-based approaches to produce actionable, entity-centric
inferences for public health applications; and (3) methods for general online
active learning and search that are tuned for detecting the rare and infrequent
occurrences required for actionable inferences. Furthermore, this project will
center around an application of detecting and acting on foodborne disease
outbreaks, in a joint collaboration between Columbia University and the New York
City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH). This collaboration will
provide a robust, real-world platform for a continuous, end-to-end evaluation of
the novel research results as applied to a large-scale data science problem, a
rare opportunity in the evaluation of Computer Science research. This
collaboration will include the development and deployment of a system with a
direct impact on public health and society. A proof-of-concept prototype is
already in use at DOHMH and has helped identify and act on several previously
unknown outbreaks. The public health findings from the project will be shared
across governmental agencies, following DOHMH's best practices. Developed code
and annotated datasets will be shared with other researchers and agencies via
the project web site (http://publichealth.cs.columbia.edu/).