* 1563115
* AMASS: Advanced Manufacturing for the Assembly of Structural Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Jialiang Le, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 06/30/2020
* USD 349,728.00

This research activity is the US component of a tri-partite collaboration
between the US, Ireland, and Northern Ireland (UK) to investigate advanced
manufacturing techniques in plasma and laser cutting for the creation of an
entirely new class of interlocking steel connections that rely on neither
welding nor bolting, both of which are time-consuming and expensive. To date,
advanced manufacturing equipment has only been used to accelerate traditional
processes for cutting sheet metal or other conventional fabrication activities.
Such approaches have not capitalized on the equipment?s full potential, and this
project will lay the groundwork to transform steel building construction by
investigating the underlying science and engineering precepts to interlocking
connections created from precise, volumetric cutting. Such connection system
could radically transform how structural steel is fabricated, assembled,
deconstructed, and reused. The class of interlocking connections represents the
introduction of the first universal, structural steel connector system in more
than one-half a century, and it will better engage advanced manufacturing into
the US, Irish &amp; UK construction industries. Moreover, it offers the
potential for significant reuse of materials that are heavily imported. The
activity offers an innovative outreach program with broad-based technical
dissemination through webinars and workshops, and educational outreach for K-12
students by means of national-level, student
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advanced manufacturing for the assembly
of structure steel (AMASS) system enhances the integration between design,
fabrication, installation and maintenance through building information modeling
(BIM) platforms to implement advanced connections. Fully automated, precise,
volumetric cutting of open steel sections introduces intellectual challenges
regarding the load-transfer mechanisms and failure modes for interlocking
connections. The research activity includes closing the knowledge gaps
concerning the mechanics, load resistance, and design of steel systems with
interlocking connections. Also multi-scale modeling will be applied to
investigate the mechanics of interlocking connections including stress and
strain concentrations, fracture potential and failure modes, and to optimize
connection geometry through parameter studies. Physical data will be collected
from full-scale tests of beams, columns and beam-column assemblages with
interlocking connections to determine nominal capacities in flexure, shear and
axial loading, as well as for appropriate combinations.