* 1563924
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Materials authentication using nuclear quadrupole resonance spectroscopy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 424,000.00

Counterfeit and substandard pharmaceuticals, dietary supplements, and food items
containing extremely harmful contaminants have emerged as a major problem
worldwide for the health industry. High-value items such as packaged medicines,
which are often sold online through untrusted supply chains, are particularly
prone to fraud. This project aims to develop and test novel low-cost materials
authentication techniques that would enable end users to easily and reliably
verify the chemical composition of medicines and dietary supplements. The
widespread adoption of the proposed authentication technology could have an
impact on public health by significantly enhancing the security of the supply
chain for pharmaceutical and food products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
authentication approach is based on comparing the Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance
(NQR) spectra generated by the material under test with reference spectra stored
in a secure database. The atoms of about half of all the elements in the
periodic table contain so-called quadrupolar nuclei that generate NQR signals.
This project will focus on the spectra of nitrogen, which is found in a large
majority of pharmaceutical products. The NQR spectra are highly sensitive to
chemical composition and physical properties, and thus act as unique "chemical
fingerprints" that are difficult to emulate or falsify. Low power portable
electronics and an integrated system resulting in instrumentation for
noninvasive, nondestructive and quantitative testing will be developed for
combining sensing, software, and data collection/analysis.