* 1563615
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Floer Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michael Hill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2020
* USD 365,147.00

Topology is the study of those properties of shapes that are unchanged by
stretching and bending. Over the years, mathematicians have developed various
topological invariants, or in other words, quantities that are associated to
shapes and can distinguish between those that have different properties.
Homology is a well-known such invariant, which can be associated to any multi-
dimensional shape, and which is a quantitative measure of the number of holes in
a space. A circle, for instance, has only a one-dimensional hole, whereas the
surface of a doughnut has two one-dimensional holes, a meridian and a longitude,
that are not filled in by the surface itself, and an additional two-dimensional
hole. Floer homology is a more refined invariant that is responsible for some of
the most important recent advances in the study of knotted closed loops in
space, three-dimensional shapes, and shapes with a geometry known as a
symplectic structure that is exhibited by phase spaces in classical mechanics.
This project brings together several researchers working in different areas of
topology and geometry to study Floer homology. The main goal of the project is
the following: To every knot, three-dimensional shape, or symplectic shape, one
should associate a different object, called a Floer space or a Floer homotopy
type, whose (ordinary) homology is the Floer homology of the initial shape. This
has been accomplished so far in a limited number of cases. A general theory of
Floer spaces will lead to new advances in several areas. Furthermore, the study
of Floer spaces will be based on techniques from a subfield of topology called
homotopy theory. This project will create a community of scholars at the
interface of these current and extremely research active areas of mathematics.

Floer homology is a fundamental tool in geometry and topology, whose
applications range from the Arnold conjecture to the surgery characterization of
various knots. Floer homology has also laid the basis for completely unexpected
interconnections between algebraic and symplectic geometry in the form of
homological mirror symmetry. Floer homotopy theory, an extension to spaces
rather than homology groups, has been implemented in a small number of cases,
leading to significant applications, for example, the resolution of the
triangulation conjecture in high dimensions and work on immersed Lagrangian
spheres. Further, the ideas behind Floer homotopy inspired the construction of a
Khovanov homotopy type associated to knots in the three-sphere. The main
scientific goal of this project is to give a general construction of Floer
homotopy. The necessary foundational work will build upon recent advances in
multiple areas. These include the conceptual advances in equivariant stable
homotopy theory stemming from the resolution of Kervaire invariant one problem,
and the development of new approaches to define virtual fundamental classes in
Floer theory. The project aims to put the homotopical and homological variants
of Floer theory on equal footing. As a consequence, new applications in both
symplectic and low-dimensional topology are anticipated, for example: (i) a
spectral Fukaya category associated to a symplectic manifold will be
constructed; (ii) the Heegaard Floer theory of Ozsvath and Szabo will be used to
produce a computable invariant parallel to the celebrated Bauer-Furuta invariant
for four-manifolds; (iii) Seiberg-Witten Floer homotopy types will be studied
using the tools of equivariant stable homotopy theory; and (iv) the Khovanov
homotopy type will be extended to give invariants of knot cobordisms and
tangles.