* 1563363
* Documenting Language, Ecology and the Aquatic Environment in Kala, an endangered Oceanic language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Kenneth Longenecker, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2021
* USD 227,463.00

Investigating the biological diversity of a specific region is essential to
understand its species and ecosystems, and how species interact with each other
and with their ecosystems. The traditional ecological knowledge of the people
indigenous to that locale can enhance such investigations. Indigenous languages
encode knowledge systems, so documentation of the language plays a key role in
understanding of the region's plants, animals and other organisms. This project
will simultaneously document both the language and the traditional ecological
knowledge of an endangered language community. The community, which lives a
near-subsistence lifestyle, is characterized by their adaptation to the coastal
environment and their deep historical, economic and cultural attachment to
rivers. Investigating the aquatic environment through language documentation
will increase scientific knowledge in three areas: the language itself, the
region's aquatic ecosystems, and the relationship of language to biological
diversity. This project is urgent because endangered languages lose knowledge of
domains like plant and animal classification much earlier than basic vocabulary
and language structure. Broader impacts include an online encyclopedia, a museum
exhibit and international research and training opportunities for a graduate
student. The NSF Office of International Science and Engineering is providing
support for international activities associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth Longenecker of the Bernice P. Bishop
Museum leads an international collaboration with linguists and anthropologists
at the University of Hawai'i and the University of British Columbia, teaming up
to document the Kala language, a threatened language from the Oceanic branch of
the Austronesian language family, spoken by about 2000 people living in six
coastal villages in Papua New Guinea. A country roughly the size of California,
Papua New Guinea is home to more than 850 languages, many of which are under-
documented and spoken by small populations under intense development pressures.
The exceptional biological diversity of Papua New Guinea is also under threat.
By thematically documenting oral narratives conducted with Kala knowledge
experts along river banks or near other aquatic habitats, the team will document
accounts of historic relationships of specific clans to rivers, place name
origins, species descriptions, descriptions of resource-use practices, and
descriptions of beliefs associated with these environments. The project will
result in expansions to an existing Kala-Tok Pisin-English dictionary, the
development of an online environmental encyclopedia with entries in Kala and
English, and a sketch grammar of the language. Digitized data will be archived
by Kaipuleohone, the University of Hawai'i Digital Language Archive, and an
interactive exhibit at Bishop Museum will share project results with the public.
The project will generate data of scholarly interest to other disciplines that
depend on language-related material (anthropology, biology, history, geography),
while increasing our scientific knowledge of Kala.