* 1563029
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Additive Manufacturing of Mechanically Strong and Electrochemically Robust Porous Electrodes for Ultra-High Energy Density Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jonghyun Park, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2020
* USD 166,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research to enable the realization of reliable and ultra-high energy
density batteries by low cost manufacturing methods. Research results can help
in making electric vehicles cost-competitive with gasoline powered vehicles,
thereby reducing the greenhouse gas emissions. This will have a broad and
lasting impact on the environment. The research will also benefit the Internet
of Things, the healthcare, and the consumer electronics industry, because many
applications need robust and high capacity batteries. In addition, this project
will help train US workforce in the interdisciplinary areas of energy, advanced
materials, and advanced manufacturing through the development of
interdisciplinary curricula and various science activities for diverse youth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on making 3D electrodes using an
aerosol jet-based additive manufacturing method along with nanoparticle
sintering. The first research objective is to establish relationships between
process parameters and the quality of 3D electrode architecture produced by the
processes. Process parameters of aerosol jet-based additive manufacturing
include carrier gas pressure, and nanoparticle size and dispersion; and
sintering process parameters include sintering energy and time. The quality of
3D electrode architecture will be measured in terms of porosity level, pore
geometry, specific capacity, and resistance to capacity fade. This objective
will be achieved by carrying out experimental research guided by theoretical
models. The solidification of nanoparticle solutions upon dispense and the
consecutive sintering process will be modelled by using a discretized particle
model and a diffusive model. Further, a model that solves the Li diffusion
equation coupled with stress evolution and the cracking in the porous electrode
will be developed using a multi-scale modeling approach. These models will guide
the additive fabrication experiments using high specific capacity materials such
as silicon and silicon dioxide. The second objective is to identify
relationships between the characteristics of an artificial coating on the
electrode and the resistance to electrode capacity fade. The characteristics of
the coating include the thickness and uniformity of the coated layer. To achieve
this objective, atomic layer deposition will be used to create an electrode-
electrolyte interface layer over the 3D porous electrodes. Several microscopic
analyses such as atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and
transmission electron microscopy will be used to measure the coating thickness
and uniformity. Battery electrochemical experiments will then be carried out and
the resistance to capacity fade will be measured using cyclic voltammetry and
impedance spectroscopy.