* 1563160
* Novel Biodegradable Materials for Additive Manufacturing of Complex Scaffolds for Algal Bioremediation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Andres Carrano, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 57,999.00

Algal farming has garnered significant interest for both environmental
remediation and energy production applications. However, the economic viability
of using algae for these applications heavily depends on the efficiency of
growing specific algae types. Custom-designed materials and structures allow for
controlled microbiological growth processes that result in increased efficiency
in water remediation and energy harvesting. Conventionally, two-dimensional
synthetic polymer meshes are employed as the scaffolds for algal attachment and
growth. These traditional substrata are not biodegradable, and do not provide
the optimal shape or surface characteristics for targeted algal growth. This
award supports fundamental research on using additive manufacturing to print
biodegradable composite scaffolds from cellulose nanocrystals, naturally
abundant materials extracted from waste agricultural and forest products.
Research results will help advance the development of more economical and
biodegradable routes to grow algae for removing contaminants from water and/or
producing energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is
to establish a scientific understanding of combined effects of scaffold
composition, shape, and texture on algal growth and scaffold biodegradation in
water remediation reactors. The first research objective is to understand the
effects of the material composition and processing on the filament properties.
To achieve this objective, cellulose nanocrystal/polylactic acid composite
filaments will be produced using extrusion after three initial mixing methods:
1) dry mixing, 2) spray drying, and 3) polyethylene oxide/cellulose nanocrystal
masterbatch incorporation. Measurement of rheological, thermal, morphological,
and contact angle properties will be performed using standard methods. The
second objective is to understand the effects of rheological properties
(particularly the ratio of the elastic to viscous modulus) of the filaments on
the quality (including surface defects) of the scaffolds printed by additive
manufacturing (fused deposition modeling). Several types of composite filament
will be printed into algae growth scaffolds containing a range of surface
structures. The characteristics of the deposited layers (e.g. layer thickness,
road width, and fill voids) will be measured using optical microscopy and
chromatic confocal profilometry and correlated to surface defects. The third
objective is to understand how scaffold shape and chemistry affect algal growth
and scaffold degradation. The scaffolds will be put into a laboratory-scale flow
reactor containing algae growth media. At one week increments, the scaffold will
be removed and examined by optical microscopy. The algae will then be removed
and the mass harvested from different regions recorded. Changes to the scaffold
will also be assessed using microscopy and mass measurement.