* 1563829
* TWC: Medium: Designing Strongly Obfuscated Hardware with Quantifiable Security against Reverse Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Christof Paar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,170,727.00

Our world has become increasingly reliant on integrated circuits (ICs). Mobile
phones are deeply enmeshed in our everyday lives, we drive cars equipped with
hundreds of ICs, and have come to depend on the power grid and other cyber
physical systems that are controlled by ICs. Not surprisingly, the issue of
securing hardware has become increasingly vital. A reverse engineering adversary
may, for example, be motivated by extracting intellectual property from a
circuit, cloning a design for product piracy, or creating a targeted backdoor
for stealing cryptographic keys. In many real-world settings, we have to assume
a strong attacker who has full access to the IC and can analyze all hardware
features therein. Numerous hardware attacks over the last few years have shown
that reverse engineering is a surprisingly easy task. The goal of this project
is to develop strong and quantifiable protection mechanisms for ICs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project combines security
engineering, formal verification and circuit design, with the aim of creating
strong obfuscation techniques that thwart IC reverse engineering. The approach
is based on integrated circuits that perform a substantially different function
than the one an attacker would infer from its physical structure. The
investigators will explore a broad design space of low-level stealthy circuit
manipulations and higher-level obfuscation techniques that remove structural and
functional boundaries. A crucial component of the project is the development of
sound metrics to measure the level of achieved security. As part of community
engagement, this project envisions a De-obfuscation Challenge that will involve
research groups from academia and industry.