* 1563665
* Building Capacity in Linguistics, STEM and Technology through the Documentation of the North Slope Dialect of Inupiaq, an endangered Native Alaskan language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Daniel Wall, Ilisagvik College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2022
* USD 246,070.00

The essential elements that constitute the minimal scientific documentation of a
language include a reference grammar, a dictionary, and transcribed narratives
with translations and linguistic analysis. In contemporary language
documentation projects, an especially important role is often played by
electronic databases, which structure a set of data and allow multiple routes to
search for information. With the advent of digital tools, databases often
incorporate richer data and documentation, including sound files, photographs,
grammatical information, and entire stories. This project will document document
the North Slope Dialect of Iñupiaq, a highly endangered Native Alaskan language,
and it will create and expand a database of the language. This language
documentation will add to the current knowledge of Native languages while
building scientific research capacities at Alaska's only tribal college. The
Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into
policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages, including Alaska Native languages. Broader impacts include
introducing I&amp;#7735;isa&amp;#289;vik College students to linguistic
research, creating institutional partnerships with the University of Alaska
Fairbanks -- home to the Alaska Native Language Archive -- and providing source
materials for Iñupiaq faculty in the instruction of Iñupiaq language, and in the
fields of science, technology and the humanities. In addition, increased
interaction with technology by tribal college students and community youth will
increase participants' skills in the technological field, creating a stronger
STEM workforce in Alaska. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation and expansion of
the North Alaskan Iñupiaq Database will document this important Native language
and will be a tool to introduce tribal college students to applications of
technology design and linguistics. Bringing together elder speakers and the
community's tech savvy youth, this project centers around an innovative,
reciprocal exchange of knowledge, the elders' expertise in the indigenous
language versus youth knowledge of technology. Ways of knowing and understanding
will be documented in the language. The team, coordinated by Erin Hollingsworth
of I&amp;#7735;isa&amp;#289;vik College's Tuzzy Consortium Library, will produce
endangered language research, engage in community outreach with members in
remote Alaskan sites, and create participating opportunities for tribal college
students. The project will also create high quality science resources for
educators, while further strengthening the scientific capacity at
I&amp;#7735;isa&amp;#289;vik College. The North Slope Iñupiaq language material
will be accessible to linguists, tribal community members, and the general
public through the database. Databases for endangered and other languages
advance knowledge by increasing access to linguistic, historical, cultural and
scientific materials, especially when disseminated in online formats. The NSF
Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUP) program in EHR is providing support for
tribal college participation in this project.