* 1563408
* Hidden Costs of Decomposition: The Need for Fit between Technical and Organizational Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Erica Gralla, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 247,214.00

Engineered systems are becoming increasingly complex, and as a result, they are
more difficult to design. Effective design requires quickly bringing diverse
expertise to bear on each iteration of the design. These two goals -- faster
design cycles and better cross-disciplinary integration -- are enabled by model-
based concurrent design approaches. These approaches bring multiple experts
together into a single room to create a design in a series of short design
sessions, and they are widely used in certain fields, such as spacecraft design.
These approaches have many proven advantages, but also potentially serious
drawbacks due to the level of decomposition they impose on the design problem.
For example, many assumptions are made in order to decompose the design tasks
into modules for each team member, and these assumptions may not be valid for
all design problems. This award supports fundamental research to generate
knowledge about how the "fit" between the technical decomposition (the problem
being solved) and the organizational decomposition (people and tasks) impacts
the quality of the design process. The results will enable design organizations
to make better informed choices about how to deploy concurrent design
approaches, such as when these tools apply and when they do not, and how to use
them well even when the technical and organizational decompositions are slightly
mismatched. The resultant gains in design efficiency would have implications for
many sectors of the economy that depend on engineering design and innovation. In
addition, this research involves several disciplines including aerospace and
systems engineering, organization design, and qualitative research methods; this
approach will foster multi-disciplinary research and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to generate
knowledge about how the lack of "fit" between a design organization's imposed
decomposition and the problem's natural decomposition affect the speed and
characteristics of the design process. The research will focus on understanding
the nature of "fit," developing a framework for measuring it, identifying the
types of problems that arise in the design process due to this lack of "fit,"
and explaining the mechanisms by which they arise. Current research in this area
is limited by measurement challenges and limited empirical evidence. This
research will address these limitations through an empirical study of the
concurrent design team at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The research will be conducted through an in-depth
observational process study of multiple concurrent design sessions. The design
process will be observed, its key characteristics measured, and the technical
and organizational decompositions will be recorded, so that the impact of the
decompositions' "fit" on the design process characteristics can be evaluated and
its drivers explained.