* 1563816
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Human-Computer Graph Exploration and Tele-Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Duen Horng Chau, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

The amount of information available to individuals today is enormous and rapidly
increasing. People are constantly making sense of the world: scientists learning
the literature in an unfamiliar field; analysts spotting abnormal activities in
computer networks; and patients understanding their symptoms. From a user's
perspective, the main issue is not about storage, or computing power, or large
scale data processing. It is more about how to best amplify his or her limited
cognition power to make sense of a large data corpus via "natural" interactive
exploration. This project will undertake the challenge of computer-human
interactive exploration of information-rich billion-scale network datasets.
These include online social networks (who is connected to whom), online auctions
(who is buying what), and intelligence analysis of communication patterns and
network traffic. It will blend computer-human interaction principles and
decomposable visualizations with new scalable exploration techniques that are
driven by information-theoretic measures. Specifically, it will design and
develop a prototype system, in which users will gradually build up an
understanding of billion-scale network datasets. This research could
fundamentally change how people make sense of data in many domains like
scientific literature, cybersecurity, and consumer decision making. The findings
could increase education effectiveness, rate of scientific discovery, and enable
more literate, knowledgeable, and intelligent citizens.

This project will combine multiple novel ideas synergistically, organized into
four inter-related research thrusts: (1) Adaptive Local Exploration using
Minimum Description Length principles (MDL), KL divergence and Combinatorial
Discrepancy. (2) Pattern Tele-Discovery & Global Summarization via algorithmic
teleportation tools. These will include mechanisms for querying, discovering,
linking, and visualizing multi-attributed time-evolving network patterns. (3)
Scalable Data Models & Algorithms to support the interactivity demands of the
previous thrusts. The proposed tools will address storage layouts via Egonet
Edge Partitions and distributed sparse and persistent multidimensional sorted
maps. (4) The researchers will continually conduct multi-stage evaluations in
key domains, working with users throughout the entire development process. These
will include iterative interface development via in-person user studies, virtual
lab studies, and longitudinal field trials. For further information see the
project web site at: http://poloclub.gatech.edu/human-computer-telediscovery/