* 1563355
* Mechanisms of Immune Cell Response to Mechanical Load
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Arpita Upadhyaya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2020
* USD 399,998.00

Cells have the remarkable ability to sense and respond to the mechanical
properties of their environment. This mechanosensing ability is essential for
many phenomena ranging from the movement of individual cells, cell
differentiation and fate choice as well as large-scale tissue rearrangement
during development. Recent work has shown that immune cells are responsive to
their mechanical environment and this mechanosensitivity tunes their ability to
respond to infectious agents. This project aims to understand how internal
forces generated by the biopolymer networks of actin filaments and the motor
protein, myosin, enable the T lymphocyte to modulate biochemical signaling,
enhancing our understanding of how mechanical stimuli and biochemical signaling
are coupled during the immune response using concepts and tools from physics and
engineering. This work has potential implications for improving the design of
artificial antigen-presenting devices that can enhance the efficiency of
immunotherapies against pathogens and tumors. The PI will develop a lecture and
laboratory course in cell mechanics, in which concepts from topics such as
statistical and continuum mechanics will be used to explain biological
processes. The PI will encourage minority and high school students from the area
to participate in research. The PI will organize biophysics laboratory
demonstrations as part of the Summer Girls Program at the University of Maryland
to encourage participation of female students in science and technology fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The binding of T cell receptors (TCRs) to antigen-derived
peptides results in the formation of dynamic protein assemblies, called
signaling microclusters, that serve as the initiating points for T cell
activation and the first step of the adaptive immune response. Recent work has
revealed that T cells are responsive to the mechanical environment on which
antigens are presented and that physical forces can trigger T cell activation.
However, the mechanisms by which T cells combine mechanical and biochemical
signals to carry out specific functions is not well understood. This project
will test the hypothesis that signaling microclusters are responsive to forces,
acting as dynamic mechanosensors, thereby allowing the cell to respond and sense
the physical properties of the antigen-bearing surface. The PI aims to elucidate
how cellular forces regulate the assembly of signaling assemblies at activated T
cell receptors (Aim 1), to determine the molecular linkages between cytoskeletal
forces and T cell signaling activation (Aim 2) and how these forces more
globally lead to activation at the level of the whole cell (Aim 3). This study
will reveal common principles in the mechanisms of receptor-mediated sensing of
the mechanical environment and the more commonly studied integrin-mediated
mechanosensing.