* 1563475
* Atomized Dielectric-Based Electric Discharge Machining for Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Shiv Kapoor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 299,338.00

Electro discharge machining process has been successfully employed in aerospace,
automobile, and other industries to manufacture high-accuracy micro-parts with
range of materials irrespective of their hardness. However, the efficiency of
the process has been low due to low energy of individual discharges and
accumulation of debris particles in the inter-electrode gaps, especially, when
machining micro-scale features. Further, the electro discharge machines use
pressure flushing techniques that result in consumption of significantly higher
amount of dielectric than needed for an effective discharge process. This award
supports research to study an atomized dielectric-based electro discharge
machining process that can reduce the consumption of the dielectric 10-20 folds
and helping to achieve an environmentally sustainable machining process. The new
process will offer unique capabilities of manufacturing high-accuracy components
and devices with complex geometries. In addition, the quantitative understanding
of plasma discharges in flowing liquid will be useful in a number of plasma
applications ranging from water purification to plasma medicine. The overall
goal of this research is to improve the efficiency of the micro-electro
discharge machining process and produce an environmentally-sustainable machining
process by reducing the consumption of hazardous dielectric. The approach is to
atomize dielectric and produce a thin moving film that fills inter-electrode gap
and flushes out the debris efficiently. This research has four specific
objectives: (1) to understand film formation, flow characteristics, melt-pool
formation, and debris flushing; (2) to understand the formation, collapse, and
discharge of plasma in liquid medium; (3) to establish the relationship between
the trajectory of the debris and the dielectric velocity; and (4) to establish
relationships between process parameters and machining characteristics
(discharge energy, material removal, and debris flushing). To achieve these
objectives, a film formation model will be developed using mass and momentum
transfer from the dielectric droplets in the spray; a spatially-resolved three-
dimensional plasma model will be developed using a fluid-based approach; and the
debris flushing model will be developed using the force balance at the flowing
debris particle in the inter-electrode gap. To validate these models,
experimentally measured data will be compared to model predictions. Film
thickness will be measured using high-speed camera, plasma temperature and
electron density will be measured using spectroscopy, and debris particle
distribution around the discharge location will be determined from the
measurements of different sized debris particles using scanning electron
microscope.