* 1563037
* Could Slower be better? Assessing Sintering Time, Temperature, and Area Tradeoffs in 3D Printing by Polymer Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Julie Harmon, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 11/30/2018
* USD 331,982.00

3D printing (additive manufacturing) is enabling dramatic changes in design,
manufacturing, and distribution. While this has created many new opportunities,
the materials and the properties available with 3D printing are still much more
limited than those available with traditional processes such as machining and
injection molding. This award supports fundamental research to enable expansion
of the range and functionality of materials used in 3D printing processes that
form components by locally heating (sintering) a polymer powder (usually with a
laser). As the range of available materials expands, the processes can be used
more widely. The continued expansion of additive manufacturing through improved
material properties, increased variety of materials, and reduced production
costs, will help achieve the full benefits of additive manufacturing including
low-cost customized products, faster development times, and more personalized
medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing via sintering of polymer
powders has typically used a scanning laser to heat the materials quickly. The
tightly focused laser creates large thermal gradients and short sintering times.
Relatively few materials can densify reliably without degradation under these
conditions. A single material (nylon 12) composes a large majority of all
polymer-sintered components. However, a solution may be to use lower intensity
light for longer time. Build rate may be maintained or improved by heating
larger areas using large laser spot sizes or by sintering an entire layer with a
single exposure. Longer processing times will require a transition from process
characterization based on energy input to temperature history. The objective of
this research is to understand the effects of sintering time, temperature, and
area in polymer sintering. This will be done by modeling process outcomes based
on processing temperature and time, rather than optical energy input--enabling
application of viscous sintering theory to guide process development. Viscosity
and sintering rates of test materials will be measured to calibrate sintering
models while stiffness, strength, and viscosity measurements of heated materials
will be used to identify the processing window which avoids degradation. A
projection-sintering system will be developed to measure sintering outcomes
(porosity, stiffness, and strength) with varying exposure time, temperature, and
area. Models will be developed to identify combinations of processing time and
temperature that achieve equivalent material properties. These models will be
used to predict tradeoffs in material properties, build rate, and resolution
between alternative machine architectures using point, line, and area-based
heating methods. They will also accelerate selection and development of new
polymer sintering materials.