* 1563280
* Biomechanics of Complex Microtubule Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Vershinin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 398,044.00

Humans and many other organisms are comprised of cells which possess a complex
biomechanical framework: the cytoskeleton. The composition and internal layout
of the cytoskeleton is different from cell to cell. Some differences are purely
random but there are also clear systematic architectural differences between
various cell types. For example, cells involved in diseases (e.g. cancer) often
have markedly different cytoskeleton from cells in a healthy organism. It is
currently not clear how different cytoskeletal architectures relate to overall
cell biomechanical properties. One of the problems hindering progress has been
the inability to reproducibly assemble cytoskeletal networks in a controlled
environment. However, a recently developed nano-scale assembly technique allows
for exactly this: the longest and least flexible cytoskeletal filaments known as
microtubules can now be assembled and manipulated with sufficient flexibility
and precision to build structures in a controlled environment which mimic what
is seen in cells. Research conducted under this award will use this novel
approach to examine the biomechanical properties of a number of key biologically
relevant filament architectures. The work will also examine how the biomechanics
of microtubule cytoskeleton changes when the architecture is identical but the
overall size of the filament structure is varied instead. These measurements
together will provide both a big picture view (the role of microtubule network
architecture in cellular biomechanics) and small scale perspective (how stress
propagates across the network).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine
several key microtubule network topologies. A recently demonstrated holographic
optical trapping approach will be used to assemble microtubule networks in vitro
in 3D. Holographic and ordinary trapping will be used together to manipulate and
to probe such networks in situ. For a given network layout, this study will also
establish how the biomechanical properties of the model network change with
overall scale. Therefore, the extent to which select microtubule network
architectures contribute to cellular biomechanics will be established. The role
of filaments and cross-links with different mechanical properties will also be
quantitatively examined using the same experimental technique.