* 1563812
* SHF: Medium: Booleanized Verification of Analog/Mixed Signal Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Jaijeet Roychowdhury, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Almost all electronic equipment today, particularly portable devices such as
smartphones, tablets etc., contain not only billions of tiny switches called
transistors, but also a number of critical analog/mixed-signal (AMS) circuits.
Designing AMS circuits is usually far more difficult than designing digital
circuits; they require specially trained designers in short supply, much longer
design times, and often require several design iterations. Furthermore, when
embedded in a chip with digital circuits, malfunctions stemming from unforeseen
digital-analog interactions are common and difficult to pinpoint. This research
aims to address the problem of making AMS design and debug easier, more
reliable, and faster. Success of this research should provide a powerful boost
to electronic design technology, eventually resulting in more complex and useful
gadgets at lower cost. Moreover, this research will help train a number of
graduate and undergraduate students, thus helping to develop the future
workforce for electronic design automation industry. Outreach activities to be
undertaken in this context will also help attract high-school students to STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical idea behind this project is to
model AMS components accurately as digital ones; and then to use digital
techniques, which are much easier to use and faster, for debugging and design.
The project will pursue two broad directions within this paradigm: 1) develop
better and more accurate Booleanization techniques for approximating AMS
circuits and systems as digital ones; and 2) develop better techniques for
determining if the Booleanized/digital models work correctly or not.