* 1563040
* Mechanics of Multi-functional Biocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Yong Kim, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2021
* USD 291,954.00

The objective of this award is to fabricate natural fiber composites that are
highly durable and multi-functional. Fiber-reinforced polymer composites are
made by combining a polymer together with strong reinforcing fibers. Both glass
and carbon fibers are relatively expensive, man-made fibers. However natural
fibers are abundant, recyclable and cheap. There is a growing trend to use
natural fiber reinforced composites in several commercial applications such as
automobiles, building construction, sporting goods, and electronic goods.
Although natural fiber composites are already used in several industrial
applications, their use in load bearing applications is very limited due to
their poor durability and mechanical properties such as stiffness, strength,
crack initiation and propagation resistance. Multi-functional properties such as
stiffness, strength and crack resistance, and damage sensing will be achieved by
coating natural fibers with graphene and embedding short carbon fibers between
the laminates. In addition, research will be performed to understand the damage
evolution of the natural composites under various mechanical loads using the
three-dimensional electrical conductive network generated by the embedded
graphene and short carbon fiber elements. This project will provide training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students on embedding graphene into
natural fibers, fabrication of composites, and multi-scale electro-mechanical
characterization. The research activities will also promote the recruitment and
mentoring of underrepresented students in cutting-edge scientific techniques
through outreach in local public high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
comprehensive experimental study will be conducted to investigate damage
evolution at different length scales in multi-functional natural fiber
reinforced composites. To accomplish this objective, novel and challenging
experiments incorporating the electro-mechanical response of three dimensional
electrical conductive networks will be performed under quasi-static mechanical
loading conditions. Highly sensitive conductive networks will be generated by
embedding graphene in natural fibers laminates along in-plane directions, and by
flocking short carbon fibers along the thickness direction between the
laminates. It is hypothesized that the generated conductive network will undergo
changes during mechanical loads to reflect damage mechanisms such as fiber
pulling from the laminates, matrix cracking, delamination between laminates, and
crack bridging. In addition to macro-scale experiments, nano-scale experiments
will also be performed using a micro-tensile tester embedded, conductive mode
atomic force microscope to capture change in current profile under tensile and
shearing loading conditions.