* 1563159
* Decoding Strain-Level Variation in the Human Microbiome
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Katherine Pollard, The J. David Gladstone Institutes
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,749,922.00

The human body is host to a diverse array of microorganisms. Collectively known
as the human microbiota, our microbial cells are a significant factor in human
health, not only through causing disease but also by promoting wellness. The
microbiota must be understood to fight antibiotic resistance, to stop the rise
of autoimmune diseases, and to deliver precision medicine. Microbes also carry
information about our ancestry and environmental exposures. Metagenomic
sequencing allows researchers to explore what is there and what they are doing.
But the field has only recently begun to link differences in metagenomic data to
specific microbes, because strain-level analysis is computationally and
statistically challenging. The goal of this project is to develop efficient and
accurate computational methods for studying the human microbiome at the strain
level, so that the full extent of variation in our microbial cells and its
association with our biology can be elucidated. The novel associations
discovered could be used to identify microbial biomarkers for diagnosis and
personalized treatments or to design microbiome targeted drugs, prebiotics, and
probiotics. The tools developed will also be useful for characterizing strain-
level variation in microbes from environments such as soils and oceans. The
investigators will use the cyberinfrastructure and discoveries from this project
in graduate teaching, for outreach and communication through public
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new statistical methods,
models, and software for microbiome research that enable characterization of
gene copy number and single nucleotide variants of the microbial strains in
shotgun metagenomes. The investigators hypothesize that strain-level analysis
will reveal cryptic diversity and associations between host and microbes, which
are missed by approaches that ignore differences in gene content amongst
strains. The researchers have discovered massive differences in gene content
(&lt;50% shared genes) between strains of common human-associated bacteria from
different people, which no doubt has functional consequences. Microbial species
therefore are not sufficient biomarkers for precision medicine and evolutionary
studies of the microbiome, because a person's strain may not harbor the pathways
(e.g., for pathogenicity or drug-metabolism) identified in another strain of the
same species. With novel tools for quantifying microbiome genomic diversity,
thousands of publicly available metagenomes will be analyzed to comprehensively
assess the global population structure of human-associated microbes. By
comparing this biogeography across species with different functional
capabilities and correlating it with human traits and demography, the aim is to
discover how microbes adapt to and affect diverse human hosts.