* 1563932
* CHS: Medium: RUI: Collaborative Research: Making the Invisible Tangible: Reimagining Science Education in Kindergarten through Reality-Based Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Orit Shaer, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 545,706.00

Recent research in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) generated a broad range of
interaction styles that move beyond the desktop into new physical and social
contexts. These emerging interaction styles, that are often referred to as
Reality-based Interfaces (RBIs), leverage users' developmental abilities such as
naive physics, spatial, social and motor skills, and offer concrete ways to
think about abstract phenomena. Building on this work and motivated by the need
of our nation to further engage children in STEM, this research investigates how
to design age-appropriate reality-based interfaces that engage young children in
scientific investigations, bio-design, and engineering. The project entails the
development of novel human-computer interfaces that encourage children to
explore and design within the domain of biological engineering, while
facilitating learning of abstract concepts in a concrete way. This approach
intends to promote a re-examination of the early childhood STEM curriculum to
include emerging and interdisciplinary topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project scope includes the design, implementation, and
evaluation of RBIs for young children that support collaborative exploration of
biological engineering. The research questions investigated focus on how
reality-based interaction techniques can be applied to make the invisible
tangible. Specifically, how to design novel interaction techniques that bridge
the time and size scales of biology? How to design and implement interfaces that
supports collaboration within both pairs and larger groups by integrating
computational devices of different scales? How to support seamless transition
between macroscopic and microscopic levels of information and across multiple
devices? And finally, can RBIs allow young children to grasp abstract concepts
that were previously considered too complex for their age and developmental
stage? The outcomes of this project contribute to four areas of research: 1)
tangible and embodied interaction, 2) computer supported collaborative learning,
3) interaction design for children, and 4) early childhood education in STEM.