* 1563705
* CHS: Medium: Improving Distributed Teamwork Through Mobile Robotic Telepresence Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Drew Margolin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,272,000.00

This research systematically investigates the impact of specific Mobile Robotic
Presence (MRP) system features on formal and informal collaboration across
different levels of analysis, including teamwork, informal communication, and
the social network structure of an organization. MRP systems are audio and video
conferencing systems mounted on a mobile base, operated by someone a distance
away from the location, and often serving as a surrogate for people who cannot
travel there, for any of a number of reasons. Geographically distributed teams
and organizations have been shown to suffer in comparison to those that are
collocated, in part because conventional computer-mediated communication tools
fail to support both formal meetings and informal interactions during activities
like walking the hallway or waiting for the elevator that help build work
relationships and provide valuable information about the organizational. MRP
systems are a promising new technology for distributed teamwork because they can
support both formal and informal workplace interactions. The project will
develop new tools and knowledge for communication across geographic distance
that will be made widely available to the research community and general public.
It will also enhance education through graduate student training and the
development of new classroom tools, curriculum, and diversity outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project aims to: (a) develop a
systematic understanding of the effects of telepresence robots on formal and
informal workplace communication through a series of lab and field studies; (b)
develop and evaluate a set of interface and control techniques that improve
informal and formal communication; (c) examine how the introduction of MRPs into
an organization influences the structure of its social network using social
network analysis; and (d) integrate the techniques and findings at the
interface, team and organizational levels through a set of field studies. The
research will contribute to the fields of computer-mediated communication and
computer-supported cooperative work by developing new theories and
understandings of how people interact via telepresence robots in both formal
group meetings and informal interactions. It will contribute to human-computer
interaction, robotics, and related fields through the development of new
techniques and tools for interacting with and through telepresence robots. It
will contribute to theories of how distance affects organizational structure by
exploring the network-level effects of working remotely via MRPs vs.
conventional computer-mediated communication tools. Finally, the project will
help build new understandings of the relationships among individual features of
MRP technology, the usefulness of that technology for distributed collaboration,
and its effects on organizational structure.