* 1563763
* CSR: Medium: A High-Performance Certified File System and  Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Robert Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

Applications rely on file systems to store their data, but even carefully
written applications and file systems may have bugs that cause data loss,
especially in the face of system crashes (e.g., due to power failure). Even in
mature file systems such as ext4, bugs that can lead to data loss are not
uncommon. Application developers also misuse file-system APIs in ways that lead
to user data being lost after a crash.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal verification
is a good way to prove the absence of bugs in a file system. By considering all
possible operations and crashes, verification can ensure that the file system is
bug-free. The goal of this proposal is to develop a certified high-performance
file system, VCFS (Verified Concurrent File System). The investigators aim to
make VCFS's performance good enough to support demanding applications while
guaranteeing crash safety. VCFS and its applications will come with mathematical
proofs that their implementations meet their specifications under any sequences
of crashes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main outcomes of this research will be as
follows: (1) A logic system, CFSL (Concurrent File System Logic), that allows
reasoning about parallelism and crashes. (2) A precise specification of the
POSIX API under concurrency and crashes. (3) The VCFS file system, for which we
will prove that its implementation meets our POSIX specification under crashes
and concurrency. VCFS will include sophisticated performance optimizations. (4)
A certified high-performance mail server, as a test case of using VCFS and its
formally specified APIs to prove application-level properties (in this case,
that the server will not lose acknowledged messages).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CFSL
will enable developers to reason about concurrency and crashes in the context of
file systems. The POSIX specification, along with VCFS, will help programmers
develop applications that are both high-performance and safe under computer
crashes. The investigators will use their understanding of writing certified
software to create a new class on certified software.