* 1563008
* Collaborative Research: Universal Processing Approaches for Functional Brush-like Polymer Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 235,998.00

Surface coatings are widely used to protect materials from degradation, inhibit
fogging and fouling, or regulate interactions with cells and micro-organisms.
However, current methods to produce coatings are slow, multi-step batch
processes. This award supports fundamental research into the development of
universal thin film coatings that can be synthesized with nearly limitless
functions and applied to a wide variety of surfaces. The research involves the
use of brush-like polymeric materials and integration with low-cost techniques
for deposition on metal, glass, and plastics. This work has the potential to
impact a broad range of commercial processes in semiconductor manufacturing,
packaging, transportation, and medical treatment. Graduate students and REU
students at both institutions will receive interdisciplinary training that
includes polymer synthesis, polymer processing, and surface science. The PIs and
their groups are involved with community outreach through the Children's Museum
of Houston, and they will design a new module that demonstrates 3D printing of
plastic parts with functional surfaces (hydrophobic and hydrophilic). This
research project will establish scalable and universal approaches to prepare
functional polymer brush coatings. Current methods to produce brush coatings are
slow, multi-step batch processes. The PIs plan to generate functional coatings
using bottlebrush polymers, a class of macromolecules that have "built-in" brush
structures. Bottlebrush polymers can be synthesized with nearly limitless
chemistries and functions, and they can be processed into coatings from solution
or melt states. Significant anticipated outcomes include: i) Design rules for
flow coating thin films of reactive and responsive bottlebrush polymers, which
leverages a bio-inspired cross-linking chemistry (dopamine) to ensure film
stability and adhesion on any surface; ii) Development of surface-active
bottlebrush polymer additives for commodity or advanced plastics, which enables
the spontaneous formation of brush-like surfaces during solution deposition
(flow coating, electrospinning) or melt extrusion (3D printing).