* 1563818
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: An Inspector/Executor Compilation Framework for Irregular Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Catherine Olschanowsky, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 10/31/2021
* USD 397,199.00

Computational science and engineering provides inexpensive exploration of
physical phenomena and design spaces and helps direct experimentation and advise
theory. Irregular applications such as molecular dynamics simulations, n-body
simulations, finite element analysis, and big graph analytics constitute a
critical and significant portion of scientific computing applications. An
irregular application is characterized by having indirect memory accesses such
as A[B[i]] that cannot be determined when the application is being compiled,
therefore severely limiting the applicability of the large body of work on
parallelizing compiler technology. Consequently, irregular applications, which
are so important in pushing forward the frontiers of science, place a very large
burden on computational and domain scientists in developing high-performance
implementations for the ever-changing landscape of parallel architectures. The
intellectual merit of this project is to develop a compiler and runtime
framework for irregular applications, particularly well suited for sparse matrix
and graph computations that underlie critical problems in computational science
and data science. The broader impact is to provide domain scientists a powerful
tool for optimizing and porting performance-critical, irregular computations to
current and future multi-core processors and many-core accelerators. The PIs
will also continue efforts in outreach and diversity to increase the
participation in STEM careers, particularly among women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in this project is to
extend the well-established inspector/executor paradigm where the computational
dependence structure (based on the memory access pattern) is determined at
runtime, and runtime information is passed to a compile-time generated executor.
Specifically, an inspector can examine the memory access patterns early in the
computation at runtime, and an executor leverages this information to perform
data and computation reordering and scheduling to affect memory hierarchy and
parallelism optimizations. The project is developing a compiler and runtime
framework with new abstractions for expressing and manipulating inspectors;
these inspectors may then be integrated nearly seamlessly with each other and
with existing compiler optimizations (e.g., loop tiling) to optimize executors.
The project is also extending prior work that supports non-affine input code and
mixes compile-time and runtime optimization. The resulting system increases the
productivity of expert programmers in achieving both high performance and
portability on a wide variety of irregular applications.