* 1563413
* A Computational Framework for Data-Driven Mechanism Design Innovation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Qiaode Jeffrey Ge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 534,730.00

Recent trends in democratization of manufacturing capability such do-it-yourself
hobby shops, 3D printing technology, as well as low-cost sensors, actuators, and
microcontrollers, call for a corresponding democratization of design tools that
can help engineers and tinkerers alike to innovate and invent motion generating
devices. Motion generation is a fundamental aspect of machines, at the heart of
which are kinematic mechanisms that make it possible for motions to be
transmitted or transformed. A kinematic mechanism is a collection of moving
pieces linked together through kinematic joints such as hinge joints and
sliders. Mechanism design innovation involves the selection of an appropriate
mechanism type (i.e., the number of moving pieces and joints as well as the
pattern of their interconnections) and the determination of key dimensions in
the mechanism needed to generate the desired motions. Once a mechanism type is
selected, the appropriate dimensions can often be determined by solving a system
of polynomial equations. The task of type selection, however, is not so amenable
to mathematical treatment, and requires a level of intuition that may take many
years to develop and is difficult to pass on. This award supports the
development of a set of web-based, data-driven design tools that unify the type
and dimensional synthesis for mechanism design innovation. The planned MOOC
(massive open online course) will help bring these tools to the masses and help
promote interest in science and engineering including high school students and
those from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
bring together the diverse fields of reverse engineering, computational shape
analysis, and design kinematics to develop a data-driven paradigm for kinematic
synthesis of mechanical motion generation devices. The goal is to advance the
science of mechanism design and lead to practical and efficient design tools
capable of solving highly complex motion generation problems faced by machine
designers. Central to this research is the creation of a new computational
framework for simultaneous type and dimensional synthesis of various mechanisms.
This includes (1) the development of unified versions of design equations that
span broad classes of mechanisms; (2) the development of unified algorithms for
data-driven simultaneous type and dimensional synthesis of planar, spherical and
spatial mechanisms, and (3) the creation of a mechanism design portal, which
will allow users to design, store, search, compare, and analyze mechanisms.