* 1563614
* Multi-Physics Models for Proppant Placement in Energy Georeservoirs
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Ingrid Tomac, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 362,435.00

Underground energy technologies are of crucial importance in contemporary
geomechanics, including Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS). EGS use geothermal
energy to produce electricity from hot deep underground permeability-enhanced
rock formations. This project addresses the need for more effective proppant
(granular material that keeps the fractures open) usage during geothermal energy
recovery. Specifically, resolving proppant placement issues will aid
optimization, growth and further development of georeservoirs, and will speed up
transformation of the EGS technology from its current early development stage to
commercial use. This will benefit global renewable energy market and global
sustainable energy delivery. This research has also a potential for contributing
to quantitative understanding of several additional geomechanical issues, such
as mud flows and slurry flows, internal erosion of dams and scouring of soil
around structures. This research project advances the knowledge of fundamental
physics of flow of dense suspensions, and develops new theories that would
improve engineering design for proppant placement into branching hydraulic
fractures with irregular, rough surfaces. The models resulting from this
activity will, for the first time, capture particle agglomeration by accounting
for the interplay between particle-particle interactions and fluid hydrodynamic
forces and the role of fluid, particle and fracture properties. Our
multidisciplinary team, consisting of a geotechnical engineer and a mathematical
modeler, will collaborate with other programs to broaden participation of women
and other underrepresented groups in science through research, engineering and
educational engagements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to better
understand and mitigate the conditions resulting in proppant logging during
proppant-fluid injection into hydraulic fractures. The project products will
lead to efficient proppant placement during permeability enhancement,
potentially reducing its environmental impact. The overarching goal of this
project is to gain quantitative understanding of this phenomenon and requires
development of new mathematical theories. Current practice for predicting
proppant flow and transport relies on empirical relationships developed from
laboratory tests involving large width, smooth, straight slots, appropriate for
use in simplified single-fracture models. However, most hydraulic fractures are
rough and branching, which creates a complex path for the fluid and proppant
transport. The physics of dense slurry flow and transport includes particle-
particle and fluid-particle interactions. Especially for fluids used in proppant
placement, this physics is not properly understood and, hence, not adequately
accounted for in current models. A mathematical model of proppant flow in
realistic fracture networks will be developed, and validated with laboratory-
scale experiments. The experimental component comprises next-generation slot-
flow experiments in 3-D printed fractures using scanned rock surfaces from
fracturing tests. The fractures will be printed with transparent materials,
enabling the use of Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) to track the movement of
proppant particles. The project's theoretical part consists of two interrelated
components, development of a continuum-scale constitutive law that accounts for
particle-particle and particle-fluid interactions, and development of a
computationally efficient algorithm for modeling proppant flow in fractures with
rough walls and (randomly) varying apertures. The continuum-scale models will be
parameterized with parameters reflecting properties of fracture surface's
roughness, average fracture width, and physical and mechanical properties of
fluid and proppant particles. These and other effective model parameters will be
determined from both discrete numerical simulations and slot-flow experiments.
The model will serve as a practical tool for reservoir engineers to ensure the
proper proppant placement in hydraulic fractures and to predict and plan the
reliable permeability enhancement of georeservoirs.