* 1563122
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Circuit Lower Bounds via Projections
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Li-Yang Tan, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 03/31/2019
* USD 331,250.00

Computers play a central role in how we work, play, and communicate with each
other in today's world. It is a truism that computers have grown steadily more
powerful over the years, but equally important (if not more so) than the amount
of sheer computing power available is how efficiently we are able to harness
that power. Finding an efficient strategy to solve a given problem (in the
language of computer science, an efficient algorithm) can often spell the
difference between success and failure. (As an illustrative analogy, consider
the task of assembling a large jigsaw puzzle. A poor choice of strategy such as
a brute-force approach of trying each pair of pieces against each other may be
infeasibly slow, while a cleverer approach such as grouping pieces by their
color can be radically more efficient and lead to a feasible solution.) But in
order to fully understand the abilities of efficient algorithms, it is crucial
to also understand their limits: what is it that efficient algorithms *cannot*
do? The field of "computational complexity", which is the subject of the PIs'
project, seeks to mathematically prove that certain computational problems do
not admit *any* efficient algorithm no matter how long and hard we try to
develop one. Such results can have both practical value (by guiding algorithm
development away from "dead ends") and deep theoretical significance, as they
play a profound role in shaping our fundamental understanding of the phenomenon
of computation.

The 1980s witnessed exciting progress on a range of Boolean circuit models (a
mathematical abstraction of the digital circuits that modern computers are built
from) in computational complexity; researchers succeeded in proving many lower
bounds establishing that various computational problems have no efficient
algorithms in these models. However, further progress slowed significantly after
the 1980s. Many of the landmark results obtained in this era were based on the
"method of random restrictions", which roughly speaking uses probabilistic
arguments to show that Boolean circuits can be dramatically simplified by making
certain random substitutions of constant values for input variables. In this
project the PIs will intensively investigate an extension of the method of
random restrictions which they call the "method of random projections." Rather
than simply substituting constant values for input variables, the random
projection method additionally identifies groups of variables, "projecting" them
all to the same new variable so that they must all take the same value. While
the underlying idea is simple, it turns out that this identification of
variables helps "maintain useful structure" which is extremely useful for
proving lower bounds. In recent work the PIs have successfully used this new
"method of random projections" to solve several decades-old problems in Boolean
circuit lower bounds and related areas (which in some cases had notoriously
resisted progress since the 1980s or 1990s). As the main intellectual goals of
the project, the PIs will continue to develop and apply the method of random
projections to attack important open problems in Boolean circuit complexity.

In addition to the technical goals described above, other central goals of the
project are to educate, communicate, and inspire. The PIs will train graduate
students through research collaboration, disseminate research results through
seminar talks, survey articles and other publications, and continue ongoing
outreach activities aimed at increasing interest in and awareness of theoretical
computer science topics in a broader population, including presentations at
elementary schools.