* 1563826
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Language and Hardware Primitives for Programming the Data Plane in High-Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Hari Balakrishnan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2022
* USD 898,333.00

The evolution of network routers and switches has been driven primarily by
performance. Recently, thanks in part to the emergence of large datacenter
networks, the need for better control over network operations, and the desire
for new features, programmability of routers has become as important as
performance. In response, researchers and practitioners have developed
reconfigurable switching chips with a RISC-inspired pipeline architecture, which
provide some programmability through hardware primitives that can be configured
into a processing pipeline with software directives. Reconfigurable switches are
gaining traction as they perform the same as fixed-function chipsets but with
lower area overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to extend the
state-of-the-art by developing higher-level programming abstractions and traffic
management algorithms for reconfigurable switches. This project will
investigate:&lt;br/&gt;1) a C-like language and an abstract machine representing
modern switches,&lt;br/&gt;2) a compiler to convert the transactional
specification to the pipelined abstract machine, and a&lt;br/&gt;3) Push-In,
First-Out (PIFO) primitive for programmable packet
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make programming high-speed
switches easier and more expressive, which will be useful in datacenters,
enterprises, and service provider networks. Research findings will be
incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate curricula, offering students an
opportunity to implement network protocols in C, a familiar language, but run
them at hardware speeds. The course material will be made widely available
through MIT OpenCourseWare and on the MITx MOOC.