* 1563228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Alignment in the Grammar of Tupari, an Endangered Language of the Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Lenore Grenoble, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 21,310.00

One reason that linguists seek to investigate a wide variety of languages is
because even basic sentences can behave in radically different ways. So while
English is often thought of as having subjects and objects that work with verbs
to create sentences, linguists have shown a much larger range of ways that
subjects behave, especially in terms of their relationships to the verb and the
roles they play in sentences. For example, some subjects are the agent of the
action, such as "She saw the cat," others are patients of the action, as in "The
ball was thrown by the boy," and some subjects are empty placeholders, such as
the "it" in "It is important that you study math." Languages show a wide variety
of approaches for how these subject roles and object roles pattern, and some of
these patterns are quite rare. Documenting and analyzing these kinds of
patterns, which linguists call "alignment", is important for a larger
understanding of the cross-linguistic variation in human grammar. This
dissertation will add deeper insight to the less frequent type of patterns
("typology").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this dissertation project, doctoral
student Adam Roth Singerman will document the grammar of Tupari, an endangered
language spoken by perhaps 300 people in villages in the Rio Branco Indigenous
Reserve, in the Brazilian state of Rondônia. Working closely with the community,
Singerman will first document a wide variety of interesting grammatical
phenomena in Tupari. This theory-neutral description of the language's
morphosyntax will serve as the basis for the first complete reference grammar of
the language. It will also create a foundation for more detailed, theoretical
investigation into several key topics, focusing especially on the grammatical
alignment patterns (both ergative-absolutive and nominative-accusative) which
Tupari shows. Alignment in Tupari behaves in ways that defy previous
generalizations from the literature, so studying it in greater depth is
important for typological research and for syntactic theory. In addition to
creating a comprehensive, complete description of Tupari grammar, Singerman will
also collaborate with the community to develop native literacy materials. The
dissertation will also facilitate comparative analysis of the Tupian family,
drawing from languages of Rondônia that are historically related to Tupari,
including Gavião, Mekens, and Karitiâna.