* 1563234
* Collaborative Research: Geometric Elucidation of Supramolecular Assembly and Allostery with Experimental Validation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Robert McKenna, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 799,990.00

A wide variety of supramolecular structures in nature and engineering--from
viruses to protein crystals to nanomaterials--assemble rapidly and spontaneously
at room temperature with remarkable efficacy. Many assembly processes
incorporate the phenomenon of allostery, where intermolecular interaction is
controlled by binding events at a remote site of one of the interacting
molecules. Despite increasingly sophisticated in vivo, in vitro and in silico
experimental efforts, assembly processes are poorly understood. A more
mathematically rigorous, and mechanistically intuitive theory is crucial not
only to predict and engineer assembly and allostery but also to guide further
time-consuming experimentation. Deeper understanding of assembly, allostery, and
the role of the latter in the former will help control infectious diseases,
assemble viral vectors for gene therapy, design drugs and engineer materials at
the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is natural to expect that geometry and
algorithmic complexity would play a key role in understanding the mechanisms
underlying assembly, since the assembly process must crucially depend on the
intricate shape and volume of the so-called assembly configuration space in
which the molecules move relative to each other as they assemble. Conversely, it
is also natural to expect that new mathematics, algorithms and software will
result from the quest to understand intricate molecular configuration spaces and
perform computations over them. The project's goals include new theorems and
algorithms, their hybridization with prevailing methods, and opensource
software. Progress is expected on long open problems in rigidity, configuration
spaces, distance geometry; algorithms for efficient atlasing, search, sampling,
and volume computation for high dimensional and topologically intricate
configuration spaces; hybrid methods that combine the new algorithms with
prevailing energy-based Monte Carlo simulation; and most significantly, concrete
experimental validation of predictions. The project combines expertise in
geometry and algorithms, experimental structural biology, and computational
chemistry, and is well-suited for bringing the three communities together, for
providing interdisciplinary training for research students as well as for
outreach to schools and the public.