* 1563145
* Mechanisms of Toughening Structural Ceramics by Thermal Engineered Laser Shock Peening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Yongfeng Lu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 348,336.00

With their combination of heat resistance, wear and corrosion resistance, and
high compressive strength, structural ceramics are ideal candidates for many
critical aeronautic, automobile, refractory, and nuclear applications. However,
the fracture toughness of ceramics is very low compared to metals, which reduces
the mechanical reliability. The inability to toughen ceramics has limited their
use in critical engineering applications. This award supports research which
aims to address this critical gap in knowledge by applying to ceramics a laser
processing technique originally devised for metals, to improve the low fracture
toughness and crack sensitivity. This research has the potential to lead to the
widespread use structural ceramics in a variety of applications such as cutting
tools, turbine engines, and armor. The research team will promote engineering
education through outreach programs such as "Sunday with a Scientist"
presentations at the University of Nebraska State Museum, and the partnership
with the McNair Scholars Program to train undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
improve the low fracture toughness and crack sensitivity of structural ceramics
by inhibiting surface-originated crack propagation using a thermally engineered
laser shock peening process. To fulfill the research goal, four objectives will
be completed to (1) develop the process for performing thermally engineered
laser shock peening on ceramics; (2) assess the residual stresses and mechanical
properties of ceramics following laser shock peening; (3) reveal the
microstructure-property relationship of ceramics in the laser shock peening
process; and (4) identify the mechanisms by which laser shock peening toughens
ceramics. The team will apply this process to a variety of structural ceramics
and measure their residual stresses and fracture toughness. The microstructural
evolution of the ceramics will then be characterized using transmission electron
microscopy and focused ion beam techniques. The toughening mechanisms will be
identified through modeling and ex-situ and in-situ electron microscopy methods.
This work will provide new fundamental knowledge of the processing-
microstructure-property relationships in ceramics with respect to the laser
shock peening process. In addition, the results will advance the field by
shedding light on the mechanism of toughening ceramics by controlling the
residual stress state and microstructural changes.