* 1563217
* Collaborative Research: Physical Modeling of Submarine Volcanic Eruption Generated Tsunamis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Hermann Fritz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 659,803.00

Tsunamis are normally associated with submarine earthquakes along subduction
zones, such as the 2011 Japan tsunami. However, there are significant tsunami
sources related to submarine volcanic eruptions. Volcanic tsunamis, like
tectonic tsunamis, typically occur with little warning and can devastate
populated coastal areas at considerable distances from the volcano. There have
been more than 90 volcanic tsunamis accounting for about 25% of all fatalities
directly attributable to volcanic eruptions during the last 250 years. The two
deadliest non-tectonic tsunamis in the past 300 years are due to the 1883
Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia with associated pyroclastic flows and Japan's
Mount Unzen lava dome collapse in 1792. At the source, volcanic tsunamis can
exceed tectonic tsunamis in wave height, but these volcanic tsunamis are subject
to significant wave attenuation and dispersion with propagation distance. There
are at least nine different mechanisms by which volcanoes produce tsunamis. Most
volcanic tsunami waves have been produced by extremely energetic explosive
volcanic eruptions in submarine or near water surface settings, or by flow of
voluminous pyroclastic flows or debris avalanches into the sea. The recent
"orange" alert in July 2015 at the Kick 'em Jenny submarine volcano off Granada
in the Caribbean Sea highlighted the challenges in characterizing the tsunami
waves for a potential submarine volcanic eruption. In this work we will conduct
a suite of experiments and closely linked modeling efforts to quantify the
relationship between source eruptive mechanism and wave generation. This
research will serve assessment and mitigation of coupled volcanic and tsunami
hazards.

The ultimate long-term goal of this research is to transform assessment and
mitigation of the submarine volcanic tsunami hazard through hybrid modeling of
submarine volcanic eruption, tsunami generation and propagation along with the
potential engulfment and caldera formation. Critically important data related to
these submarine tsunami generation processes is lacking in the literature. This
research will compensate for missing data by hybrid modeling of 3D submarine
volcanic eruption tsunami generation scenarios. It will focus on the tsunami
generation by submarine volcanic eruptions and engulfments. A computer
controlled pneumatic submarine volcanic eruption tsunami generator (SVE-TG) will
allow fully 3D physical modeling. The variable eruption velocities of the SVE-TG
mimick relatively slow mud volcanoes and rapid explosive eruptions. The event
analysis will be used to determine the experimental program and the design of
the SVE-TG, which will expand the capabilities of the existing NHERI tsunami
facilities. The experimental program will determine the characteristics of the
dynamic eruptive column and the coupled tsunami generation, propagation and
potential caldera formation. The combined experimental results from the
submarine volcanic eruption will provide a robust validation tool for numerical
models of submarine volcanic eruptions and engulfments. Source characteristics
from submarine volcanic eruption events remain poorly constrained from present
experimental and numerical studies. A historical event will be simulated by
using described coupled volcanic mass flow, eruption and tsunami mechanisms.
This research will transform knowledge and understanding of submarine volcanic
tsunamis and potentially mitigate some of the deadliest non-tectonic tsunami
hazards.