* 1563928
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Detecting and Localizing Spectrum Offenders Using Crowdsourcing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Milind Buddhikot, Nokia of America Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 105,264.00

Software defined radio (SDR) is emerging as a key technology to satisfy rapidly
increasing data rate demands on the nation's mobile wireless networks while
ensuring coexistence with other spectrum users. When SDRs are in the hands and
pockets of average people, it will be easy for a selfish user to alter his
device to transmit and receive data on unauthorized spectrum, or ignore priority
rules, making the network less reliable for many other users. Further, malware
could cause an SDR to exhibit illegal spectrum use without the user's awareness.
The FCC has an enforcement bureau which detects interference via complaints and
extensive manual investigation. The mechanisms used currently for locating
spectrum offenders are time consuming, human-intensive, and expensive. A
violator's illegal spectrum use can be too temporary or too mobile to be
detected and located using existing processes. This project envisions a future
where a crowdsourced and networked fleet of spectrum sensors deployed in homes,
community and office buildings, on vehicles, and in cell phones will detect,
identify, and locate illegal use of the spectrum across a wide areas and
frequency bands. This project will investigate and test new privacy-preserving
crowdsourcing methods to detect and locate spectrum offenders. New tools to
quickly find offenders will discourage users from illegal SDR activity, and
enable recovery from spectrum-offending malware. In short, these tools will
ensure the efficient, reliable, and fair use of the spectrum for network
operators, government and scientific purposes, and wireless users. New course
materials and demonstrations for use in public outreach will be developed on the
topics of wireless communications, dynamic spectrum access, data mining, network
security, and crowdsourcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several challenges
the project will address in the development of methods and tools to find
spectrum offenders. First, the project will enable localization of offenders via
crowdsourced spectrum measurements that do not decode the transmitted data and
thus preserve users? data and identity privacy. Second, the crowd-sourced
sensing strategy will implicitly adapt to the density of traffic and explicitly
adapt to focus on suspicious activity. Next, the sensing strategy will stay
within an energy budget, and have incentive models to encourage participation,
yet have sufficient spatial and temporal coverage to provide high statistical
confidence in detecting illegal activity. Finally, the developed methods will be
evaluated using both simulation and extensive experiments, to quantify
performance and provide a rich public data set for other researchers.