* 1563372
* A Novel Dynamically Coupled Storm Surge Hazard-Infrastructure Model for Effective Real-Time Risk-Informed Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Ethan Kubatko, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 502,532.00

Coastal areas in the US face substantial risk from storm surge. Data from
modeling efforts can provide crucial information to decision makers to act
against these risks, but available models are limited in scope. Current
fragility-based models for flood defense systems are primarily focused on a
single mode of failure without consideration of causal relationships and
temporal correlations among various failure modes. Failure assessment is treated
as a snapshot in time neglecting the time evolution of failure processes. The
adoption of surge hydrographs in current methods to independently determine
failure probabilities from reliability models neglects the impact of the
performance of geo-structures on spatio-temporal surge response. Moreover, we
lack an accurate conceptualization of how this informational shortfall impairs
decision makers in making critical judgments about storm surge risk and
infrastructure investment. This work will provide for the development of the
next generation in storm surge and fragility models and will provide for an
experimental validation and assessment of the models' effects on decision
making, as follows: 1) Development of an adaptive-resolution storm surge model
that responds to the changing state of flood protection systems; 2) Derivation
of novel time-dependent, multi-dimensional fragility models of geo-structures,
fully integrated with the storm surge model; 3) Development and utilization of
human-in-the-loop experimentation to validate and test the effects of these
models on real-time decision making, and 4) Creation of enhanced educational and
research opportunities for students and teachers, along with dissemination of
research knowledge to critical stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
performed under this project will have a significant impact on the development
of the next generation of storm surge models that are fully integrated with
time-dependent fragility models to improve forecasting capabilities of flooding
scenarios. The research will also improve understanding of how decision makers
utilize storm risk assessment information to make critical decisions.
Ultimately, this research will lead to more informed decisions about
catastrophic risk and infrastructure failure (e.g., evacuation decisions, search
and rescue operations, infrastructure investment, and pre-, during, and post-
event planning). The educational plan will provide for integrated new curriculum
in infrastructure modeling, resilience and risk analysis. Moreover, the
educational plan will enhance the self-efficacy of K8 teachers to teach
engineering in classrooms and help engineering students to develop pedagogical
skills. Results will be disseminated to (and validated with) key federal and
regional stakeholders (e.g., Dept. of Homeland Security, FEMA, US Coast Guard)
as well as industry partners. The results from this project will provide a
significant improvement in storm surge modeling through the development of a
novel, dynamically coupled modeling system consisting of hydrodynamic and
fragility model components. The stochastic finite difference models combined
with machine learning techniques will enable generation of a novel class of
multi-dimensional fragility surfaces that will enhance our understanding of
various failure processes and characterize time evolution of failure
probabilities. The coupled surge/fragility model will adapt the mesh resolution
in response to changing conditions of the flood protection systems, resulting in
improved forecasting capabilities. The experimental analysis will provide for an
assessment of how these modeling capabilities improve real-time decision making.