* 1563714
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Econometric Inference and Algorithmic Learning in Games
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Eva Tardos, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 03/31/2022
* USD 701,267.00

Classical work on economic analysis of the interactions of strategic agents
starts with players that have valuations for outcomes, such as items or sets of
items they may win in an auction, and analyzes equilibria of the resulting game,
where players optimize their strategies to improve their outcomes. To
empirically test the prediction of such a theory, one needs to recover
valuations of the players. Most econometric methods used to recover valuations
rely on the assumption that the game is at a stable equilibrium (known as a Nash
equilibrium). It is not surprising that such a framework provides a poor fit to
the data in changing or new markets. At the same time, there is a growing
theoretical literature in algorithmic game theory that allows one to study games
where the game is not at a stable equilibrium. The PIs' program focuses on
developing a methodology for inference without relying on the standard notions
of the stability of outcomes in dynamically changing environments, such as
online auctions. The goal of this project is to develop a theory that allows the
researchers to take advantage of new dynamic data sets from electronic markets
available on the Internet, and using the findings from the data to further the
underlying theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of the project are intended
to enable to application and development of Data Science tools for analysis and
prediction in non-stable and new market settings. This will affect a broad
community of empirical researchers such as market analysts, by allowing them to
study economic markets that have previously been considered hard or impossible
to analyze.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program is based on using the
theoretical results from algorithmic game theory on game outcomes when players
use no-regret learning rules and combine these results with econometric
techniques that allow one to estimate the best responses of players from the
data using a set of non-parametric estimation techniques. The goal of the
program, which PIs initiated in a paper in the ACM Conference on Economics and
Computation in 2014, is to combine these approaches to develop a set of analytic
tools for empirical analysis of games in non-equilibrium settings. Algorithmic
game theory helps one to characterize the properties of outcomes in games (such
as approximating factors for revenue and welfare in various cases), where the
game is not at a stable equilibrium, assuming players use strategies that
guarantee a certain no-regret property in place of the stronger equilibrium best
response assumption. The project is aimed at combining the insights from
algorithmic game theory with econometric methods to enable the analysis of
dynamic markets. The intellectual merit of the project is twofold: (i) providing
a methodology for inference in games (i.e., estimation of the payoff functions
of players and the distribution of player types) in cases where the players use
general classes of learning strategies; (ii) providing tools for the analysis of
outcomes in non-equilibrium environments, including the analysis of statistical
properties of the outcomes constructed using inferred preferences and types.