* 1563477
* Layerless Additive Manufacturing of 3D Objects with Wide Solid Cross Sections
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jie Xu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 295,310.00

Additive manufacturing, also known as three-dimensional (3D) printing, is a
class of manufacturing technologies that make 3D objects by accumulating rather
than removing material (e.g. machining). Most current additive manufacturing
technologies accumulate material in a layer-by-layer process. Recently,
layerless additive manufacturing techniques based on vat processing have been
suggested. Advantages include faster processing speed, smoother surfaces and
better part quality using layerless techniques. However, processing speed and
part quality are critical challenges for producing parts with relatively wide
solid cross sections. This award supports fundamental research to provide new
knowledge for layerless additive manufacturing of arbitrary 3D objects with wide
solid cross sections. The establishment of a fast, layerless additive
manufacturing process would enable the production of part shapes and sizes
beyond trusses or shells. The research involves multiple disciplines of physics,
surface science, microfluidics and manufacturing technology and will contribute
new knowledge to advanced manufacturing. The research will have significant
impact on a large number of minority students and enhance STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous Liquid Interface Production is a
layerless additive manufacturing technology based on vat photopolymerization
that can achieve build speeds 25 to 100 times faster than layer-by-layer
photopolymerization. However, the horizontal distance over which the
replenishment polymer can travel before polymerization occurs is limited, which
prohibits printing of parts with large cross-sections. This grant will establish
a fundamental understanding of the manufacturing process by investigating the
resin flow-curing dynamics. The research team will perform liquid-gel-solid
multi-phase modeling to understand the resin flow, explore new window designs to
accelerate resin replenishment, and establish new light delivery strategies to
coordinate resin flow and curing processes. This research will test the
hypothesis that the integration of a textured window and a gradient light
delivery strategy will enable continuous printing of arbitrary objects with wide
solid cross sections.