* 1563095
* NeTS: CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Enabling Flexible and High Performance Big Data Analytics Over Geo-Distributed Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Mosharaf Chowdhury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Large organizations and small enterprises alike leverage datacenters across the
globe to offer Internet services to their users. These sites routinely gather
data pertaining to end user activities to provide better services, and they
collect server monitoring logs and performance counters to ensure uninterrupted
service. Although fast, efficient, and cost-effective analyses of these large
datasets can significantly improve users' quality of experience and enable novel
applications, the wide area network (WAN) that connects the datacenters poses a
considerable challenge: because WAN bandwidth is limited and expensive, and WAN
latency is high and variable, both the performance and timeliness of analytics
are affected by the WAN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build a new
WAN-aware big data stack customized for flexible geo-distributed data analytics.
The project will not impose any constraints on the set of queries that can be
issued, and it will support a variety of performance objectives including
obtaining timely responses, minimizing batch completion times, or using minimal
bandwidth. To account for unpredictable and fine-timescale changes to WAN
conditions and to enable coordination among the actions taken by different
layers of the analytics stack, this project will enable holistic, cross-layer
visibility and optimizations. It will incorporate awareness of the geo-
distributed setting in the stack's upper layers (e.g., query optimization) and
of application-level objectives in the lower layers (e.g., networking). This
will result in a radical re-factoring of the API and interfaces between query
optimization, query execution, resource negotiation, wide-area storage, and
network routing/scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts from this
project will be incorporated into existing open source big data stacks, making
the research outcomes broadly available for public reuse. The experimental
harnesses will be made available to ensure repeatability and to foster follow up
research. The research outcomes will guide industry evolution as the industry
slowly shifts from single-datacenter to geo-distributed settings. The project
has a substantial educational component involving the introduction of new
courses on big data systems at both graduate and undergraduate levels that will
involve hands-on exercises with state-of-the-art big data software, and it will
reach out to high-school students, women, and underrepresented minorities
through big data boot camps.