* 1563779
* Variables Influencing Increased Agricultural Yields in Areas of Socioeconomic Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Tad Mutersbaugh, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 138,966.00

One striking feature of contemporary agricultural production is the rapidly
increasing number of women-headed farms registered in national agricultural
databases and with small producer organizations, such as the ones producing for
fair trade markets. While it is clear that women are increasingly represented in
these formal registries and producer groups, it is less certain that this trend
is correlated with women's increased access to secure land holdings, credit, and
agricultural services; heightened participation in local governance; or
increased economic decision-making power at home. According to the UN Food and
Agriculture Organization, if women and men had access to the same resources,
agricultural yields could increase 20-30%. In addition, many environmental
conservation and global climate change mitigation programs are based upon the
idea that farmers will undertake activities such as planting trees or protecting
endangered species, yet relatively few studies have assessed whether and how
women farmers will respond to these environmental initiatives. The expanding
number of women farmers across the globe will certainly have far-reaching
implications for policies related to both poverty alleviation and environmental
management. Given the importance of stable agricultural livelihoods to North
American issues such as migration, food security, environmental conservation,
and drug enforcement, a better understanding of women and agriculture is in our
vital interests.

Dr. Sarah Lyon and Dr. Tad Mutersbaugh of the University of Kentucky explore
whether activities associated with EQ-GVCs (ethical quality global value chains)
correlate with measures of gender equity. This research will be conducted in
highland coffee producing areas of Mexico where the percentage of women farmers
participating in certified organic and fairtrade coffee production has increased
from just 9% to well over 40% in a little over a decade. Oaxaca is also marked
by extensive cultural and organizational heterogeneity. The project explores two
questions: First, it assesses how this increase affects gender equity in local
governance and whether it increases women's land holdings and their access to
credit and agricultural training. Second, it examines how women farm, asking
whether women have different practices and expectations in comparison with men.
To answer these questions, researchers will survey coffee plots; interview both
women and men farmers; and observe and participate in activities related to
coffee production, producer organizations, and community life. Researchers will
also interview coffee buyers, donors, and coffee industry participants in order
to better understand the links between gendered production practices and larger
market transformations. The research will help identify barriers to women's
participation in agriculture with the goal of informing future policies and
programs to promote gender equity and women's access to productive resources.
This would not only help explore methods for increasingly agricultural output in
developing countries, but also assess the scale at which these strategies
enhance the life prospects of future generations.