* 1563428
* RUI/Collaborative Research: Framework for Earthquake-Resilient Design of Tall Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Vesna Terzic, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Urban areas are experiencing significant increase in construction of tall
buildings to meet the demands of their rapidly increasing population. It is
projected that 70 percent of the world's population will live in urban areas by
2050. The resiliency of tall buildings during and after a natural hazard event
plays a vital role in maintaining economic and social stability of an urban
region. In the case of earthquake hazard, current design methodologies for tall
buildings focus only on preventing loss of human lives and building collapse,
whereas damage-impaired losses are not being considered nor limited through the
design. Recent earthquakes in Chile, Japan, and New Zealand highlighted that due
to the great number of building occupants, seismic impacts would not be
constrained within tall building footprints, but would also affect the community
as a whole. To alleviate such earthquake consequences, this research will
investigate an integrated system-level framework and metrics essential for
understanding and modeling the earthquake-resilient design of tall buildings
(e.g., repair losses, downtime, resiliency index, and expected annual loss). The
research will focus on the development, validation, and integration of novel
simulation tools and loss/recovery models that will envelope interaction between
soil, foundation, structural, and nonstructural building components to provide a
methodology for identifying engineering design requirements that will enable
resiliency. Given the diverse student body of the participating universities,
this project will enhance student experiences, particularly those of
underrepresented groups, by active participation in a multi-campus
interdisciplinary research project and collaborations with researchers and
engineers in the U.S and globally.

This research will focus on tall buildings that utilize reinforced concrete core
walls as the lateral load-resisting system, as it is currently the preferred
system in construction of tall buildings. To develop the system-level framework,
the research program will target four major areas that are essential to
addressing the critical gaps in current simulation, assessment, and
damage/loss/recovery estimation capabilities: 1) development and validation of a
novel, three-dimensional, analytical model for reinforced concrete structural
walls that integrates shear-flexural interaction and failure mechanisms, 2)
evaluation of available soil models for simulating soil behavior and soil-
foundation-structure interaction effects of tall buildings, 3) development of
functionality limit states, downtime, and recovery models for tall buildings,
and 4) integration of all framework components into a robust innovative tool for
resilient-based design. The framework components will be validated based on test
data available in the literature and archived in the Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure data repository or in other data bases, and on data
collected through earthquake reconnaissance reports and interviews with
engineers, public officials, contractors, owners, and insurers. The framework
will be demonstrated on a tall reinforced concrete core wall building located in
an urban region with high seismicity. The framework will be applicable to all
types of lateral-load resisting systems for tall buildings, including new and
existing construction. The developed framework components will tackle the
aforementioned critical gaps and provide valuable data sets to advance the
natural hazard mitigation of civil infrastructure. This project will contribute
to research and engineering communities by implementing the framework components
into widely available computational platforms, disseminating research results
using web-based tools, involving professionals and researchers in earthquake
engineering during the project, and disseminating educational materials.