* 1563697
* TWC: Medium: Automating Countermeasures and Security Evaluation Against Software Side-channel Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Aidong Ding, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

Side-channel attacks (SCA) have been a realistic threat to various cryptographic
implementations that do not feature dedicated protection. While many effective
countermeasures have been found and applied manually, they are application-
specific and labor intensive. In addition, security evaluation tends to be
incomplete, with no guarantee that all the vulnerabilities in the target system
have been identified and addressed by such manual countermeasures. This SaTC
project aims to shift the paradigm of side-channel attack research, and proposes
to build an automation framework for information leakage analysis, multi-level
countermeasure application, and formal security evaluation against software
side-channel attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed framework provides
common sound metrics for information leakage, methodologies for automatic
countermeasures, and formal and thorough evaluation methods. The approach
unifies power analysis and cache-based timing attacks into one framework. It
defines new metrics of information leakage and uses them to automatically
identify possible leakage of a given cryptosystem at an early stage with no
implementation details. The conventional compilation process is extended along
the new dimension of optimizing for security, to generate side-channel resilient
code and ensure its secure execution at run-time. Side-channel security is
guaranteed to be at a certain confidence level with formal methods. The three
investigators on the team bring complementary expertise to this challenging
interdisciplinary research, to develop the advanced automation framework and the
associated software tools, metrics, and methodologies. The outcome significantly
benefits security system architects and software developers alike, in their
quest to build verifiable SCA security into a broad range of applications they
design. The project also builds new synergy among fundamental statistics, formal
methods, and practical system security. The automation tools, when introduced in
new courses developed by the PIs, help improving students' hands-on experience
greatly. The project also leverages the experiential education model of
Northeastern University to engage undergraduates, women, and minority students
in independent research projects.