* 1563991
* SHF: Medium: Spectral Profiling: Understanding Software Performance without Code Instrumentation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Alenka Zajic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 850,000.00

Dynamic analyses such as profiling program execution are widely used because
they can measure various aspects of the runtime behavior of a software system
and have a wide range of applications in software engineering. These analyses
are typically carried out by adding probes to the software, which imposes
space/time overhead, is intrusive, and can negatively affect software behavior.
To address these issues, we propose a novel approach that allows for analyzing
software behavior accurately and non-intrusively by leveraging the
electromagnetic emissions produced by a computer as it executes code. Our
approach can collect runtime information about a software system by simply
placing a device next to the system. It can thus not only enable profiling for a
variety of software systems for which this was previously impossible (e.g.,
embedded systems), but also benefit dynamic analyses in more traditional
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine various machine
learning and static analysis techniques to build likely electromagnetic
signatures for different code patterns, investigate which code granularity
provides the most accurate matching of electromagnetic emissions to code, and
explore adaptive and hierarchical techniques for performing this matching at
runtime. This research is inherently interdisciplinary and promises to break new
ground and have broader impact in several combined areas, including software
engineering, programming languages, computer architecture, and electromagnetics.
Unlike previous work on electromagnetic emissions analysis, our approach will
collect runtime information that is fine-grained enough to measure the execution
of short sequences of statements, if not individual instructions. This will let
us apply our approach to several software engineering tasks. In fact, if
successful, this research will both provide a solid conceptual foundation, which
other researchers will be able to leverage, and investigate a set of specific
techniques and tools that build on this foundation to support tasks such as
zero-overhead performance measurement, debugging, and anomaly detection.