* 1563956
* CSR: Medium:Combating Distributed Concurrency Bugs in Cloud Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Shan Lu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 07/31/2021
* USD 799,977.00

DCBA: Distributed Concurrency Bugs Annihilation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software
systems are getting more complex, creating reliability issues that cause
millions of dollars in economic loss. Beyond local software, distributed cloud
software infrastructures (i.e., cloud systems) have emerged as a dominant
backbone for many modern applications. Users expect high reliability from these
systems, but guaranteeing their reliability proves to be challenging. Cloud
systems run on hundreds/thousands of machines, execute complicated distributed
protocols, and face a variety of hardware faults. This combination makes cloud
systems prone to distributed concurrency bugs, which can cause catastrophic
failures such as data loss, downtimes, and data loss/inconsistencies. This
Distributed Concurrency Bugs Annihilation (DCBA) project will address this
important issue and bring many direct benefits to the society; users from many
areas (science, healthcare, business, education, military, and government)
increasingly use cloud computing services and demand high availability and
predictability. Combating distributed concurrency bugs is an important
ingredient to such success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed concurrency bugs
are caused by non-deterministic order of distributed events such as message
arrivals, faults, and reboots. This project, Distributed Concurrency Bugs
Annihilation (DCBA), will find, remove, and prevent buggy interleavings of
concurrent distributed events with the development of four approaches: (1) full,
automated, and deep distributed system model checkers, (2) fast inference,
detection, testing and fixing of order violations, (3) runtime statistical
debugging, prevention, and recovery, and (4) design advancements that reduce the
possibilities of distributed concurrency bugs to appear. This DCBA project will
advance the state of cloud dependability research. Existing literature on
distributed systems reliability focuses on monitoring, post-mortem debugging,
deterministic record and replay, and verifiable programming language frameworks.
The DCBA project will introduce advancements to approaches related to model
checking, bug detection, bug fixing, runtime debugging, prevention and recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As more organizations build more distributed systems on
farms of machines and services in cloud era, it is time for the dependability
community to address distributed concurrency bugs in systematic and
comprehensive manners. The DCBA initiative will have a profound impact to future
distributed cloud systems.