* 1563551
* Collaborative Research: Multifunctional Structural Panel for Energy Efficiency and Multi-Hazards Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Jialai Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 01/31/2021
* USD 312,858.00

The building sector in the United States is responsible for approximately 40
percent of the primary energy consumption and carbon dioxide emission, and the
construction of lighter structures results in higher flexibility, thereby
increasing wind-induced vibrations, which may create discomfort and frequent
inoperability. It is critical to investigate alternative structural technologies
capable of improving energy efficiency and maintaining serviceability. This
study re-thinks conventional structural load bearing panels into multifunctional
components to generate multiple benefits: (1) significantly increasing the
energy efficiency of the building; (2) enabling high efficiency use of the
renewable energy; (3) providing ancillary services of operation reserve to the
power grid; (4) paring onsite renewable generation (e.g., solar and wind) with
energy storage; (5) mitigating natural hazards to ensure serviceability. The
potential societal impacts of the environmental-conscious and resilient building
are substantial. The education and outreach plan will consist of: (1)
integrating research within the undergraduate classrooms through the development
of teaching modules and special topics lectures; (2) educating high school
students and teachers on the topic of building energy, and teaching and training
undergraduate students by directly involving them in the research project; and
(3) broadening the participation of under-represented groups by leveraging
resources at both research institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Advances in
fundamental knowledge will enable to create a multifunctional panel: (1)
investigating how Phase Change Materials (PCMs) can be integrated into
construction materials (concrete) without significantly altering structural
strength; (2) investigating the synergy of combining PCM and a capillary system
within a structural panel to significantly enhance energy storage and vibration
mitigation capabilities; (3) studying the integration of the multifunctional
panel to eliminate ductwork and heat transfer terminals, support a power grid
system with high penetrations of as-available renewable energy sources, and
dissipate vibrations through inertia. Research tasks will be centered around
three hypotheses. (1) PCMs can be integrated into concrete through
microencapsulation using low-cost and highly thermal-conductive hollow fly ash
particles to enhance the thermal energy storage capacity without significant
adverse effect on strength. (2) The synergy of combining PCM and a capillary
system into a concrete structural panel can significantly enhance the energy
performance by amplifying the efficiency of the energy storage of PCM and
directly using low-grade energy, such as ground water, to balance supply and
demand. (3) A capillary system embedded in a structural panel can be leveraged
through a series of controlled valves to provide vibration mitigation
capabilities versus large deflections and vibrations.