* 1563271
* Modeling and Control for Laser Based Additive Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Panagiotis Michaleris, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 05/31/2019
* USD 277,304.00

Additive manufacturing, also called 3D printing, is well known for its ability
to produce complex shapes, with great reductions in manufacturing time and
material over traditional machining. This project focuses on additive
manufacturing processes that use a powerful laser to melt a pool of metal powder
onto a growing work piece. Inaccurate knowledge of the temperature in the
vicinity of the melt pool can lead to use of too much or too little laser
energy, and thence to errors in the dimensions of the final part. The complex
geometry of 3D-printed components can make accurate knowledge of temperature
difficult. This project studies the use of feedforward control to address this
problem, by augmenting real-time sensor measurement of the melt pool with z
family of pre-computed thermal models representing the part as it is formed.
This strategy anticipates necessary changes in input thermal energy, and thereby
allows much higher accuracy than responding to errors only after they occur.
Results from this project will have potential applications ranging from
customized medical implants to aerospace fuel nozzles to turbine blade repair.
This project will advance the state of the art in additive manufacturing for
metal components. The project also supports recruitment of women and minorities
through university-level initiatives, specifically Penn State's Women in Science
and Engineering Research (WISER)and Minority Undergraduate Research Experience
(MURE) programs, and curriculum development for an additive manufacturing summer
camp for high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its huge potential,
additive manufacturing has not yet achieved widespread adoption in industry due
to multiple challenges in the process, including accuracy of part geometry,
mechanical and material properties of the processed part, and surface roughness.
To resolve these issues, fundamental understanding and advanced technologies for
modeling and control are in demand to improve the accuracy and process stability
of additive manufacturing. This project investigates novel modeling
methodologies and control algorithms for laser-based additive manufacturing
processes, specifically for directed energy deposition. Intellectual
significance offered by the research to the additive manufacturing scientific
community include: 1) A physics-based, control-oriented dynamic model that
accounts for 3D part geometry and thermal history. This model will have high
fidelity yet still be amenable for real-time multivariable control; and 2) A
nonlinear multi-input, multi-output control paradigm. This control paradigm
takes advantage of the special nonlinear structure of the additive manufacturing
process dynamics without resorting to linearization, and also addresses
constraints for input/state constraints, performance optimization and robustness
with respect to uncertain model parameters. Experimental tests will be performed
by the research team to evaluate the effectiveness of the modeling and control
methodologies.