* 1563528
* Spatially-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy of individual semiconductor nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Masaru Kuno, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 513,705.00

In this project, funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Masaru Kuno of the University of
Notre Dame is developing an instrument and related techniques to conduct
chemically-specific single particle infrared absorption measurements. The
development of a single particle mid-infrared absorption microscope advances the
ultrasensitive quantitative identification of samples. Potential uses include
the detection of single virus particles, which is an important research topic
given its close connection to human health and homeland security. An outreach
program developed by Professor Masaru Kuno for area middle schools allows
students and teachers to explore infrared imaging using low cost heat imagers
now available for smartphones. This smartphone application enables the students
to explore and see the practical uses of blackbody radiation (light that is
emitted depending on a body's temperature).

Basic science problems to be addressed by Professor Kuno include investigating
the intraband and intersubband transitions of individual semiconductor
nanostructures. This research focuses on the use of Single-particle infrared
absorption measurements. Such meansurements are distinguished from existing
single particle microscopies in that they operate in the mid-infrared
fingerprint region and exceed the optical diffraction limit. The infrared
technique is multimodal and enables both visible and infrared single particle
absorption measurements. The technique is inherently fast and can rapidly
acquire large area infrared images (centimeters) as well as spectra. The
infrared absorption measurements can ultimately be applied to specimens under
native conditions without the need for additional sample enrichment or
purification. This research is an important given the potential applications of
the materials in infrared photodection. Potential uses include the detection of
single virus particles, which is an important research topic given its close
connection to human health and homeland security.