* 1563921
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Novel Optimal Control for Co-Adaptation of Human and Powered Lower Limb Prosthesis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Jennie Si, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,765.00

Emerging powered lower limb prostheses hold great promise for restoring
normative locomotion in amputees. However, these robotic devices currently lack
inter- and intra-wearer adaptability to cope with wearers' physical variations
and changes. Frequent manual and heuristic adjustment in clinics is required,
which limits the practical use of these advanced prostheses. A new generation of
prosthesis control that is intelligent, adaptable, and interactive is needed to
better support walking function and improve the quality of life of lower limb
amputees. The PIs' long-term research goal is to create bionic legs that can
adapt to the individual amputee's physical and cognitive capabilities,
coordinate with the wearer's movement and intent, adjust to changing
environments, and essentially restore the full function of patients with lower
limb impairments. To this end, the PIs' objective in this project is to create a
novel optimal control framework for these prostheses. They will systematically
address the challenge of supporting automatic adaptation to the wearer's
physical capability while achieving desired gait performance for the integrated
amputee-prosthesis system. And they will provide a preliminary design and
evaluation for an interactive interface that would allow wearers to personalize
prosthesis control safely and easily. Project outcomes will open up a new
frontier of wearable robotics and lay the foundation for clinical translations
of these innovative devices, which will impact not only the prosthetics and
orthotics industry but also the robotics community by providing new knowledge
relating to human-robot interaction, the biomechanics and neuromotor control
community by elucidating the control mechanism of amputee locomotion, and
healthcare in general by providing innovative and cost-effective prosthesis
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new amputee-prosthesis performance-based
framework for control of powered lower limb prostheses which this work will
introduce represents a departure from existing approaches that mainly focus on
design for the prosthesis (a local machine), in that it adopts a global approach
by accounting for co-adaptation between amputees and prostheses in order to
provide optimal, personalized assistance based on wearers' physical conditions.
The PIs will use approximate dynamic programming (ADP) to achieve the global
control goal. Such innovative use of ADP will provide an opportunity to
demonstrate its optimal adaptive control capability in a new test domain of co-
adaptive robotic prosthesis, a unique and significant challenge only seen in
human wearable robotics but not in lifeless robots. The ADP scheme is based on
approximation and learning that alleviate problems associated with the
requirement of accurately modeling wearers' neuromuscular control and dynamics
that is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve. Additionally, the PIs will
conduct an experimental investigation on subjects with transfemoral amputations
of the interactions between amputees and prostheses, including evaluations of
the compensatory strategies of amputees, and discrepancy assessment between
subjective (human) and objective (machine) preferences in prosthesis control.