* 1563315
* Mechanics of Locomotion with Nonholonomic Constraints in a Fluid
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Phanindra Tallapragada, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports fundamental research into the interactions of a fish-like
body with a surrounding fluid, and the ways in which motion of the body can
transfer energy and momentum for propulsion and maneuverability. The research
builds upon recent results that show how the complex dynamics of certain types
of fish-like bodies can be captured in the form of a relatively tractable
nonholonomic constraint, that is, an algebraic relationship between the
velocities of different parts of the system. This project will generalize and
extend the consequences of this result, and clarify the variables that govern
this class of fluid-structure interaction. Robotic platforms will be built to
experimentally validate the theoretical insights. The ability to precisely
maneuver small aquatic robots has many important applications, including the
inspection of underwater structures, environmental monitoring, and underwater
exploration. The results of this project will lead to improved design of aquatic
robots with different shapes, sizes and propulsion mechanisms. The natural
appeal of fish-like robots will be leveraged to recruit members of
underrepresented groups into engineering, to develop attractive independent
research projects for undergraduate students, and to demonstrate and motivate
key aspects of fluid mechanics in undergraduate courses. The project provides a
rich multidisciplinary research education and training environment,
demonstrating synergy between subjects, including fluid mechanics, nonlinear
dynamics, geometric mechanics, and control theory, which are rarely connected at
the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motion of a fish-like body in
water is governed by the changes in its shape, the creation of vorticity and the
interaction of the body with such vorticity. The creation of vorticity imposes a
nonholonomic constraint on the motion of the body. The primary aim of the
research supported by this award is to create a mathematical framework that can
illuminate the interplay of abstract shape variables and nonholonomic
constraints on the motion of a body in water. Shape variables will take form of
internal masses and rotors. The constraints in the form of vorticity creation
will be modeled using discrete vortex approximations. Such models with the novel
interpretation of vortex shedding as a nonholonomic constraint are well suited
to understand and emulate the efficiency and maneuverability of fish, to
investigate gaits and to design control algorithms for an aquatic robot. Aquatic
robots propelled and maneuvered entirely via internal rotors or moving masses
will be designed and provide a platform to validate the theoretical results.