* 1563754
* GOALI: Magnetic Measurements to Characterize Chemistry and Structure in Nanoscale Doped Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* stefano spagna, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 725,592.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The addition of small amounts of metal atoms, or
dopants, to ceramics frequently leads to remarkable property changes that can
impact performance in applications such as fuel cells, gas separation, and
photocatalysis. The reasons for these changes are believed to be related to the
type and state of the dopant and its spatial distribution, all of which
influence the material's response to a magnetic field. That response means every
material exhibits a unique magnetic signature, and thus, magnetism may be used
to understand the roles of dopants in ceramics. The PIs are benchmarking and
modeling the magnetic signatures, with the ultimate goal to design new materials
with exceptional properties. The collaboration with Quantum Design, a leading
manufacturer of magnetometers, means innovations in metrology can be closely
coupled with materials discoveries. Additionally, Quantum Design engages
students through internships. As part of the project, students of the Colorado
Center for Advanced Ceramics are organizing and running an annual on-campus
conference in ceramics with participation from industry, university faculty, and
members of the local community. The research has broad impact in many energy-
related applications where challenges exist in understanding and controlling
nanoscale phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This combined
university-industry research project is pioneering magnetometry measurement
techniques for nanoscale doped oxides and is utilizing these techniques to
assess material behavior. The main scientific objective is to correlate the
magnetic response of ceramic materials with nanoscale structural and
compositional features such as size and distribution of second phases, solid
solution arrangement including ion clustering and segregation, and dopant
valence state. From the sensitivity of magnetometry to differentiate the various
nanoscale structures, a particularly novel aspect is derived, namely that it is
possible to study the initial stages of nucleation and growth of the metal
dopant within the ceramic host during internal reduction. The behavior of
dopants is being examined in two technologically important transition metal-
doped oxide systems: yttria-stablized zirconia (YSZ) and yttria-doped barium
zirconate-barium cerate perovskites (BZY-BCY). A suite of characterization
tools, including a novel in situ Raman spectroscopy-magnetometry technique,
enables kinetic and thermodynamic based descriptions of internal reduction and
oxidation. The research lays the foundation to advance the state of nanoscale
metrology for magnetometry. Graduate students are being engaged and trained in
the potentially transformative magnetometry characterization tools under
development.