* 1563537
* GOALI: Core/Shell Sinterable Advanced Ceramic Materials Using Particle Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Jennifer Walsh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2021
* USD 383,832.00

A recent Department of Energy analysis concluded that the adoption of light-
emitting diodes (LEDs) in 2013 was correlated with a one-year energy cost
savings of $1.8 billion, which is less than 5 percent of the expected savings
with complete adoption of LEDs. A key driver in the cost and performance of LEDs
is the heat sink as LED lumen efficiency decreases by 0.3-0.5 percent for each
1°C increase in operating temperature. However, the costs of manufacturing the
desired heat sink material, aluminum nitride (AlN), are substantial as a result
of the high sintering temperature required to form dense AlN parts and the
proclivity for AlN to degrade in the presence of water. The benefits of atomic
layer deposition (ALD) for densification and processing of AlN are expected to
be transformative in enabling lower-cost production of AlN parts and present a
domestic route to manufacturing ceramic thermal packages, an area currently
dominated by foreign manufacturers. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) research program will promote collaboration between
university and industry and enable the education of both graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The densification of AlN with
yttria (Y2O3) currently requires temperatures in excess of 1700°C, mandating the
use of expensive graphite furnaces. Through ALD of the sintering aid, Y2O3, onto
AlN substrate particles, it is expected that a conformal and pinhole-free Y2O3
film will protect the AlN particles from degradation by water, allowing
processing in water instead of more expensive solvent-based processing. Further,
the precisely thick and uniform ALD Y2O3 films around primary AlN substrate
particles, are expected to provide for beneficial liquid phase sintering in the
intergranular region of the densifying matrix - promoting low temperature
densification. A decrease in densification temperature not only lowers the
energy input required to form dense AlN parts but may also enable the use of
more inexpensive alumina furnaces in lieu of graphite furnaces. For gel-casting,
the ALD Y2O3 coatings will also simplify the processing of colloidal gels since
only one surface (i.e. Y2O3) will be present, not two - AlN and Y2O3. The
uniform nature of ALD coatings should be a substantial improvement over
conventional ball milling techniques where the incorporation of Y2O3 is not
uniform with respect to each AlN particle, leading to inconsistencies in
densification behavior and the properties of dense AlN parts. The combination of
AlN particles resistant to hydrolysis and lower temperature densification may
dramatically decrease the costs of manufacturing the AlN heat sink and thus,
LEDs.