* 1563612
* Achieving Sustainable Urban Buildings with Seismically Resilient Mass Timber Core Wall and Floor System
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Peter Dusicka, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2022
* USD 410,000.00

The urgency in increasing growth in densely populated urban areas, reducing the
carbon footprint of new buildings, and targeting rapid return to occupancy
following disastrous earthquakes has created a need to reexamine the structural
systems of mid- to high-rise buildings. To address these sustainability and
seismic resiliency needs, the objective of this research is to enable an all-
timber material system in a way that will include architectural as well as
structural considerations. Utilization of mass timber is societally important in
providing buildings that store, instead of generate, carbon and increase the
economic opportunity for depressed timber-producing regions of the country. This
research will focus on buildings with core walls because those building types
are some of the most common for contemporary urban mid- to high-rise
construction. The open floor layout will allow for commercial and mixed-use
occupancies, but also will contain significant technical knowledge gaps
hindering their implementation with mass timber. The research plan has been
formulated to fill these gaps by: (1) developing suitable mid- to high-rise
archetypes with input from multiple stakeholders, (2) conducting parametric
system-level seismic performance investigations, (3) developing new critical
components, (4) validating the performance with large-scale experimentation, and
(5) bridging the industry information gaps by incorporating teaching modules
within an existing educational and outreach framework. Situated in the heart of
a timber-producing region, the multi-disciplinary team will utilize the local
design professional community with timber experience and Portland State
University's recently implemented Green Building Scholars program to deliver
technical outcomes that directly impact the surrounding
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research outcomes will advance knowledge at
the system performance level as well as at the critical component level. The
investigated building system will incorporate cross laminated timber cores,
floors, and glulam structural members. Using mass timber will present challenges
in effectively achieving the goal of desirable seismic performance, especially
seismic resiliency. These challenges will be addressed at the system level by a
unique combination of core rocking combined with beam and floor interaction to
achieve non-linear elastic behavior. This system behavior will eliminate the
need for post-tensioning to achieve re-centering, but will introduce new
parameters that can directly influence the lateral behavior. This research will
study the effects of these parameters on the overall building behavior and will
develop a methodology in which designers could use these parameters to
strategically control the building seismic response. These key parameters will
be investigated using parametric numerical analyses as well as large-scale, sub-
system experimentation. One of the critical components of the system will be the
hold-down, a device that connects the timber core to the foundation and provides
hysteretic energy dissipation. Strength requirements and deformation demands in
mid- to high-rise buildings, along with integration with mass timber, will
necessitate the advancement of knowledge in developing this low-damage
component. The investigated hold-down will have large deformation capability
with readily replaceable parts. Moreover, the hold-down will have the potential
to reduce strength of the component in a controlled and repeatable way at large
deformations, while maintaining original strength at low deformations. This
component characteristic can reduce the overall system overstrength, which in
turn will have beneficial economic implications. Reducing the carbon footprint
of new construction, linking rural and urban economies, and increasing the
longevity of buildings in seismic zones are all goals that this mass timber
research will advance and will be critical to the sustainable development of
cities moving forward.