* 1563448
* Laser-based Additive Manufacturing Process Using Water Droplets Carrying Nanoparticles for Microlayer Deposition of Semiconductor Materials on Flexible Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Aravinda Kar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Much research has been carried out to produce nanoparticles of various materials
due to excellent mechanical, chemical, electrical, and optical properties of
nanoparticles. However, it is difficult to deposit and transform nanoparticles
into large two-dimensional and three-dimensional structures, such as thin films
and discrete arrays, in a controlled manner. This award supports fundamental
research to enable a new additive manufacturing process to deposit nanoparticles
into thin films or discrete nanodot arrays (a nanodot is a cluster of
nanoparticles). The new process is versatile and scalable, and uses less
materials and energy. It can promote roll-to-roll manufacturing of a variety of
energy and electronic devices such as conformal solar cells, sensors, and
actuators. It can also be used to fabricate masks for nanolithography,
nanopillar arrays for photonic crystals, and nanodot arrays for plasmonic
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new additive manufacturing process involves
injecting silicon nanoparticles (contained inside electric field-driven water
droplets) into a hollow laser beam. The size of nanoparticles ranges from 5 to
100 nm. The laser beam will heat the droplets, causing the water to evaporate
and the nanoparticles to sinter and form microlayers on flexible substrates such
as polyimide plastic (Kapton) or stainless steel foil. For this process to work,
the laser beam needs to be focused so that its diameter is smaller than its
wavelength. The droplet will serve as both a nanoparticle carrier, and a
superlens that focuses a laser beam to subwavelength diameters. The dropsize has
to be within an upper and lower critical limit. The first research objective is
to determine these limits, and will be achieved through laser beam propagation
modeling and droplet deposition experiments. The model involves numerical
solution of Maxwell equations, and the solution yields the two limits. Several
dropsizes will be chosen within these limits to conduct experiments. The size
and feed rate of droplets will be measured using high speed photography;
particle concentration using colloidal testing meter; the laser power, diameter,
and pulse repetition rate using laser beam analyzer; the speed and temperature
of substrate using substrate feed controller and thermography respectively. The
grain size of the microlayer (determined by process variables) affects the
electrical conductivity of the microlayer. The second research objective is to
establish the relationship between the grain size and conductivity. It will be
achieved by measuring the grain size using atomic force microscopy and scanning
electron microscopy, and the conductivity using four-probe technique.