* 1563027
* Bottom-up Synthesis of Nanocrystalline Intermetallic Coatings with Controlled Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jagannathan Rajagopalan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2020
* USD 349,107.00

Coatings made of metallic alloys are used in a wide range of industries from
machine tools to automobiles, aircraft and thermal power plants. These coatings
increase resistance to wear, corrosion and oxidation and enhance the performance
of structural and functional components to which they are applied. Thus, the
ability to tailor the properties of metallic alloy coatings would lead to
significant improvements in the efficiency and lifetime of automobile and
aircraft engines, cutting tools and power plant turbines and tubings. This award
supports fundamental research that aims to control the microstructure (size,
shape and distribution of small-scale crystallites) of metallic alloy coatings.
Since the mechanical, chemical and thermal properties are intimately connected
to the microstructure, this would allow the PIs to tune the properties of the
coatings for various applications. The research activity is integrated with
education and outreach efforts that include a mentoring program for
undergraduates, scientific demonstrations for high school students and training
of graduate students in materials synthesis and characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods to synthesize metallic alloy coatings
using either chemical or physical deposition processes provide only limited
capability for controlling the microstructure. This project aims to develop a
new bottom-up process to synthesize intermetallic coatings with tailored
microstructures using physical vapor deposition. The central hypothesis of the
project is that by methodically seeding nanocrystals during the growth process,
amorphous intermetallic coatings can be controllably crystallized during
subsequent annealing at the appropriate temperature. The project will elucidate
the fundamental physics of this process and demonstrate its practical viability
by synthesizing and characterizing nanostructured titanium aluminide (TiAl)
coatings with controlled grain size, aspect ratio and spatial distribution. In
addition, microstructural evolution, stability and mechanical behavior of the
synthesized TiAl coatings will be investigated using in situ transmission
electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction experiments to understand the
crystallization kinetics and structure-property relationships.