* 1563622
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Frontiers in coding for cloud storage systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Onur Ozan Koyluoglu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2017
* USD 244,211.00

Cloud storage systems increasingly form the backbone of software services that
underwrite everyday lives, serving a large array of businesses and forming an
essential pillar of the economy. Given the sheer volume of interactions within
these distributed systems, there arise a multitude of issues in building,
maintaining and enhancing them. The most salient of these challenges are in the
reliability, availability, consistency, confidentiality and privacy of data
stored in these vast systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
expected to have a significant impact on the manner in which cloud storage
systems are designed and deployed. In these systems, storage node failures can
have a significant impact on the efficiency of the overall system. This project
enhances fault tolerant mechanisms to enable efficient recovery from failures,
while augmenting the overall data availability and privacy offered by such
systems. The research effort will advance the science of cloud computing by
developing a new family of algorithms for distributed storage , and connect the
advances to the significant industry needs in this topic. The research agenda
will also be tightly integrated with education and outreach activities with
direct involvement of underrepresented minorities, graduate, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on efficient maintenance of data with a
range of desirable qualities, including mechanisms that ease data encoding,
accessibility, updates, as well as privacy, the main objectives of this effort
include (i) to develop coding schemes where a failed element can be regenerated
with higher repair efficiencies from its local neighbors, (ii) to bring together
the advantages of both local decodability and local repairability into one
coding solution, (iii) to design mechanisms that provide low cost data updates
in addition to efficient repair, (iv) to develop codes that can be resilient
against failures with different scales/modalities, (v) to develop coding
mechanisms taking advantage of implementation aspects of existing systems, and
(vi) to develop coding schemes that enable users to access their data in a
private manner. This effort addresses these challenges using a combination of
tools from disciplines spanning coding theory, information theory,
communications, as well as combinatorial and discrete mathematics.