* 1563652
* CSR: Medium: Modeling and synthesis for application-specific systems-on-a-chip
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Tosiron Adegbija, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Popular electronic devices such as e-book readers, automotive entertainment
systems, digital TVs, and medical devices, are internally powered by a state-of-
the-art computer chip. Such a chip may have hundreds of components, including
many microprocessors, graphics processors, video processors, audio processors,
memories, and more. Just a few decades ago, so many components would have
required a table-sized box, but today they fit on a tiny fingernail-sized chip.
Because such a chip costs tens of millions of dollars to build, companies that
build these chips make them as configurable as possible, so the same chip that
is used in a digital TV application may also be used in a medical device
application. However, engineers have a hard time setting all the configurable
features to get the chip's performance and power optimal for their specific
application. The features are like the ingredients of a recipe; an imperfect
balance can ruin the performance/power (or the meal). As a result, today's chips
run much slower than they could, get hotter, and consume more battery than they
could as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's intellectual merit includes
developing techniques to automatically tune a state-of-the-art chip's many
configurable features to serve any one particular application well, thus
substantially improving performance and power for any application implemented on
such a chip. The project will develop a unified computation model that ideally
supports such techniques, empowering engineers to make best use of state-of-the-
art chips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts not only include
improving the performance and power of a wide variety of popular devices, but
also includes a web-based tool for capturing the unified computation model. Such
a tool will positively impact university education as well as practicing
engineers, and can catalyze research.