* 1563616
* Investigating language contact by documenting two endangered Arctic languages, Unangam Tunuu (Aleut) and Mednij Aleut
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* James Gamble, Aleut International Association
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2019
* USD 188,967.00

Language contact situations arise when at least two languages or varieties
interact. Linguistic research shows a wide variety of outcomes that occur in
these situations. For example, sometimes only a few words are borrowed, or
perhaps entirely new languages emerge, or speakers use both languages and switch
and mix between them in systematic, patterned ways. There are significant gaps
in existing knowledge about language contact situations. This project will
document and analyze language contact between an endangered indigenous language
and a European language where the contact resulted in two different outcomes. In
one, the community adapted by creating a mixed language, and the second where
the community adapted by shifting to the European language. This offers a unique
opportunity to compare factors that affect contact and adaptation because the
source languages are the same. The resulting activities will also document two
endangered language varieties (the mixed and the indigenous languages), each of
which is inadequately documented and critically endangered. Broader impacts
include creating language materials available in formats that facilitate
community use, broadening participation by involving local community
participants, and fostering new international relationships focused on the
Arctic region. The Arctic Social Sciences Program at NSF is providing additional
support for activities associated with this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Unangam Tunuu language, also known as Aleut, is indigenous to the nearly 200
islands in the Bering Sea that stretch from Alaska towards the Kamchatka
Peninsula of the Russian Federation. Language contact between Unangam Tunuu and
Russian resulted in two distinct outcomes of language adaptation (language shift
vs. creation of a mixed language) in the Commander Islands. An entirely new
mixed language, Mednij Aleut, arose as a result of the combining of Unangam
Tunuu and Russian. In contrast, Bering Island residents maintained their dialect
of Unangam Tunuu and later shifted to Russian. The international project team
includes the highly respected Unangam Tunuu expert and educator Moses Dirks and
the leading scholar of Mednij Aleut, Evgeny Golovko, to research each of these
severely endangered languages, as well as language contact and change. The team
will collect and analyze language data for Mednij Aleut and the Bering Island
dialect of Unangam Tunuu, as well draw on historical oral and written archival
resources. The existence of the older materials will facilitate an examination
of language change over time and place in two very different situations.
Especially exciting is the potential for Mednijj Aleut to contribute
significantly to the scientific understanding of mixed languages, which is a
small but interesting set of languages of the world.The project will increase
our understanding of the cultural history of the Aleut region and increase
existing documentation of Native Alaskan languages. The Native American
Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the
recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American languages,
including Alaska Native languages. The Alaska Native Language Archive at the
University of Alaska, Fairbanks will serve as the repository for the project
data. In addition, the Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the
Arctic (ELOKA) will assist in public dissemination and access. The latter step
will ensure that the newly collected data gets added to ELOKA's extensive
exchange of local and traditional knowledge from other participating communities
in the Arctic region, increasing its value to a wide variety of audiences,
including the general public, other indigenous communities, and Arctic-focused
scientists from a variety of disciplines.