* 1563424
* GOALI: Adaptive Control of Inkjet Printing on 3D Curved Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Bogdan Antohe, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 06/30/2019
* USD 310,452.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
apply engineering techniques in adaptive control to greatly expand the surface
geometries accessible to inkjet depositing. Inkjet depositing is a valuable
technique, with potential applications that vary from wound treatment to
advanced manufacturing. However, this potential is currently limited by the
practical restriction of inkjet depositing to printing on flat surfaces. This
research will enable new classes of technologies, products, and services. The
work will be done through a university-industry partnership between researchers
at The University of Texas at Dallas and experts at MicroFab Technologies, a
Dallas-area organization. The team will focus on two real-world applications: 1)
printing customized wound treatments directly onto wounds arising from cancer
tissue removal or traumatic injury, and 2) printing labels onto manufactured
parts to increase assembly efficiency. Research outcomes will be integrated into
engineering education workshops at UT Dallas, as well as exhibits at the Perot
Museum of Nature and Science in downtown Dallas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
lack of specific knowledge of droplet motion on curved surfaces after
deposition/impact, necessitating methods to detect and alter drop placement to
regulate final fluid distribution. This is a complicated problem incorporating
estimation of surface geometry, surface chemistry, materials science, and
estimation and control theory to regulate correct drop placement with a moving
print head. This project requires innovative sensing and control strategies
incorporating feedforward, feedback and adaptive control to address uncertainty
in the surface measurement and models of the interactions between liquid and
surface. Specifically, tools of information theory, nonlinear estimation,
optimization, Lyapunov-based stability theory and geometric control will be used
to establish a formal approach to conduct such printing with robot manipulators,
along with understanding of liquid properties and surface chemistry.