* 1563225
* A Novel Framework for the Efficient and Accurate Solutions of Complex Chance-Constrained Optimal Control Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Anil Rao, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 12/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project will create a novel integrated computational framework for
formulating and solving optimal control problems in the presence of uncertainty.
Optimal control is concerned with finding the user-specified inputs to a dynamic
system that will produce the best possible outcome, in the sense that some
performance measure is made as small or as large as possible. Typically the
outcome must also satisfy additional constraints, capturing physical limitations
or operating requirements that the system cannot or must not violate. In
uncertain systems subject to significant random influence, both performance and
constraints may be characterized probabilistically. One such formulation
involves "chance constraints," requiring that a specified undesirable event must
be sufficiently unlikely -- for example, the probability that two aircraft will
pass within an unsafe distance of each other must be less than a given
threshold. Unfortunately chance constraints often lead to formulations that are
computationally intractable. This project aims to overcome this obstacle through
innovations in four areas, namely 1) the representation of uncertainty in the
form of chance constraints, 2) the computationally tractable approximation of
chance constraints, 3) the efficient discretization of continuous optimal
control problems, and 4) the structuring of the optimal control problem so that
it can be split among many different processors using only local information.
These innovations will be integrated into a unified framework, amplifying their
benefits and ultimately enabling accurate and efficient solution of complex
uncertain optimal control problems. Results from this of this work will benefit
rapid multi-agent trajectory planning for search, rescue and reconnaissance
missions, as well as applications involving human motion, air-traffic control,
underwater vehicle control, and hypersonic vehicle mission planning. Educational
activities will include outreach to high school students and teachers through
the University of Florida Student Science Training Program and Summer Science
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, chance-constrained control is almost
exclusively dominated by robust model predictive control, invariably involving
linear dynamics and convex polyhedral chance constraints, mostly comprising
Gaussian random parameters. In contrast, this project will pose trajectory
design as a nonlinear chance-constrained optimal control problem in an uncertain
environment. The following key aspects will be studied: (a) modeling of the
uncertain environment and its contribution to probabilistic constraints on the
state and control variables; (b) scalable semi-analytical approximation of
nonlinear, nonconvex and potentially high dimensional chance constraints
involving non-Gaussian probability measures based on split-Bernstein
approximations and Markov chain Monte Carlo; (c) highly accurate and low-
dimensional variable-order Gaussian quadrature methods for discretizing the
continuous optimization problem arising from the chance-constrained optimal
control problem; and (d) a novel large-scale nonlinear programming problem
solver for rapidly and accurately solving problems arising from the variable-
order Gaussian quadrature discretization. Work in this area can lead to
significant contributions in autonomous path planning, extendable to multi-agent
systems. This will require efficient and accurate conversion of the joint chance
constraints into computationally attractive forms that can be shown to be
consistent with and convergent to the originally prescribed chance constraints.
This research will lay the foundation for the direct solution of chance-
constrained optimal trajectory design by discretizing the transcribed problem
using a variable order orthogonal collocation method, solved using an nonlinear
programming routine that employs a powerful reverse communication architecture,
enabling parallel processing together with a state-of-the-art nonlinear
programming algorithm.