* 1563832
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Coexistence of Heterogeneous Wireless Access Technologies in the 5 GHz Bands
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Haining Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

As billions of wireless devices (such as smartphones and tablets) are introduced
into the market each year, wireless spectrum becomes a scarce resource. This
project aims to address this important problem by developing novel technologies
that enable efficient utilization of wireless spectrum. Due to the proliferation
of Wi-Fi, the unlicensed spectrum in the 2.4 GHz wireless band has been
saturated with wireless traffic. Hence, there has been a lot of interest from
the Wi-Fi industry and the cellular stakeholders (such as Qualcomm) to use the 5
GHz wireless bands. In this project, the PIs will develop innovative
technologies that will enable harmonious spectrum sharing among different
wireless technologies in the 5 GHz bands. The example wireless technologies
include Wi-Fi, Unlicensed LTE (LTE-U), and Dedicated Short-Range Communications
(DSRC). DSRC is a short-range to medium-range wireless communication technology
designed for automotive use. The outcome of this project will allow much more
efficient utilization of wireless spectrum, which means supporting more new
wireless applications and services, faster speed and better quality. The
proposed work is expected to have significant impacts on today's and future
wireless technologies. The project findings are expected to include fundamental
contributions that would provide insights into other wireless research. Through
industry and government outreach activities, the project team will ensure that
the project findings have maximum impacts on ongoing industry
research/development efforts as well as on Government initiatives to open up
more spectrum for spectrum sharing. The project outcomes will be incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate courses currently offered at the three
institutions. The proposed work provides excellent hands-on exercises, research,
and educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at the
three collaborating institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling harmonious
spectrum sharing between heterogeneous wireless technologies is a challenging
problem, but one that needs to be urgently addressed in order to quell the
exploding demand for more spectrum by existing as well as burgeoning wireless
applications. The importance of this problem is especially acute for the 5 GHz
bands because these bands have emerged as the most coveted bands for launching
new wireless applications and services. Access to spectrum in the 5 GHz bands
has emerged as a major bone of contention between the LTE-U, Wi-Fi, and
Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) stakeholders. More importantly, the
5 GHz bands have become a proving ground for demonstrating the viability of
spectrum sharing between three heterogeneous technologies-viz., LTE-U, Wi-Fi
(802.11ac/802.11ax), and DSRC. Recognizing the importance of this problem, the
project team proposes to embark on an in-depth study that focuses on two
particular coexistence scenarios: (1) coexistence between LTE-U and Wi-Fi and
(2) coexistence between DSRC and Wi-Fi. The proposed work on the coexistence of
Wi-Fi and LTE-U is expected to have tangible impacts on today's technologies as
well as those of the future. The PIs will study avant-garde approaches that
exploit the advanced functionalities envisioned in future technologies, such as
802.11ax, as well as backward-compatible techniques that can be applied to
today's technologies (e.g., LTE-U, 802.11ac). The proposed work on DSRC-Wi-Fi
coexistence will be one of the first systematic studies that investigate
incumbent protection techniques designed for highly mobile incumbent users that
are very sensitive to communication latency.