* 1563920
* SHF: Medium: Contract-Based Black-Box Assurance
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Mats Heimdahl, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,004,019.00

Systems in diverse domains such as transportation, medicine, aviation and space
exploration, increasingly rely on third-party components with embedded software.
Due to the lack of visibility into the components' implementation and design,
traditional techniques for verifying that the components perform as advertised
are not feasible; novel alternatives are needed. This research addresses the
assurance of such "black-box" components by developing and evaluating (1)
techniques to discover and capture contracts - the do's and the don'ts - that
the component must satisfy to operate safely in its intended environment, and
(2) rigorous metric-driven criteria that can be used to guide as well as to
assess the thoroughness of the component testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypotheses are that (1) novel test coverage adequacy criteria can be
defined over the component's contracts as well as its object code; criteria that
when satisfied will ensure the level of confidence needed for a critical system,
and (2) object-code symbolic execution techniques can be developed for both
automatic discovery of component behaviors as well as for verifying conformance
to contracts. The expected advances from this research are: (a) new contract
definition and discovery techniques suitable for contract-based testing, (b)
coverage criteria for contracts and object-code of software, (c) enhanced
object-code symbolic execution techniques, and (d) empirical evaluation of the
approach on realistic systems. The anticipated broader impacts of this work are
that: (a) observations from the empirical studies conducted provide guidance for
regulatory agencies and standards organizations in their efforts; (b) commercial
tool vendors adopt these techniques in their software development tools and thus
help reduce the very high costs of testing critical systems; (c) extensive
automation of the costly manual testing processes enabled by these new
techniques provide a powerful incentive to formally specify and model
requirements, thereby greatly improving quality in all aspects of software
development projects; and (d) open-access to tools, case examples, experimental
infrastructure, data, and curricular materials developed, advances the state of
software engineering research, education and industrial practice.