* 1563324
* Hydrogen Bonding, Proton Transfer, and Clusters on the Brink of Chemical Change
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Kenneth Leopold, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 421,851.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kenneth R. Leopold at the
University of Minnesota performs fundamental studies on the forces of attraction
between molecules. These forces are ubiquitous in nature and their study
underlies our understanding a wide variety of chemical phenomena. The work is
done by creating small clusters of two or three molecules and studying their
physical properties. By grouping only a few molecules at a time, the
simplification needed to fully understand the attractive forces is achieved.
This work identifies prototypical systems that provide the most useful basic
information. Whenever possible, prototypes are chosen that contain molecules
known or suspected of being active in the Earth's atmosphere, thus providing
foundational knowledge for atmospheric science. The direct focus on
atmospherically important problems produces basic information needed to
rationally evaluate the impact of both natural and anthropogenic changes to the
environment. Additional impact is realized in the education of students and
postdoctoral fellows who work on these problems. This project continues to grow
a broader set of collaborators at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs).
The ability to collect a data in a short time is conducive to allowing
undergraduate students the opportunity to see a project through from beginning
to end.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microwave spectroscopy in a supersonic jet is used
to determine molecular and electronic structure in small weakly bound complexes.
Studies include complexes containing sulfur trioxide, carboxylic acids, sulfuric
acid, and/or amines. Special emphasis is placed on systems that are on the brink
of chemical reaction. Proton transfer, for example, is one common theme and its
study provides a glimpse of the role of solvation in promoting chemical change.
Quantum mechanical tunneling, when observed, offers experimental benchmarks with
which to challenge theoretical chemical dynamics. Three-dimentional printing is
explored as a convenient and inexpensive means of optimizing the design of the
supersonic nozzles used to generate the chemical species of interest. The
broader impact of this work lies, in part, in its elucidation of the fundamental
interactions that govern solvation and determine the properties of matter. The
understanding obtained informs fields as diverse as molecular biology and
environmental science. Additional impact is derived from the training of
graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral students that it provides.