* 1563343
* A Data-Driven and Real-time Approach to Personalized Bundle Recommendation and Pricing; from Theory to Practice
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Georgia Perakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 395,000.00

A good pricing strategy plays a crucial role in any retailer's business process.
This is largely due to the fact that pricing approaches are highly visible to
both customers and competitors, and thus have an immediate and dramatic impact
on the bottom line. The online market for retail goods has grown enormously over
the past decade. The development of a sophisticated personalized product and
price recommendation system can provide the necessary competitive edge for any
Internet retailer, making the difference on the order of billions in profits.
The challenge of the new retailing paradigm is to design models for bundling and
personalized pricing that are able to extract value from the new streams of
customer data that an e-tailer has access to. The goal of this research will be
the development of a personalized bundling and pricing model that recommends a
bundle of related products to a consumer, but at an incentivized price (lower
than the sum of the prices of the individual items) during their online session.

The innovation in this model will consist of balancing several key factors in
terms of bundle and pricing offerings simultaneously, while developing a new
approach to personalized demand estimation. The focal points of the work consist
of four considerations: (i) developing meaningful personalization models (in
terms of bundling of products but also in terms of pricing these products), (ii)
developing inventory balancing methods that will balance the tradeoff between
losing money due to future markdowns and at the same time facing potentially
future inventory stock-outs, (iii) developing interesting structural results and
insights on how personalization can tradeoff with bundling in terms of the
pricing strategies. Finally, and very importantly, (iv) developing efficient
solution approaches (theoretically but also computationally, the latter using
actual industry data) that could impact practice. The goal will be to combine
these distinct goals in the modeling: personalization, inventory balancing,
pricing insights and efficiency/practicality. This research will design
innovative models, analyzing them first from a theoretical as well as an applied
standpoint but also in exploring the relationships between them and testing them
first with real data. Furthermore, this research will build an integrated
framework, models and solution techniques from machine learning, integer
optimization, stochastic and robust optimization to key personalized bundle
pricing problems that are accessible to all, in order to help academics and
practitioners in the area of pricing.