* 1563382
* Innovative Processes for Fabricating Three-Dimensional Ultrathin Foams with Enhanced Thermal Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Li Shi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 435,957.00

Three-dimensional (3D) ultrathin foams of two-dimensional (2D) materials hold
high potential for a variety of applications, including structure reinforcement,
thermal management, and energy storage. However, their industrial adoption has
been limited due to the substantial difficulties in controlling the pore size
and strut wall thickness of the foams to desired dimensions with existing
materials processing technologies. This award supports research to address this
challenge, by investigating an original and novel process that can lead to
highly controllable growth of 3D foams with tunable pore sizes. This research
will accelerate the processing technology of 3D porous materials with
substantial impact on an array of applications including energy storage, thermal
management, and flexible electronics. It will also provide opportunities for
educating the next generation workforce to enhance the competitiveness of the US
in materials processing and manufacturing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The goal of this research is to investigate an innovative process for
manufacturing 3D foam architectures of 2D ultrathin graphite (UG) as well as
similar foams of dielectric 2D hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) with controllable
pore sizes between 1 micon and 100 microns, and tunable strut wall thickness
from 1 to 1000 nm. The materials processing method consists of a new approach
for fabricating Ni foams as catalytic templates with reduced pore sizes or
multiple level porosity, an energy effective and rapid RF induction heating
method for growth of large-scale UG and h-BN materials, and an efficient Ni
etching process. This work will also establish a fundamental understanding of
the effects of pore size, wall thickness, grain boundaries and structure on the
thermal properties of UG and h-BN foams and composites. New knowledge in
materials processing will be obtained for manufacturing 3D multilevel porous UG
and h-BN materials with enhanced thermal management properties. The
understanding and knowledge resulting from this work will also potentially lead
to a general approach for manufacturing a variety of other 2D materials into 3D
foam structures.