* 1563233
* GOALI: Nanomanufacturing of Atomically Precise Bipolar Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wiley Kirk, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The impact of atomically precise manufacturing on future economic activity
cannot be overstated. In particular the development of atomically-precise
bipolar electronic devices is a potentially disruptive technology, leading to
job growth in manufacturing arenas where novel high-value applications can be
exploited. It is expected that this development will also positively impact
national security. Recent efforts show that precise placement of donor dopant
atoms is feasible. This award will study the placement of acceptor dopant atoms
with atomic precision and it should open pathways to empower a wide range of
high-performance nanoelectronic devices, as well as potentially advance the
development of quantum computation devices. A successful outcome would permit
nanomanufacturing of a wide range of new bipolar devices with extraordinary
performance characteristics. An atomically precise acceptor doping capability
would enable new device regimes since both n-type and p-type regions would allow
engineering new devices and circuit designs. Solving this problem would open new
realms of unique device physics for later exploration. The collaborative effort
with a proven nanotechnology industry partner will accelerate the rate of
technology transfer and sharpen the focus on parts of the investigations that
yield the most effective outcomes. This academic-small business collaboration
offers opportunities for a graduate student to gain valuable experience in a
well-established high-tech environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to demonstrate an acceptor as a p-type dopant for nanomanufacturing
bipolar devices by atomically precise doping methods. This capability would
enable new types of device regimes that offer unprecedented low-noise, high-
bandwidth performances in analog electronic applications. Although atomically
precise doping of n-type dopants has been demonstrated using phosphorous donors,
the development of a suitable acceptor dopant species is unsolved since basic
science questions remain unanswered. University researchers will address this
problem by collaborating with the scientific staff of an industrial partner,
which is the nation's leading small company in nanomanufacturing, using scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) lithography tools to produce atomically precise
nanostructures. An innovative ultra-high vacuum approach that produces alanes
will be investigated. These studies will produce acceptor species that adsorbs
selectively on patterns of clean Si dimers. This outcome is needed by the
industrial partner to enable STM based nanomanufacturing steps. In addition to
the absorption studies, low-temperature dopant activation processes and the
prevention of deleterious diffusion effects using silicon molecular-beam-epitaxy
technology will be explored. Also, electrical characterization investigations
will be done to examine electrical properties of p-doped regions.