* 1563553
* GOALI: Turbulent Flow Modeling of Gas Injection to Minimize Surface Defects in Continuous-Cast Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Brian Thomas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2018
* USD 398,000.00

Many important commercial processes involve turbulent flow of molten metal mixed
with gas. In steel continuous casting, used to manufacture 96% of steel in the
US, problems with multiphase flow in the mold are responsible for most of the
serious defects in final rolled steel products. Detrimental flow patterns allow
particles to become entrapped in the solidifying steel shell, where they form
permanent defects, leading to surface pinholes, slivers, blisters, and expensive
rejects. With the difficulty of experimental measurements in the molten metal
environment, computational models are an important tool to enable fundamental
understanding of how these defects form, and to find windows of safe operating
conditions to avoid them. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) Program award supports creation of a new computational tool to
study multiphase flow in molten metal systems with inert gas injection, and to
apply this tool to better understand and improve steel continuous casting, in
order to minimize the entrapment of gas bubbles, inclusions, and slag particles.
This will benefit many engineering processes which involve these phenomena. In
particular, the application of these tools to steel continuous casting will
improve the quality of steel slabs and competitiveness of the US steel industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI award supports a collaboration between
University researchers experienced in computational modeling with an industry
team at ArcelorMittal, experienced in conducting water modeling studies,
measurements and trials in the operating steel plant, and metallurgical analysis
of defects. A comprehensive model system is being developed to accurately
simulate gas flow through the nozzle refractories, passive gas aspiration into
low pressure regions, bubble formation during injection, unsteady multiphase
flow in the nozzle and mold that ranges from bubbly to slug flow with and
without electromagnetic effects, and particle transport and entrapment into the
final product. Systematic measurements are being conducted at ArcelorMittal to
quantify the size and location of entrapped bubble-related defects in many cast
steel slabs, in order to validate the model system. The validated models will
provide new insights into defect formation, and ways to improve caster
operations will be proposed and tested. This fundamental project complements
ongoing practical modeling efforts at the University Continuous Casting
Consortium, which is currently supported by eleven member companies. Results
will be conveyed to the steel industry via the Consortium and short courses to
industry.