* 1563638
* Soil-Foundation-Structure Interaction Effects on Cyclic Failure Potential of Silts and Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2020
* USD 654,868.00

Earthquake-induced ground failure has resulted in billions of dollars of damage
during recent earthquakes. For example, the Canterbury earthquake sequence
resulted in $40 billion in losses (over 20% of New Zealand GDP) in Christchurch,
New Zealand, with much of this loss attributed to liquefaction of loose
saturated sandy soil. Entire communities were relocated following the earthquake
sequence as "red-zones" were declared in regions of high liquefaction hazard.
Soils can be broadly characterized as exhibiting either "sand-like" or "clay-
like" behavior with respect to strength loss during earthquakes. Liquefaction of
"sand-like" soils is due to reductions of interparticle contact stresses, and
transfer of stress from the soil particles to fluid occupying the space between
particles. A large number of case histories of liquefaction of "sand-like" soils
has enabled engineers to develop procedures for predicting its occurrence. By
contrast, the mechanisms of failure of "clay-like" soils are more poorly
understood, though there are cases in which such failures have resulted in
damage to structures. In fact, cyclic failure of "fine-grained" soils are often
constrained to the regions beneath structures, and not in the free-field soils
away from the structures. There is a significant need to better understand the
conditions for which "clay-like" soils may fail during earthquakes. Forging such
an understanding will require new knowledge in the fundamental cyclic behavior
of "clay-like" soils combined with knowledge of the cyclic stresses imposed on
the soil beneath structures during earthquake shaking. This project will enable
engineers to better predict conditions for which cyclic failure of "clay-like"
soil will and will not occur during earthquakes. This will enhance public safety
by reducing the risk of future structural failures. The research project will
result in a publicly accessible database containing all of the experimental data
so that future researchers will be able to benefit from the experiments.
Furthermore, the project team will engage under-represented students through the
UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED) through a hands-
on project-oriented course for engineering freshman, and through the RISE-UP
(Research Intensive Series in Engineering for Under-represented Populations)
program.

The project will achieve its technical objectives by developing an understanding
of the influence of Soil-Foundation-Structure Interaction (SFSI) on cyclic
ground failure potential. The project activities include: (1) development of
elasto-dynamic solutions quantifying the amplitude and phase of stresses induced
by SFSI, and deployment of these solutions in a web-based tool for public use;
(2) laboratory testing of fine-grained soil samples to evaluate variations of
liquefaction susceptibility with soil plasticity and more advanced indicators of
soil behavior (i.e., strength normalization) for the purpose of designing the
centrifuge modeling experiments, (3) centrifuge modeling studies involving
single-degree-of-freedom structures resting atop variable-plasticity fine-
grained soil deposits, and (4) a simplified procedure for analyzing triggering
of cyclic failure and the resulting settlements. Currently, the influence of
SFSI is nearly entirely neglected when assessing ground failure potential due to
a lack of understanding of key aspects of behavior, and a lack of tools
available for engineers to incorporate SFSI effects . The primary intellectual
merit of the project will be to enhance understanding of these fundamental
issues.