* 1563489
* Toward the Design and Control of Dynamical Transport Barriers in Nonlinear Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Nicholas Ouellette, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2020
* USD 345,000.00

Fluid flows in natural and engineered systems, such as those in the ocean,
atmosphere, or industrial machinery, are typically complex and variable in both
space and time. Such flows mix efficiently on average, and they rapidly disperse
material that they carry with them. They do not, however, mix uniformly. Rather,
they spontaneously form complex patterns that lead to persistent
inhomogeneities. In an oil spill, for example, oil does not move away uniformly
from its source; instead, the oil wanders out in tendrils and whorls that are
locked to the underlying structure of the ocean surface flow. In recent years,
powerful methods have been developed to uncover the hidden structures that
govern mixing in unsteady flows, and to isolate the transport barriers that
separate different regions of the flow. Almost nothing is known, however, about
how to control the location or presence of these dynamical barriers, or even
whether it is possible to do so. This award will support research to demonstrate
that control of these barriers is indeed possible, and to understand how
barriers respond to external forces or to the shape of the container holding the
fluid. The results of this research will have significant implications in a
range of applications. For example, knowing how barriers in the ocean are
related to coastline shape will inform the siting of coastal facilities that may
discharge waste products or the deployment of limited resources in an
environmental disaster. In other situations, such as in industrial mixers, rapid
mixing is desirable, and so understanding how to inhibit the formation of
transport barriers would be valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing methods for
locating transport barriers often require knowledge of the future evolution of
the flow, and so have limited utility as predictive tools. This research will
surmount this limitation by asking not how barriers will evolve naturally but
rather how they can be manipulated and controlled. Two ways to control transport
barriers will be investigated in an electromagnetically driven laboratory flow:
control via spatio-temporally modulated applied body forces and control via
lateral and bottom boundary shape. By demonstrating how transport barriers
respond to manipulation of these quantities rather than to an imposed control
velocity field, which is difficult to achieve in practice, the results of the
research will pave the way for the development of implementable control
strategies for real-world situations.