* 1563544
* CSR: Medium: A Smart Runtime System for Parallel Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Vijay Garg, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2020
* USD 509,755.00

Since the clock speed of computers is not increasing, the only way to speed up
processing is by exploiting multiple cores. Programming these multicore
processors is a challenging task due to bugs resulting from concurrency and
synchronization. This project is developing new synchronization mechanisms that
address three aspects of concurrent systems --- programmability, scalability and
fault-tolerance. Programmability refers to the ease of developing concurrent
applications. Scalability refers to the performance of the program when the
number of threads in the system increase. Fault-tolerance refers to the ability
of the system to cope with failure of a thread holding a
lock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the most prevalent synchronization
mechanism is based on monitors with condition variables. Monitors or lock based
systems are hard to use for multi object operations, usually have poor
scalability and low tolerance for faults. Lock-free mechanisms may have good
scalability and fault-tolerance, but are notoriously hard to write and debug.
Software Transactional Memory systems hold most promise for programmability.
However, it is difficult to get efficient conditional synchronization in current
transactional memory systems. This project is developing new synchronization
techniques that address global conditional synchronization aspects of monitor or
transactional memory systems. In particular, it is developing scalable
mechanisms to detect global or multi object conditions and automatically notify
threads waiting on these conditions. The only way to simulate this mechanism in
current systems is by using a global lock or busy wait which results in a large
number of context switches and slower performance. The mechanisms developed in
this project will result in more concise and faster
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For scalability and fault-tolerance, the project
is developing methods that enable asynchronous and parallel execution of certain
object methods. Asynchronous execution is carried out by keeping a monitor
thread that can execute methods on behalf of threads that make the monitor call.
This technique improves cache locality and concurrency. For objects with high-
contention, the project is studying methods that enable parallel execution of
read operations by keeping read-only copies of objects. However, maintaining
copies of every monitor object or creating an additional thread for asynchronous
execution is inefficient. The project is developing efficient techniques to
determine which objects to replicate at runtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will result in improving programmer productivity and reducing
concurrency errors in development of multicore programs. It will also lead to
better understanding of how global conditions in a multithreaded program can be
evaluated efficiently. As a result, the concurrent programming systems will
become more reliable and faster. In addition, the graduate students supported by
the project will be trained in fundamentals of multicore computing.