* 1563087
* Discovering the Mechanisms of Hydrogel Surface Weakening and Wear Under Applied Sliding Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Alison Dunn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2020
* USD 295,492.00

Hydrogels are flexible plastic materials that have water integrated into the
structure. This hydration helps make them slippery and biocompatible, so they
are used as thin biomedical devices such as contact lenses and catheter
coatings, as well as in the oil industry as soft particles. New chemistries of
hydrogel are developed every day for targeted applications such as drug
delivery, prosthetic soft devices, and synthetic soft tissues. However,
retaining durability of soft, slippery materials in these intended applications
when they are sliding against other materials is important for their success.
The specific ways that hydrogels degrade under sliding is not yet known, so this
award supports the fundamental discovery of connections between the hydrogel
structure, sliding conditions, and surface durability. These connections will
result in new mechanical design guidelines for manufacturing hydrogels,
impacting health and industrial sectors. Because this research connects
materials properties to mechanical performance, it is well-suited as the basis
for interdisciplinary activities targeted to empower underrepresented minority
students in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The friction and
lubrication properties at the interface of soft hydrated materials determine the
collective behavior of dense microgel systems, but friction is often treated as
a simple function of slip velocity or shear rate. Materials-based lubrication
theories for soft hydrated matter have recently emerged, along with experimental
evidence of hydrogel surface wear. The research goal of this project is to
discover the mechanisms of surface degradation in soft interfaces due to surface
shear by applying, measuring in situ, and mapping the progression of mechanical
degradation in slipping, low-friction hydrogel interfaces. Instrumented micro-
tribometry, optical- and force-based microscopy, and micro-indentation will be
employed to measure the progression of degradation. This knowledge will
contextualize competing theories of hydrogel lubrication and catalyze hypotheses
regarding chemical and physical degradation of hydrogels for emerging
scientific, technological, and engineering design problems