* 1563140
* Collaborative Research: Causes and Consequences of the Gradients in the Vertical Plasma Drift in the Equatorial Plasma Drift Vortex
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2020
* J. Vincent Eccles, Space Environment Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 03/31/2020
* USD 169,200.00

At low latitudes during the evening twilight period, as the E-region plasma
recombines due to fast chemistry, a strong vertical gradient in the plasma
density will appear below the F-region peak height. This vertical drift gradient
in altitude below the F peak can be surprising large, dynamic, and variable from
day-to-day. This award would apply a physics-based model of the ionosphere-
thermosphere-electric field to study the relationship between the development of
these vertical gradients and a possible production of plasma bubble structure.
In these circumstances the phenomenon of unstable plasma fluids that occur
whenever a dense fluid overlies a light fluid will generate strange three-
dimensional structures. These plasma depletion regions (often called "bubbles")
affect severely communications of radio waves that normally are reflected off
the smooth bottom side of the F-region plasma layer. The data that would be used
in this study are derived from observations by the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
and by the Low Latitude Ionosphere Sensor Network (LISN) network of total
electron content and ionosonde measurements of plasma density throughout South
America. Also associated with LISN data are equatorial magnetometer measurements
that can be interpreted to produce estimates of upward vertical plasma drift
rates during the evening period. These results would be used to explore the day-
to-day variability of the gradients to help develop a better understanding of
the relationship between the rate of vertical drift and the onset of equatorial
plasma bubble production. UTD will be utilizing a graduate student to accomplish
much of the data analysis and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large equatorial
plasma bubbles (EPBs), which are associated with the strongest signal
scintillations, have negative impacts on communication and navigation
technologies. Society has become dependent on these technologies to accomplish
common tasks in transportation services, industrial ventures, and military
operations. In addition to addressing these important science questions for the
mitigation of negative impacts of F-region plasma structures, these activities
will continue and expand multinational collaborations associated with the LISN
Project and the JRO.