* 1563799
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Top-down algorithmic design of structured nucleic acid assemblies
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2021
* USD 560,755.00

The past decade has witnessed dramatic growth in ability to "print" complex
nanometer-scale structures and patterns using self-assembling nucleic acids.
These structures can be used as templates to synthesize inorganic materials on
the 1-100 nanometer-scale, or employed directly in applications such as DNA-
based memory storage, therapeutic delivery, single-molecule structure-
determination, and nanoscale excitonic materials. While various computational
strategies are available to forward design these complex 3D structures manually
from underlying DNA or RNA sequence and topology, the inverse problem of
autonomously generating linear nucleic acid sequences from target geometry alone
remains an unsolved computational challenge. In this project, fully automatic,
top-down computer-aided design (CAD) algorithms are explored to generate
topological sequence designs for broad classes of programmed DNA and RNA
assemblies in an autonomous manner using target geometry alone. These assemblies
can be "printed" via self-assembly in vitro or in vivo to form target nanoscale
geometries using either synthetic or transcribed nucleic acids. The approach
will offer a broadly accessible, high-level programming language to realize
sequence-based programming of arbitrary 1D/2D/3D nanoscale structured materials
based on nucleic acids with diverse applications in basic science and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed computational
algorithms will be distributed freely online as open source software as well as
integrated into a variety of software packages to broadly enable the top-down
design of DNA and RNA assemblies. These algorithms and software will provide the
broader scientific and industrial communities with easy-to-use, high-level
design strategies that will accelerate the broad participation of groups in the
use of nucleic acid nanotechnology for diverse applications in biomolecular and
materials science and technology. The tools will open up opportunities for high
school students and undergraduates to gain hands-on experience in nucleic acid
nanostructure design. Curriculum developments at ASU and MIT will employ the use
of this sequence design software for participation by undergraduate and graduate
students in its use and application to basic questions in computer science and
nanotechnology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foundational aspects of
the design of nanoscale structured materials using DNA and RNA will be explored.
Algorithmic approaches to rendering diverse CAD-based geometric primitives using
DNA and RNA will be investigated, including wireframe lattices in 2D and 3D,
single-layer surfaces that may contain arbitrary curvatures, as well as 3D solid
objects. Meshing algorithms will be used to discretize geometric objects in 1D,
2D, and 3D, and topological routing and sequence design will be applied to
position nucleic acid strands within CAD objects. Continuous and discontinuous
single stranded nucleic acids will be routed through duplexes using anti-
parallel and parallel crossover configurations to exploit distinct modes of
programmed self-assembly. Sequence design and routing will be validated
experimentally to explore principles for obtaining optimal folding, self-
assembly, and positioning of specific base pairs in 3D space. Self-assembly of
nanostructures from RNA will additionally be explored, utilizing staple-free
designs from single long continuous scaffold strands. Close interaction between
experiment and computation will help to distill fundamental yet practical
approaches to programming structured nucleic acid assemblies.