* 1563412
* Collaborative Research: Solution Processing of Organic Semiconductors: A Coupled Atomistic-Continuum Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Chad Risko, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 208,597.00

Electronic devices manufactured from organic compounds are a promising
alternative to those containing active layers derived from inorganic materials.
The ability to fine tune material performance through chemical synthesis, and
the inherent flexibility, stretchability, and biological compatibility offered
by organic materials, offer new avenues for integrated, flexible, and large-area
electronics applications. The internal material distribution, or morphology, of
the manufactured devices critically influences performance. Understanding how
the morphology of the thin-film active layer is affected by the chemical
composition of the constituent organic compounds and manufacturing conditions
will enable the efficient and accelerated design of high performance electronic
devices. Computational modeling is a well-known approach to understanding
morphology formation during manufacturing, with most current computational
approaches limited to analyzing phenomena at one scale. However, it is now
understood that both molecular structure and mesoscale conditions interactively
affect morphology formation. This award supports fundamental research to provide
needed knowledge to understand morphology formation using a multiscale
theoretical approach. The results from this research will have broad
applicability across a diverse spectrum of technologies, such as solar cells,
diode lighting, flexible displays, and bioelectronics, thus directly benefiting
the U.S. economy and society. The research is based on a tight integration of
chemistry and engineering and involves concepts from materials science,
chemistry, mathematical modeling, and scientific computing. The research and
associated workforce development activities will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups and will offer students a solid foundation in
engineering, chemistry, computational science, and the development of energy and
electronics technologies.

This research will integrate first principles and molecular methods with meso-
scale continuum methods to create a cohesive, atomistic-continuum framework. The
framework will be used to model morphology formation during solution manufacture
of thin films of a class of molecules (containing oligoacene cores with
trialkylsilylethynyl side groups) that have shown promise for creating high
performing multifunctional electronic devices. Molecular simulations will be
used to compute free energies, solubilities and other material properties that
will be used by the meso-scale continuum simulations. The research will fill the
knowledge gap on the interplay between molecular structure and solution
conditions on (a) aggregation, (b) the early stages of film growth and the
impact of chemisorbed surface modifiers, and (c) the complexity of OSC film
formation in multicomponent polymer-molecule blends. This research will help
establish relationships between molecular structure, manufacturing conditions,
and the resultant material morphology.