* 1563805
* RI: Medium: Active Sensing, Localization, and Mapping in Dynamic Deformable Environments for Image-Guided Interventions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Michael Branicky, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,056,000.00

This study aims to address two important research problems in realizing
intelligent robotic systems for image-guided needle and catheter based surgical
interventions. The first research thrust focuses on localization and tracking of
flexible instruments and anatomical targets during the surgical intervention
using medical imaging. Algorithms for robustly tracking the instrument, target
tissue, and other relevant anatomical structures, including obstacles and
anatomical structures that need to be avoided, under noisy, incomplete sensor
measurements are essential for the robotic system for successfully performing
the procedure. The second research thrust aims to develop algorithms for
dynamically controlling the medical imaging system during the procedure. The
goal is to minimize the number of sensor measurements, and hence reduce costs
associated with sensing, while still obtaining sufficient sensing information.
This project will have direct broad societal impacts in healthcare, by
developing technologies that will improve percutaneous interventions, which are
widely used for both diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the present study is the development of
methods for active control of intra-operative medical imaging systems for
localization and tracking of instruments and anatomical structures during
percutaneous interventions. Specifically, the research will focus on development
of algorithms for active localization and mapping in dynamic deformable
environments, and active sensing algorithms for dynamically controlling intra-
operative imaging system. The developed technologies will be realized in
hardware and validated in benchtop experimental studies on a clinical
interventional magnetic resonance imaging system using real-time magnetic
resonance imaging techniques. The intellectual merit of the project comes from
the scientific contributions to the fields of robotics and medical imaging as
well as a synergistic integration of the two technologies.