* 1563427
* Revealing Ductility in Transition-Metal Carbides through Small Scale Experiments and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Suneel Kumar Kodambaka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 360,001.00

This award supports an investigation of the microscopic mechanisms governing
fracture and plastic deformation in transition-metal carbides. Transition-metal
carbides are a technologically important class of materials that are extremely
hard, can withstand high-temperatures, and exhibit excellent resistance to wear,
ablation, and corrosion. As a result, these materials are attractive for
building hypersonic vehicles, spacecrafts, cutting tools, etc. However, they are
generally believed to break easily at room temperature. The new knowledge gained
from these studies can help develop superior performance, long-lasting,
sustainable structural materials for use in a wider variety of applications.
Therefore, the results of this research and the educational training of next-
generation scientists and engineers will benefit the U.S. economy and society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition-metal carbides, owing to a mixture of ionic,
covalent, and metallic bonding, are expected to be intrinsically ductile even
though they are generally considered to be brittle at room temperature.
Motivated by the recent nanomechanical tests revealing ductility in single-
crystals of these compounds, this project aims to develop fundamental
understanding of the factors contributing to plasticity vs. fracture in these
materials. To this purpose, a combination of in-situ electron microscopy based
mechanical characterization and multi-scale modeling will be conducted at length
scales between 0.1 and 3 micrometers. A new modeling framework, called the
Discrete Dislocation &amp; Crack Dynamics will be developed and has the
potential for predicting concurrent plastic deformation and crack propagation in
these materials. The research plans to reveal the role of crystal orientation,
specimen size, transition-metal (group IV vs. V), and loading mode (tension,
compression, and indentation) in determining dislocation microstructures, onset
of fracture, and failure. These studies will improve the fundamental
understanding of the physics of plastic deformation in transition-metal carbides
and can likely enhance the life-time operation of advanced structural components
used, for example, in aerospace and automotive industries, cutting tools, and
hard coatings and may potentially lead to the design of tougher miniature
structural components, such as micro- and nano-electromechanical systems.