* 1563767
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Computational Blinking - Computer Architecture Techniques for Mitigating Side Channels
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2021
* USD 816,000.00

Computer systems increasingly perform operations on critical and confidential
data. Despite best efforts to protect this information, the side effects of
computations using this data, e.g., the computation time, the power consumption,
electromagnetic radiation, thermal emanations, and acoustics, can be used to
decipher secret information even when it is encrypted. Power analysis attacks
are particularly powerful and have been shown time and again to be able to
quickly and reliably extract the most critical information from otherwise secure
devices including smart cards, RFIDs, microcontrollers, microprocessors, and
other computing hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing inspiration from the
human body, the proposed research will develop new techniques to mitigate power
analysis attacks through a technique called computational blinking. An average
person blinks 15-20 times per minute; in fact our eyes are closed around 10% of
our waking hours due to blinking. With each and every blink, sections of our
brain are momentarily "powered off," yet we are rarely even aware of these near
continuous interruptions. Our techniques replicate this same, seemingly
imperceivable interleaving of "connected" and "disconnected" states in a
computer system through the dynamic reconfiguration of the electrical network
powering a device. During a computational blink, a portion of the processor is
momentarily electrically disconnected from the rest of the system making it more
difficult to modify or examine the side effects (e.g., power consumption) of
that computation. Our innovative circuits, architectures, run-time systems,
programming frameworks, design tools, and measurement methodologies make these
intermittent disconnections just as imperceivable in computing systems.