* 1563379
* Principal-Agent Models of Decision Delegation during Systems Design: Integrating Modeling and Behavioral Approaches
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Heather Lench, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2021
* USD 398,967.00

Modern systems engineering projects can involve tens of thousands of engineers
spread across thousands of independent organizations. For example, the Air
Force's F-35 Lightning II consists of more than 300,000 individual parts
delivered by more than 1,400 suppliers. Similarly, development of the Boeing 787
Dreamliner involved over 2,000 suppliers organized into three tiers of
responsibility. Decisions about how to delegate design authority within and
among these organizations can have significant impact on project metrics
(schedule and budget) as well as the performance of the resulting engineered
systems. Poor design delegation decisions have been cited as an explanation for
problems on large systems engineering projects. However, the impact of different
approaches to design delegation in systems engineering is not well understood at
a fundamental level. Improved understanding of design delegation in systems
engineering will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of systems engineering
projects and result in better-performing engineering systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to create a new
behaviorally-informed modeling framework for decisions that occur during the
design stages of a systems engineering project. The research will combine the
mathematics of principal-agent theory with new empirical results about human
judgment and decision-making behavior. This will enable the analysis of various
decision delegation strategies in a manner that is supported by data about how
engineering decision makers behave but at a scale impractical via human studies.
It is anticipated that the new modeling framework will enable researchers to
answer important questions about design delegation approaches, such as whether
one method is superior to another under particular circumstances and the degree
to which the performance of a method is sensitive to problem context. The
research will contribute new knowledge about how engineers interpret and respond
to incentives in their decision making and about how well-known methods for
design delegation compare to one another.