* 1563238
* Innovative Building Envelop Materials with Light-Driven Autogeneous Environmental Cleaning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Xiong Yu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 481,138.00

Improvement in indoor environmental quality is important as most people spend
over 90 percent of their time indoors, especially the young, the elderly, and
people with chronic illnesses. The temperature and humidity conditions in
typical indoor environment are inductive to the growth of bacteria, molds, etc.
Indoor air quality improvement in conventional buildings is primarily via the
ventilation system, whose operation incurs an associated energy budget. This
research will advance the understanding of the photocatalytic properties of
titanium oxide nanofiber composite to be use for autogenously clean of the
building environment. The autogenous cleaning function in air quality
improvement and airborne contaminant removal will be driven by the ambient light
and further augmented with nanoporous structure of the nanofiber. The material
will improve the aesthetic appearance of building structures and can serve a
variety of decoration purpose. The material design will be tailored towards
green and upscalable production. This innovation will demonstrate the design of
novel material and product to improve the quality of the indoor environment,
which can lead to significant improvement in the public life and reduce the
health care cost. Such innovation will expand the horizon of the multifunctional
building envelope. It will also train students through research projects that
increase the interdisciplinary competencies of young researchers in the areas of
design and testing of innovative materials, green manufacturing, and smart
building envelope, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to optimize the design of an innovative multifunctional photocatalytic fiber
composite through microstructuring and photoactivity chemical tuning. The
hypotheses of this research are 1) a green manufacturing procedure for non-metal
doped titanium oxide nanomaterials can be implemented to extend the activation
spectrum from ultraviolet to the visible and infrared ranges; 2) high efficiency
photocatalytic air cleaning can be achieved via composite nanofiber structure.
The project tasks include: 1) develop economical and effective syntheses
manufacturing technology for non-metal doped titanium oxide nanomaterials with
extended activation spectrum in the visible and/or near-infrared ranges; 2)
characterize the photocatalytic efficiency of non-metal doped titanium oxide; 3)
optimize the design of broadband photocatalytic nanofiber composite mat
considering multifunctional design matrix and methods of application; and 4)
quantify and fine-tune the photocatalytic efficiency and durability of the
nanofiber mat.