* 1563757
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Power of Randomness for Approximate Counting
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Daniel Stefankovic, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 415,999.00

The study of the complexity of counting problems has a long and rich history in
theoretical computer science. Counting problems (and closely related sampling
problems) arise naturally in many different fields, for example in statistical
physics they correspond to partition functions and for studies of the
equilibrium states of idealized models of physical systems, and in Bayesian
inference they arise for the study of posterior distributions or maximum
likelihood distributions. The specific questions addressed here are long-
standing open problems, progress on which will be of wide interest. The project
will develop new tools for approximate counting and is likely to make new and
useful connections between statistical physics, probability and computational
complexity. The research results will be disseminated via course notes, a summer
school and workshops. Any practical algorithms that result will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to extend the
known boundary of polynomial-time tractability for counting problems, to
understand whether randomness is essential and how it could be eliminated, and
to push the limits of the current fastest randomized algorithms towards
practicality. Specific aims include: (1) Polynomial-time randomized
approximation schemes for some fundamental problems that have thus far eluded
efficient solutions, (2) Deterministic polynomial-time approximation schemes for
some central problems that have celebrated randomized algorithms and (3) Faster
randomized algorithms for classical counting problems.