* 1563722
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: New Protocols and Systems for RAM-Based Secure Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Michael Hicks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 04/30/2021
* USD 484,196.00

Secure computation allows users to collaboratively compute any program on their
private data, while ensuring that they learn nothing beyond the output of the
computation. Existing protocols for secure computation primarily rely on a
boolean-circuit representation for the program being evaluated, which can be
highly inefficient. This project focuses on developing secure-computation
protocols in the RAM model of computation. Particularly challenging here is the
need to ensure that memory accesses are oblivious, and do not leak information
about private data. We are designing efficient oblivious data structures that
can be used as general-purpose building blocks for secure protocols in the RAM
model of computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a framework
that enables programmers to write high-level code that can then be compiled by a
back-end algorithm that analyzes the code and makes use of the oblivious data
structures we provide. This work is influenced by the needs of real
applications, and the techniques to analyze the exact requirements of the
program will evaluated and to tailor the resulting protocol to those
requirements. This project aims to develop tools making secure computation more
accessible to non-specialists, so it can be more broadly used to perform
computations on private data. The PIs on this project mentor both graduate and
undergraduate students and actively encourage involvement of minority students.
The project develops new course materials and interact with the broader
community through involvement in the IEEE cybersecurity initiative and the
Maryland Cybersecurity Council.