* 1563364
* High Fidelity Probabilistic Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Andrew Smyth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 06/30/2020
* USD 342,697.00

In the last decade, sensor based Structural Health Monitoring has become an
important area of research as it shows great potential for life-safety and
economic benefits for improved and responsible management of our aging civil
infrastructure. Structural health monitoring involves the detection of damage or
deterioration within a structure, the identification of its location and
severity and ultimately it can assist in providing a prognosis for the future
life of a structure. Many important civil structural systems are large and
complex, with many joints and components. The task of identifying damage and
deterioration in a high fidelity model of such a large system based on
relatively few sensor measurements which themselves are not perfect is highly
challenging. The main goal of this research project is to provide more detailed
and accurate estimates of structural condition in a probabilistic format, which
can be integrated into more reliable decision-making tools for infrastructure
stakeholders. Furthermore, development of novel algorithmic tools for nonlinear,
high dimensional system identification and parameter learning are of utmost
interest in many fields of engineering, biology and even finance. Thus, this
research could not only benefit from knowledge in other fields, but could
contribute to research domains well beyond the structural monitoring context at
the heart of the motivation here. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within Bayesian
estimation, the core framework adopted in this research, the algorithmic
frontiers lie in the sensitivity to noise, Gaussian versus non-Gaussian, for
example, as well as tackling high dimensional problems with local nonlinearities
and many static parameters to be identified. Overcoming these challenges
requires both a deep understanding of well accepted algorithms as well as
development of enhanced or novel algorithmic tools. In Bayesian estimation, two
main filtering algorithms are extensively studied in the literature. The
consequences of the Gaussianity assumption used in the unscented Kalman filter
will be carefully studied on systems of interest, while enhancements of the
particle filter, which behaves poorly in high dimensional systems, will be
introduced. Strategies to tackle the high dimensionality issue are based on the
Rao-Blackwellisation principle as well as partitioning schemes. Off-line
algorithms could also be integrated in this framework to obtain more accurate
estimates with lower uncertainties. Finally these schemes should be validated on
realistic, experimental data.