* 1563244
* Magnetically-Assisted Laser-Induced Plasma Micro-Machining for Flexible and Fast Texturing of Functional Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Challenges in the energy, environmental, and health sectors present a growing
need for flexible and scalable micro-machining processes for applications such
as textured surfaces for tissue adhesion and anti-bio-fouling, reduced wear in
tooling and engine systems, and functional surfaces for biomedical devices such
as needles and implants. This award funds research on a novel micro-machining
process that addresses several existing challenges, namely limitations in the
machinability of materials, patterning large areas at economically feasible
material removal rates, and generating micro-features of different sizes and
shapes. A fully realized magnetically-assisted laser induced plasma micro-
machining process will be capable of fast and direct generation of micro-
features with controlled geometrical characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
magnetically-assisted laser-induced plasma micro-machining, picosecond laser
pulses induce a plasma plume within a liquid dielectric. The plasma plume
removes material from the workpiece surface by a combination of thermal
vaporization and mechanical erosion to create machined features with desired
geometry. This project aims to advance processing capabilities in terms of
machining rate and precision by utilizing the external magnetic field's
influence on the plasma plume through two mechanisms: (1) by increasing its
energy density, leading to increased material removal rates; and (2) by
modifying its shape, leading to the nearly direct creation of desired micro-
feature geometries. The research objective is to understand the interaction
between the electromagnetic and thermo-mechanical mechanisms of the process,
i.e., interactions between the laser, dielectric, plasma, magnetic field and
workpiece material. Methods to achieve this objective include simulations using
magneto-hydrodynamic, particle-in-cell and finite element analysis methods to
determine the outcomes of each interaction. Experiments with a wide variety of
materials, including titanium alloys, silicon, polymers, and transparent,
brittle and reflective materials such as glass, will be conducted using a
picosecond laser system with a 532 nm wavelength, a computer-controlled array of
electromagnets, and focus variation-based metrology. Experimental results will
be compared with simulation results in terms of the depth and shape of the
generated features and material removal rate.