* 1563224
* Environment Assisted Cracking of Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Alireza Tabarraei, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 240,416.00

This award supports the study of the mechanism of environment assisted cracking
in graphene. Environment assisted cracking is a common damage problem in a
variety of engineering materials such as metals and glasses, leading to the
failure of materials well below their maximum strength. Recent studies on the
fracture properties of graphene show that environment assisted cracking in the
form of stress corrosion cracking can occur in graphene too. The wide spectrum
of potential applications of graphene from nanodevices to space elevators
necessitates understanding of the mechanisms of environment assisted cracking in
graphene to prevent catastrophic corrosion cracking. The second objective of
this project is to investigate if graphene can act as an anticorrosion coating
to protect reactive metals against corrosion. The permeability and optical
transparency of graphene has inspired its use as a protective layer of metals
such as copper. However, the experimental results on this subject are very
contradictory. Some experiments have indicated that graphene can stop corrosion
almost completely, while the others have indicated that using a graphene coating
can lead to a more extensive corrosion in the underlying metal. Advance
numerical modeling will be use to understand at what conditions graphene acts as
a protective layer and under what conditions graphene makes the situation worse.
Insights gained from this project can benefit society by reducing the large
industrial costs related to corrosion cracking. Outreach to high school students
will also be integrated with the research activities.

A main difficulty in understanding the mechanism of corrosion cracking is to
understand the impact of mechanical loading on the chemical reactions. A
hierarchical multi-scale method coupling atomistic and continuum domains will be
developed to consider the impact of long-range stress fields on the chemical
reactions occurring at the crack tip. The chemical reactions will be captured in
the atomistic zone using molecular dynamics combined with self-consistent charge
density-functional-based tight-binding and the impact of the long-range stress
field is captured using the continuum zone. The multi-scale method will be used
to study the impact of factors such as temperature, grain boundaries and
environmental molecules on the intergranular and intragranular corrosion of
polycrystalline graphene.