* 1563750
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Wizard: Exploiting Disk Performance Signatures for Cost-Effective Management of Large-Scale Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Song Fu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 316,000.00

The tremendous advances in low-cost, high-capacity magnetic hard disk drives,
flash-based solid state drives and non-volatile memory have been among the key
factors supporting big data applications and various computing-storage services
that the modern society deeply relies on. However, storage drives are reported
to be the most commonly replaced hardware components because of failures. This
causes service downtime and even data loss, costing enterprises multi-trillion
dollars per year. Existing disk failure management approaches are mostly
reactive and incur high overheads; they do not provide a cost-effective solution
to managing large-scale production storage systems. The goal of this project is
to achieve a deep understanding of the reliability of the real-world storage
systems, and to develop a cost-effective data and storage resource management
system for reliability enhancement. The investigators' approach to building
reliable, large-scale storage systems is carefully designed to support storage
health monitoring, modeling, prediction and proactive recovery in a systematic
fashion. In particular, they first categorize and model storage failures to
derive disk performance signatures and explore disk performance signatures to
forecast occurrences of disk failures. They then characterize I/O workload
dependency in disk performance degradation and integrate the performance
signatures of heterogeneous disk devices to effectively reconfigure and manage
storage resources. Furthermore, the project will provide easy-to-use APIs for
storage users and developers to employ the developed tools and techniques for
proactive data rescue and preventive disk reliability enhancement. Finally, the
project provides excellent opportunities for training graduate students,
especially minority and female students, and for developing new curriculum
materials on reliable storage systems.