* 1563198
* Empirically Determined Growth Laws for Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Mechano-Adaptation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Hall, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 366,742.00

There is often a disconnect between the available experimental measurements and
those needed to populate functional mathematical models. This project will
create a tightly integrated set of experiments and models to predict how
arteries change in response to the internal loading of blood flow. The results
of this work will be the framework needed to predict how the arterial system
develops during growth. The results will be incorporated into the PI's graduate-
level Tissue Mechanics course. In addition, the PI's undergraduate-level
Biomechanics course will be integrated with an existing outreach program to 2nd
graders at Harambee Elementary School where the young students learn some basic
fundamentals of the engineering approaches to problem
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, mechano-adaptation models have
employed phenomenological growth laws that connect arterial tissue or vascular
smooth muscle cell (VSMC) stress with vessel remodeling. This approach can give
important qualitative insight, but for the theory to be predictive, it needs to
be better connected to vessel physiology. An examination of VSMC cell biology
suggests that the simple growth laws commonly used are unlikely to universally
describe VSMC mechano-adaptation. For example, VSMCs readily switch between two
phenotypes (contractile and synthetic) with markedly different behaviors. This
switching is particularly pronounced during remodeling, both adaptive and
maladaptive, suggesting that it is a key step in the mechano-adaptation process.
Additionally, vascular dysfunctions, such as hypertension or atherosclerosis,
can lead to long-term changes in the mechanical environment surrounding VSMCs.
While the changes in matrix mechanics are often included in mechano-adaptation
models, the effect of the change in mechanics on VSMC function is not. The
principal investigators hypothesize that phenotype switching plays an important
measurable role in vascular smooth muscle mechano-adaptation, and that both
phenotype and mecahno-adaptation dynamics are influenced by extracellular
mechanical properties. They will employ novel in vitro assays to directly
measure VSMC mechano-adaptation and use these measurements to develop more in-
depth theory for use in models of artery mechanics.