* 1563129
* Investigating Endangered Language Contact for Awakateko and K'iche', two Mayan languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2022
* maria polinsky, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 201,461.00

Language contact situations arise when at least two languages or varieties
interact. Linguists know that there are a wide variety of outcomes that occur in
these situations. For example, sometimes only a few words are borrowed, or
perhaps entirely new languages emerge, or speakers use both languages and switch
and mix between them in systematic, patterned ways. There are significant gaps
in existing knowledge about language contact situations, and those gaps are even
larger when considering contact situations involving two or more endangered
languages. Endangered language contact raises questions on language 'vitality,'
that is, who, how and where the languages are in use. Even more understudied is
child language acquisition in such contact situations. This project will
document the language usage by children and adults in a region where endangered
languages are in contact. Broader impacts include providing graduate students
with international research and training opportunities and fostering a new
international collaboration between U.S. and foreign academic institutions. The
NSF Office of International Science and Engineering is providing support for
international activities associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With more than 30 Mayan languages are
spoken by about 3 million people in an area of 345,937 square kilometers, many
of these languages are in contact, resulting in multilingual speakers. Although
documentation projects have been carried out on several Mayan languages, their
interaction under contact has not been studied extensively. Understanding the
principles of contact-induced change will allow language scientists to better
document these languages and to make suggestions concerning their maintenance.
The team will focus on Awakateko and K'iche', two endangered Mayan languages
from the Huehuetenango region of western Guatemala. This project will
investigate the following main questions: How do children acquiring one or both
of these languages use them, and what determines which language is more
dominant? What are the patterns of everyday use of Awakateko and K'iche' by
adult speakers in this area? What factors determine the relative importance of
one of the languages? Led by University of Maryland linguist Maria Polinsky, the
collaboration includes two U.S.-trained linguists, Dr. Pedro Mateo Pedro and Dr.
Ajb'ee Jiménez Sánchez, both of whom are native speakers of Mayan languages and
are also experienced in linguistic fieldwork on their own and other Mayan
languages. The team is uniquely positioned to carry out this investigation,
given their collective expertise on heritage languages, syntactic theory, Mayan
languages, language contact, and child language acquisition. The project will
focus on a set of phonological and morphosyntactic phenomena: stress;
palatalization; numeral classifiers and detransitivization means (i.e.,
antipassive and agent focus). In addition, the project will construct a
transcribed, annotated corpus of naturally occurring data (narratives and
dialogues) with bilingual and multilingual speakers which will be accessible to
other researchers and the general public. The project has a strong training
component that will engage native speakers of both languages, and these trained
native-speaker citizen scientists will play the primary role in data collection.