* 1563426
* Material Removal and Ejection Dynamics in Femtosecond Laser Machining of Microchannels in Transparent Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Xin Zhao, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 272,665.00

High aspect ratio and high quality microchannels in transparent materials are
critical in many important areas, such as micro-optics, microelectronics,
micromechanics, and biomedicine. However, it is difficult to fabricate them
using traditional machining techniques, due to the brittle nature and low
thermal conductivity often found in transparent materials. Femtosecond pulsed
lasers offer the potential to overcome these difficulties. However, the aspect
ratio and quality of microchannels produced by femtosecond pulsed lasers are
limited. This award supports fundamental research to enable significant
improvement in the quality and aspect ratio of microchannels produced by
femtosecond pulsed lasers.

The research objectives are to establish the relationships between (1) ablation
mechanisms (spallation, phase explosion, fragmentation, etc.) and machining
conditions (laser intensity, pulse duration, etc.); (2) ablation mechanisms and
ejected particle size/velocity distributions; and (3) the size/velocity of an
ejected particle and its capability of escaping a long channel. To achieve the
first two objectives, a physics-based atomistic model, consisting of a molecular
dynamics method, a Monte Carlo method, and a particle-in-cell method, will be
developed, with laser parameters and material properties as the inputs. By
predicting the distributions of temperature, pressure, and electric field within
the materials, dominating ablation mechanisms will be revealed under different
machining conditions. This model will also predict the sizes and velocities of
the ejected particles by simulating the atom evolution during the laser-matter
interaction. To verify the simulation outputs, the sizes/velocities of the
ejected particles under the same conditions will be experimentally measured by
the time-resolved pump-probe imaging technique. To achieve the third objective,
outputs of the atomistic model, such as the temperature, pressure, and the
sizes/velocities of the ejected particles after the initial laser-matter
interaction, will be used as inputs into a subsequently developed smooth
particle hydrodynamics model, to simulate the ejected particle evolution within
the channel in a large time scale. For particles with given sizes and initial
velocities, the model will predict their escape or redeposition onto the channel
side walls, based on the temperature, pressure, and ambient environment inside
the channel. Ejected particle moving dynamics, such as their transient locations
and velocities, will also be observed in-situ using the time-resolved pump-probe
imaging technique, and compared with model simulation results.