* 1563950
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Bayesian Modeling and Inference for Quantifying Terrestrial Ecosystem Functions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 724,000.00

While the past decade has seen considerable advances in predicting missing
entries in data matrices, existing approaches have demonstrated sobering
performance and several limitations in an important scientific problem:
characterizing plant traits, such as plant height, seed mass, leaf area, and
leaf nitrogen, over space and time. Detailed global maps of plant traits will
enable accurate quantification of terrestrial ecosystem functions, such as
agricultural and forest productivity, and regulation of atmospheric CO2 levels.
This project uses the largest and most comprehensive plant trait database on the
planet (TRY, www.try-db.org) to develop a detailed characterization of plant
functional traits and trait diversity at relatively fine scales across most of
the terrestrial land surface. In doing so, the project produces the first
detailed uncertainty quantified maps of plant traits across all of earth's major
land ecosystems as well as their future projections. The project trains a new
generation of interdisciplinary scientists who can cross the traditional
boundaries between computer science, spatial statistics, and the Earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in the project makes substantial
advances on Bayesian probabilistic models for matrix gap filling or matrix
completion, as well as spatiotemporal gap filling with emphasis on continuous
fields. In particular, the project develops probabilistic matrix completion
models which can incorporate domain specific hierarchies, such as plant
taxonomic or phylogenetic trees, as well as spatial variations across different
environmental regimes. The project also develops methods for gap filling in
continuous fields based on spatiotemporal process models along with highly
scalable inference methods based on dynamic nearest-neighbor Gaussian processes.
The models and methods are expected to have impact beyond the scope of
quantifying ecosystem functions.