* 1563849
* CSR: NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Cloud Support for Latency-Sensitive Web Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Harsha Madhyastha, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

For web applications, as little as hundreds of milliseconds of additional delay
has been found to significantly degrade user experience and lower revenue. Cloud
services are well-positioned to help application providers reduce users' latency
by serving users from hundreds of locations across the world that have rich and
diverse Internet connectivity to users' networks. However, due to various
sources of inefficiency, web service performance in practice often falls well
short of the potential that cloud-based deployments offer. For example, many
users are incorrectly served from distant servers. Even when served from a
nearby server, performance can be degraded due to circuitous routing or
congestion. These suboptimal outcomes stem from the limited interface between
applications and cloud providers to express goals and achieve outcomes, and
often a mismatch in their goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a
multi-pronged cross-layer approach to enable cloud services to optimize the
performance offered by web services they host. First, the researchers will
develop a new approach for directing clients to nearby servers, combining the
strengths of existing approaches in order to overcome their weaknesses. Part of
this research will also include an investigation of how to jointly optimize
client-to-server redirection and back-end data placement in order to satisfy
end-to-end performance objectives. Second, this project will involve large-scale
studies of web transport performance and anomalies in order to inform the design
of low-latency transport protocols. Lastly, the researchers will design a system
to allow cloud tenants to take advantage of the rich interdomain routing
available to cloud providers, in order to best balance diverse performance and
cost constraints. Thus, this project will synthesize various inter-dependent
aspects of running a high performance web service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will collaborate with the providers of popular cloud services to
have a transformative effect on industrial practice and enable real-world
impact. By developing solutions for cloud providers to deploy for all
applications they host, this project will benefit application providers without
them having to build and deploy these solutions themselves. Where applicable,
the researchers will also deploy prototypes of their systems on the NSF-funded
PEERING and CloudLab testbeds, which other researchers can use to build their
own experimental applications. The researchers are committed to aiding other
research efforts by publicly sharing measurements gathered as part of this
project.