* 1563883
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: NVM-enabled Host-side Caches
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Giri Narasimhan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2020
* USD 783,461.00

Non-volatile memory (NVM) is a transformative technology that is dramatically
changing how data storage systems of the future are built. This technology
allows an unprecedented combination of performance and persistence into a single
device. This project will develop a suite of storage caching techniques for this
transformative technology along four complementary dimensions.

The first two usage dimensions address the selective use of NVM as host-side
read caches for persistently stored data as well as using their persistence
properties explicitly by developing fault-tolerant write caching solutions. The
latter two develop advanced techniques for delivering storage quality of service
(QoS) using NVM caches and building caching algorithms that are aware of data
reduction techniques, such as deduplication and compression, for the NVM layer.
Together, these contributions have the potential to transform enterprise data
center storage stacks by readily adopting the best properties of current and
future NVM technology. The expected performance benefits apply to a broad
spectrum of computer systems and applications.

Educational activities will include the involvement of undergraduate students
and incorporation of the project's research findings into coursework. Planned
outreach activities will focus on recruitment of under-represented students from
minority groups in computer science for participation in the project. Transition
of the new technologies to practice through open source distribution of the
Linux operating system and KVM hypervisor code implementing the innovations are
successful expectations.