* 1563672
* Collaborative Research: Training the next generation of Navajo language scientists
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Theodore Fernald, Navajo Language Academy, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2019
* USD 153,345.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. The Navajo language (also called Diné) has more speakers
than any other language indigenous to the United States. This is the language of
the Code Talkers, United States Marines who developed and employed a code in
World War II that was never broken. Despite strong traditions, very few Navajo
children are now learning to speak the language which means that it is at great
risk of vanishing within a few generations. The complexity of the grammar, which
contributed to the code's security, makes the language difficult to learn in
schools. This project will train the next generation of Navajo Nation language
scientists from in language documentation and linguistic analysis, broadening
participation by Native Americans in the social sciences. Broader impacts also
include working with language teachers on applying the analysis of Navajo
grammar to language teaching, which will benefit students in K-12 Navajo
classrooms. The project will also enhance the capacity of the two participating
organizations, Navajo Technical University (NTU), a tribal college that offers a
variety of educational degrees up to a master's degree in Diné Culture, Language
and Leadership and the Navajo Language Academy (NLA), a non-profit educational
organization dedicated to the scientific study of Navajo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summer workshops, ongoing since 1997, will
focus on applying principles of scientific research to the Navajo language and
discovering the rules and principles that underlie its grammar. Co-directed by
linguist Dr. Theodore Fernald from the NLA and cultural anthropologist Dr.
Wesley Thomas from NTU, the project will train tribal college students,
linguistics students, and Navajo Nation teachers in language documentation and
analysis annually. Learning the necessary linguistics, transcription and
annotation skills will enable participating students and language teachers to
create materials for a bilingual Navajo digital text corpus with analyzed
examples. Participants and other researchers will use the corpus to develop
hypotheses about language data and to test those hypotheses against the corpus
using the scientific methods employed by linguists. The corpus and its
recordings will be accessible on-line to provide resources for researchers,
teachers, and language learners. NTU students will engage in analysis and work
with the corpus throughout the year. A unique advantage of this planned research
is that it is possible because of the two generations of Navajo speakers who
were trained in linguistics graduate programs on how to engage in the scientific
study of their language, earning doctorates in linguistics and related fields,
the type of scenario that linguists argue enables deeper and richer
investigations of a language's structure. These summer workshops offer a unique
venue for research and teaching Navajo and Dene (Athabaskan) linguistics. A
professional evaluator will develop and implement an assessment plan to gauge
the success of NLA and NTU programs. The NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities
Program (TCUP)is providing support for tribal college participation in this
project.