* 1563591
* Fundamental Study of Friction with Hierarchically Ruga-controlled Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Kyung-Suk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 375,000.00

This award supports fundamental research on the mechanics of friction applicable
to modern nanotechnology as well as geotechnical science and engineering. Since
the time of Leonardo da Vinci, friction - sliding resistance between two objects
- has been one of the most challenging subjects still incomplete in
understanding but crucial in advancement of modern science and technology. For
example, it is critical in controlling sliding mechanisms in nano-manipulators
as well as in measuring and predicting forces building up at tectonic fault
lines. Here, the principal investigator plans to develop an innovative mechanics
framework - renormalization of friction, i.e. successive evaluation of larger
length scale friction with smaller length scale friction behavior, and verify it
with controlled experiments. The fundamental studies of this project will
establish a systematic framework for regulating nanoscale friction to control
macroscopic friction. The multi-scale framework of friction will be essential
for developing not only nano-mechanical device technology but also friction-
control technology in robotics and bio-medical device engineering, as well as
for solving scientific problems in geology. It will also advance computational
modeling and design capabilities for manufacturing processes sensitive to
friction control, widely encountered in production industries. In addition,
under this project, the principal investigator will develop an outreach program
at Brown, to educate underrepresented students through summer internship
programs, and to develop new course material.

Over the past two and half decades, research on multi-scale frictional processes
has been very active to uncover the molecular origin of these processes and to
bridge understanding of the phenomena at different length scales. Recently the
principal investigator's group revealed that renormalization
softening/strengthening of friction develops depending on the reduction of
molecular adhesive friction stress, scale-dependent flattening of asperities or
stiffening of the surface. This unique scheme of friction renormalization is
very powerful in investigating multi-scale friction processes of rough surfaces.
With this award, the principal investigator will study (i) renormalization
strengthening in rough-surface friction; (ii) Ruga (surface corrugation) control
of hierarchical roughness to study renormalization of friction; (iii) evolution
of roughness spectra and friction due to asperity plasticity and wear.