* 1564745
* Scholarship Program for Retaining, Inspiring, and eNabling Graduates (SPRING): Implementation and Assessment of its Impact on Retention and Graduation Rates
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Samantha Cass, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 649,279.00

Students who enter college with the desire to complete a STEM major but have
relatively weak mathematics proficiency tend to successfully earn their STEM
degree at a much lower rate than their peers. The loss of these students who are
interested in STEM fields contributes to the relative dearth in quantity of STEM
majors needed to support the US economy. Lyman Briggs College at Michigan State
University has developed a strong entry program focused on INstilling
QUantitative and Integrative Reasoning (INQUIRE) to help these students overcome
their lower math preparation and successfully enter into the college science
curriculum. However, the factors that lead to low math proficiency also
correlate notably with low socioeconomic status and very high levels of
financial need. Thus although the students who complete the INQUIRE program are
able to academically succeed in college science courses, their ability to
succeed in college is frequently still hindered by financial considerations
(including high debt burden and the need to dedicate precious hours to working
jobs for income, rather than focusing on academic endeavors). The SPRING program
will support students who are talented with demonstrated financial need in two
cohorts starting in their second year of college through to graduation. The
SPRING scholars will be supported with 1) scholarships, 2) the development of a
cohort with strong faculty mentorship, and 3) professional career skills
development and network building. The experience of each student will be closely
monitored through interviews to better understand which aspect of the program
were most beneficial and why. Additionally, we will use data analytics to
compare the retention and graduation rates of the students involved in the
SPRING program to matched students not participating in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a minimum of 26 scholars
across a range of STEM disciplines in their pursuit of a bachelor's degree.
Students will receive up to $3000 in the first year, $6000 in the second and
$9000 in the final year. The SPRING program will help scholars investigate the
breadth of possibilities in science careers and help them make informed
decisions about their career path. Throughout the project, the project team will
employ semi-structured interviews, student self-reflections, and data analytics
to evaluate the efficacy of the program. Specifically, the team will investigate
1) how the SPRING program impacts students with low incoming math proficiency,
2) what barriers to graduation remain for low math proficiency after the INQUIRE
program, 3) what value students perceive for the different components of the
program, 4) the impact of the inflating nature of the scholarship program, and
5) the result of the impact of the SPRING program on student retention,
graduation rates, and career paths. Findings will be disseminated and will add
to the growing literature relevant for institutions working on effective ways to
support entering students with weaker mathematics preparation.