* 1564926
* I-Corps: Ultra High Performance, Fiber Reinforced Concrete
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Shih-Ho Chao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Nearly half of total annual construction costs are related to repair,
replacement, and maintenance of existing infrastructure that have been
deteriorated or damaged by environmental stress, structural loading, or other
effects. The durability issues of structures can lead to a significantly higher
life-cycle cost in comparison to the initial construction cost. The deficiencies
of conventional concrete and subsequent impacts of the environment calls for a
more durable material that will last longer under environmental stress, thereby
contributing to the conservation of natural resources and the protection of
ecosystem. Ultra-High-Performance Fiber-Reinforced Concrete (UHP-FRC) is the
next generation of concrete material, which is six times stronger than
conventional concrete, highly damage tolerant, fully ductile, and free of cracks
under normal loadings. The very high compressive strength of UHP-FRC comes from
its micro-mechanical design by the dense particle packing concept. The addition
of discrete high-strength steel fibers considerably enhances its ductility and
toughness. UHP-FRC is a green concrete, environmentally friendly, and has the
ability to create a durable infrastructure that is resilient and sustainable for
the future of our country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
accelerate the introduction of UHP-FRC to potential areas of design and
construction in need of a futuristic material that allows sustainability,
workability, strength, durability, and resilience. The potential economic impact
in construction will be evidently clear with UHP-FRC, because the strength and
ductility of the UHP-FRC product will reduce the cost of reinforcement placement
and reinforcement materials. This material will impact the markets in
challenging architectural projects and constructability. This new technology
will also reduce cost in repairs and maintenance by approximately 25% in
comparison with conventional concrete. UHP-FRC has board applications in
blast/impact/earthquake resistant structures, challenging architectural members,
bridges and highways, railroads, and airport runways.