* 1564987
* FAST-TRAC: Identifying and Overcoming Barriers to Advanced Degree Attainment for Low Income Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Karen Panetta, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The FAST-TRAC program at Tufts University School of Engineering will recruit,
prepare, and support academically talented low-income undergraduate students to
complete an MS in Engineering through Tufts' existing 5-year BS/MS program.
FAST-TRAC's core features will be early outreach, support of the student-
research mentor relationship, skill-building workshops, and undergraduate
research experiences. Industry partnerships will connect students to current
state of the art challenges in their fields. FAST-TRAC will establish a
comprehensive and transferrable support framework to prepare low-income
undergraduate STEM students for the increased rigor, culture, and expectations
of a graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FAST-TRAC research component
will make significant contributions to the knowledge base about what inhibits
and facilitates the matriculation of underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students into STEM graduate programs. This program will
characterize the needs, perceptions, and research competencies of low-income
students pursuing graduate Engineering degrees, and will measure the
effectiveness of each program component in helping students achieve the MS
degree. The project will measure the contextual supports and barriers to
pursuing graduate education or securing a position in industry using the social-
cognitive theory of career choice and development. This measure has been
extensively used in the study of career choice and successfully applied to
examine the roots of gender and ethnic disparities in STEM disciplines.