* 1564340
* Strategies for the Concise Syntheses of Complex Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Christopher Vanderwal, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Vanderwal of the Department of Chemistry at UC Irvine
develop innovative designs for the assembly of structurally complex naturally
occurring structures. The underlying theme of the work is the strategic use of
inexpensive and readily available molecular building blocks to arrive at the
complex architectures of the targeted natural products in as few chemical
operations as possible. In so doing, existing synthetic methods are pushed to
their limits by their use in very challenging contexts, and novel chemical
reactivity is uncovered and utilized. The results of these studies positively
impact any area of applied science that benefits from chemical synthesis,
including pharmaceutical development, materials science, and more. This grant
also supports outreach activities to middle school students from underserved
communities to engage in scientific experiments on-campus, and simultaneously
learn about the college experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this proposal is the development of several strategies for the rapid buildup
of the molecular architectures of four different types of complex natural
products. The Himbert intramolecular arene/allene cycloaddition reaction and the
resulting strain-driven rearrangement of the cycloadducts, transformations that
have both previously been carefully investigated in these laboratories, are
being leveraged in a concise synthesis of a small family of alkaloids. A
combination of an arene-terminated cation-pi cyclization, a bioinspired A-ring
cleavage, and a cycloaddition of a novel cumulene equivalent Diels-Alder
dienophile set the stage for a rapid synthesis of a complex diterpenoid. An
underutilized heterocycle annulation is leveraged to synthesize a structurally
unique antibiotic alkaloid. Finally, either a concise and unusual but
potentially biogenetically relevant route or a more conventional approach
facilitate the first synthesis in an unusual family of complex alkaloids. The
broader impacts of this work include the exceptional research training for
undergraduate and graduate students. This grant also supports the UCI-LEAPS
program that brings in local middle school students for day-long experiences in
university chemistry and physics laboratories.