* 1564298
* SHF: Medium: A DSL for Data Visualization and Analysis in Imaging-Based Science and Scientific Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2016,08/31/2021
* John Reppy, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,182,415.00

This research project is focused on the design, implementation, and application
of Diderot, a high-level domain-specific programming language for analyzing and
visualizing 3D and 4D (spatio-temporal) data, such as produced by imaging
modalities and computational simulations on finite-element meshes. Many areas of
science now require computing with digital representations of the objects and
systems being studied, but creating new research software to visualize and
understand the data is a major bottleneck. With new ways of volumetrically
scanning specimens and increasingly nuanced models of dynamic systems, research
software is becoming more complex, and the computational expense of running the
software is significantly increasing. Diderot addresses this urgent problem by
simplifying the process of creating new parallel software to visualize and
process complex scientific data. The intellectual merits are how Diderot will
accelerate expressing mathematical ideas in working code, expand the kinds of
computational representations that Diderot understands, leverage the power of
large supercomputers, and help programmers debug their programs. The project's
broader significance and importance are derived in part from the kinds of data
that Diderot will handle, such as the high-resolution images produced by a
microCT scanner at Argonne National Lab (used daily by scientists from all over
the world), or the latest generation of light-sheet microscopes used in
developmental biology to investigate fundamental questions about how cells
organize themselves into tissues. The project's significance also derives from
the range of people who will use Diderot, from mathematicians writing
specialized finite element method programs, to college students getting their
first taste of scientific computation by working with real-world microscope data
capturing the formation of the nervous system in a fish
embryo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computation is an increasingly important tool for
science, but the semantic gap between the available computational tools and
scientific reasoning is often large. One pressing research topic within computer
science is how to create programming tools that can track the shift in parallel
computing hardware from traditional general-purpose CPUs to heterogeneous
processors with high-performance accelerators like GPUs. This proposal seeks to
accelerate research at the intersection of computation and science by exploiting
domain-specific language (DSL) technology to bridge this semantic gap and to
transform how scientists use software to understand data from measurement and
simulation. The PIs will build on the parallel DSL Diderot that they have
designed. Preliminary experience with Diderot demonstrates that it is possible
to write visualization and analysis algorithms in a very mathematical
programming notation that has performant parallel implementations on a variety
of parallel hardware. The project will build on these preliminary results in
several ways: the PIs will extend Diderot to support a wider range of data
models and to provide a richer set of computation tools for analyzing data; the
PIs will work on scaling Diderot to handle larger data sets and larger parallel
platforms; and the PIs will explore techniques and tools to better support
domain-specific software development. These research thrusts will involve close
collaboration between the areas of programming languages and image analysis. The
design of language features will be driven by the needs of image analysis
algorithms, as well as the foundational principles of programming languages. The
design and implementation of Diderot will be evaluated using the latest image-
analysis algorithms from the literature, as well as being used to prototype new
algorithms.