* 1564275
* CHS: Medium: Hyperlocal and Hypertemporal Information in Mass Emergencies Events: Next Generation Crisis Informatics Data Collection and Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kenneth Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,197,841.00

This project will advance the empirical study of crisis informatics by moving
the extensive analytics developed for post processing of social media-based
crisis information to the point of data collection to create a set of
intelligent data collection techniques. Crisis informatics is a
multidisciplinary field combining human-computer interaction and social
computing; its central tenet is that people use personal information and
communication technology to respond to disaster in creative ways to cope with
uncertainty. This research will reveal how people respond in disasters, both
collectively and individually, by examining their digital traces. This will help
create better emergency management practice and policy. The research will also
advance the delivery of the information people need in disasters by leveraging
the vast social media data sets that are produced during them. The safety of
people and provision of emergency care as a function of improved situational
awareness are the direct benefits of conducting this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research shows that people local to an event
seek and provide information online to help themselves and each other, and that
this information is highly localized and temporalized when compared to the
global conversation that otherwise arises. Current techniques to derive useful
information from the social media stream are limited because they usually cannot
scale to the vast growth in social media production; they are often restricted
to examining only the language of social media posts and not their metadata; and
social media are often collected in ways that prohibit the kinds of analyses
that are needed for deep exploration and re-use of the data. This research
relies on the body of work that the investigators have empirically conducted on
the nature of social media behavior in disasters, and incorporates those
rigorous deductive and inductive analytical methods at the point of data
collection of the social media streams. This will enable intelligent data
collection that can perform real-time analysis that bore in on the hypertemporal
and hyperlocal features of information communicated via social media. With
agility and rigor, solutions developed in this research will be able to pursue
multiple threads of emergent concern that will spawn multiple simultaneous data
collection trajectories. This will better enable real-time analysis and
visualization of what is happening in the social media record during disaster
events as they unfold.