* 1564755
* Visible Light and Divalent Lanthanides in Photoredox Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Matthew Allen, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Matthew J. Allen, Chemistry Department, Wayne State
University, is studying new lanthanide systems that catalytically perform
reductions and bond-forming reactions when exposed to visible light. Catalysts
are substances that permit chemical reactions to be run rapidly with minimum
energy consumption. They are used in a variety of industrial processes. In this
project, catalysts are being developed that utilize and can be switched on and
off by visible light. In addition, they operate under conditions that are not
compatible with current catalysts. Several important processes including
reactions that form carbon-carbon bonds are studied. Graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students are trained to become skilled and ethical scientists.
High school students, who are from groups underrepresented in science, have an
opportunity to participate in research, leading to a more educated and diverse
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new
lanthanide-containing complexes that can drive visible-light-promoted photoredox
catalysis. Specifically, the project tests the hypothesis that if trivalent
lanthanide-containing azacryptates are exposed to a sacrificial reductant and
visible light, they perform catalysis at redox potentials more negative than
divalent lanthanide salts alone. Testing this hypothesis simultaneously
addresses two long-standing challenges in redox chemistry: (1) the need for
photoredox catalyts tunable across a range of potentials and wavelengths for
improved chemoselectivity and (2) the need for air-stable, non-toxic
alternatives to samarium(II) hexamethyl phosphoramide. The research includes the
synthesis of a series of complexes of divalent and trivalent europium and
ytterbium. These complexes are characterized by UV/visible and fluorescence
spectra, electrochemical potentials, thermodynamic and kinetic stabilities,
crystal structures, solubilities, and propensities for transmetallation.
Additionally, the complexes are studied with respect to their ability to
catalyze important classes of photoredox reactions including reductions, carbon-
carbon bond formations, and ring closures. Finally, students are trained in the
scientific method and the responsible conduct of research.