* 1564950
* CAREER: A New Perspective on Biomineralization in Healthy and Dysfunctional Ferritins
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2015,06/30/2020
* Tolou Shokuhfar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 06/30/2020
* USD 330,936.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research is to Michigan Technological University. The
award is cofunded by the Biomedical Engineering program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. Current research shows
that the regulation of iron ions in human body is crucial for healthy function
of our brain, and in reducing the incidence of Parkinson or Alzheimer's
diseases. In human body, this important task is accomplished by proteins called
'ferritins'. Ferritin proteins store iron ions when their circulating amount
exceeds the required amount, and ferritins release iron ions when the body lacks
sufficient iron to perform its normal functions. The ferritin proteins store
iron ions in the form of crystals with well-defined atomic arrangements and
chemistry. This process is called biomineralization. While these unique proteins
have been the subject of intense research in biology and chemistry fields due to
their importance in many chronic diseases, little effort has been made to unveil
the dynamics of such biomineralization processes in liquid conditions. This
proposal will address this shortcoming by studying the biomineralization process
inside the proteins in real time at atomic scales. A potential outcome of these
studies would be in developing novel approaches in the early detection and
treatment of some these neurological diseases. By better understanding the role
of iron storage in proteins, it may be easier to develop new pharmaceutical
drugs to correct the ferritin dysfunctions. As part of the teaching, training
and outreach activities, special attention will be given in recruiting and
mentoring female and underrepresented students to work in the investigator's
research laboratory. In addition, a new course will be developed to educate
undergraduate and graduate students on the recent developments in this field of
biomineralization. To increase public awareness, this project plans to
distribute the results of this project through press coverage, news releases and
social media. Radio talk shows to discuss the new horizons on reducing neuro-
degenerative diseases such as Parkinson or Alzheimer's are also part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to Michigan
Technological University is in developing an understanding the role of
biomineralization and demineralization processes with ferritin proteins, and to
study iron transport in the human body with the goal of understanding the
fundamental differences among different ferritins responsible for neurological
diseases. This award is cofunded by the Biomedical Engineering program in the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems. Ferritin
proteins convert ferrous irons to ferrihydrite and iron oxide crystals through a
complex biomineralization process in the body. Ferritins play an important role
in iron transport, and thus protecting the body from iron ion toxicity. Any
dysfunction in ferritin protein may result in chronic diseases due to iron
toxicity including neurological ones. Therefore, understanding the process of
biomineralization by ferritin is of great importance in the study of neuro-
degeneration and other chronic diseases such as Parkinson or Alzheimer's. The
proposed research probes are expected to understand the biomineralization
processes within different ferritins with respect to nucleation, growth
mechanism, existence of defects, and morphology of healthy and dysfunction
ferritin. Using liquid electron microscopy with subnanometer scale resolution,
this award will study the biomineralization and/or demineralization processes
inside a ferritin protein in solution, and in real time. The broader impacts of
this CAREER award would be in integrating undergraduate and graduate education
in teaching and training with this multi-disciplinary research at all levels
while promoting diversity. Graduate and undergraduate students involved with the
project will be trained in emerging fields such as in-situ electron microscopy
and biomineralization. A new graduate course will be developed for senior
undergraduate and graduate students. The investigator and graduate students will
work with minorities and underrepresented students in the proposed research
activities. As part of this project, this researcher will recruit
female/minority students for undergraduate education through well-established
outreach programs at Michigan Technological University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;