* 1564362
* FRG:  Collaborative Research:  Geometric Structures on Higher Teichmuller Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2021
* USD 432,160.00

A surface is a space which looks locally like the 2-dimensional plane, e.g. the
surface of a basketball or a pretzel. Surfaces arise naturally in many
scientific fields. A geometric structure is a way of measuring distances and
angles on a surface or more complicated object. Studying spaces of geometric
structures (or shapes) on a fixed object gives further information about their
nature. The classical Teichmuller theory studies a space which parametrizes
certain geometric structures (of constant curvature) on a fixed surface.
Teichmuller theory has impacted diverse areas in mathematics, including
algebraic geometry, complex analysis, low-dimensional topology, and dynamics, as
well as theoretical physics through its connections with string theory. A metric
on Teichmuller space is a way of measuring the distance, or difference, between
two such geometric structures. The PIs plan to study metrics on a generalization
of this theory called Higher Teichmuller Theory. Higher Teichmuller spaces may
be viewed as deformation spaces of geometric structures on higher-dimensional
spaces. It shares some of the nice properties of the classical theory and has
become a very active field of research. The PIs will mentor graduate students
who will be engaged in aspects of the project. They will also run a program
which helps science and engineering students from low-resource high schools
transition to college studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher Teichmuller theory
studies spaces of "geometric" representations of a hyperbolic group into a semi-
simple Lie group. The main goal is to develop a theory which shares the
richness, beauty and versatility of classical Teichmuller theory. The Higher
theory has exploded in popularity because of the interactions it fosters between
the subjects of geometric topology, real and complex differential geometry, Lie
theory, algebraic geometry, string theory, and dynamics. Bridgeman, Canary,
Labourie and Sambarino used thermodynamic formalism to construct a pressure
metric on many higher Teichmuller spaces which is motivated by Thurston's
definition of the Weil-Petersson metric on Teichmuller space (and its
reformulations by Bonahon and McMullen). In the special case of the Hitchin
component, the pressure metric is a mapping class group invariant, analytic
Riemannian metric whose restriction to the Fuchsian locus is a multiple of the
Weil-Petersson metric. Wolf developed an analogous approach to the Weil-
Petersson metric, and has results on the isometry group and curvature of the
Weil-Petersson metric, degeneration of hyperbolic structures, and on harmonic
maps (Hitchin equations) approaches to Teichmuller theory. Wentworth has worked
on the pressure metric, Weil-Petersson geometry, Higgs bundles and harmonic
maps. The PIs together propose to study the isometry group, curvature and metric
completion of both the pressure metric and variants on Hitchin components and
quasifuchsian spaces, aiming to understand the pressure metric on general higher
Teichmuller spaces.