* 1564989
* The RADSS Program (Rural and Diverse Student Scholars)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 643,925.00

The Rural and Diverse Student Scholars (RADSS) Program at George Mason
University will offer scholarships and research experiences to rural and diverse
undergraduates, who are academically talented and have demonstrated financial
need. Students will major in science degrees such as astronomy, biology,
chemistry, environmental science, mathematics, geology, and physics at George
Mason University. The specific objectives of RADSS are to: (1) strategically
attract talented rural and diverse students to major in College of Science (COS)
degrees, (2) promote retention of talented rural and diverse students in COS
majors, and (3) directly support undergraduate scholarly activity by these
underrepresented students in the College of Science. The RADSS Program will
recruit and target high school students from rural parts of Virginia who express
interest in STEM, and will work with target schools to increase awareness of
science, technology, and/or math degree options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RADSS
will build capacity at Mason to form partnerships with regional laboratories and
industry, for students to gain research experiences and mentorship experiences.
Rural student access to research opportunities has the potential to be a gateway
for them to pursue a science, technology, or math degree. The inclusion of
undergraduate research and S-STEM Scholar support by Learning Assistants is an
innovative design for a two-cohort model. The undergraduate research component
has been shown to be effective for supporting student scientific identity
formation and motivates students to complete STEM courses and degrees. The
synergistic effects of these components and the effectiveness of an
interdisciplinary faculty team will be investigated. The evaluation of the RADSS
S-STEM program will benefit our understanding of how to recruit and support
rural undergraduates in science, technology, and math. This program will be
supported by the STEM Accelerator Program in the College of Science (COS), the
COS Dean's Office, the Admissions Office, and the Students as Scholars Program
in the Provost's Office at Mason. By working to increase the number of rural and
diverse students in STEM at Mason, the RADSS program will benefit NSF's mission
to increase participation of those typically underrepresented in science and
technology.