* 1564727
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: HydroClim: Empowering aquatic research in North America with data from high-resolution streamflow and water temperature GIS modeling
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 438,312.00

The clean water provided by aquatic systems is fundamentally important to
humans. These systems also sustain biodiversity and provide support for basic
ecological processes as well as important economic and recreational activities.
Nevertheless, freshwater systems are heavily impacted by human actions that are
having significant detrimental effects on water quality, increasing water
temperatures, altering seasonal river and stream flows, and subsequently
impacting freshwater biodiversity. Projected changes in air temperature and
precipitation in the coming century are expected to further impact water
resources and the biodiversity dependent on these systems, yet basic data
describing variation in streamflow and water temperature across North America
are not available. This project will address this issue by generating the
"HydroClim" dataset, which will provide monthly streamflow and water temperature
predictions for stream sections in all major watersheds across the United States
and Canada from 1950-2099. This work will produce the first dataset on
freshwater resources in North America of this scope and resolution. These data
will provide a vast array of benefits to the public in terms of greater
understanding of water resources in the coming century as well as numerous
training opportunities directed at developing a large and interactive group of
scientists focusing on the conservation of water resources and freshwater
biodiversity in the United States and Canada. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to develop and distribute "HydroClim", a data set
characterizing contemporary and future streamflows and water temperatures in
individual stream sections in all major watersheds across the United States and
Canada. These data will be generated on high-performance computing systems using
multiple Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) hydrologic models linked with a
water temperature model. The SWAT hydrologic and water temperature models will
be generated using contemporary air temperature and precipitation data as well
as future climate data from multiple Global Climate Model scenarios to produce
monthly estimates of streamflow volume and water temperature for the years
1950-2099. These data will also be integrated with FishNet 2 (www.fishnet2.net),
an established data portal that provides scientists, government agencies,
resource managers, and the general public free and open access to occurrences of
over 4.1 million species lots of freshwater fishes, globally, and over 2 million
lots for the United States and Canada, thus allowing for the characterization of
the habitat requirements of freshwater species in this region. Results from
these efforts will also allow for examination of the sensitivity of streams
throughout the United States and Canada to changes in climate, thus providing a
greater understanding of the factors regulating water resources as well as the
distribution of freshwater biodiversity both now and in the coming century. The
HydroClim data and results of this project will be available online at
www.hydroclim.org.