* 1564067
* TWC: Medium: Limits and Algorithms for Covert Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,198,781.00

Security and privacy are prominent concerns in modern communications. Although
cryptographic approaches have been widely studied to protect a message's content
from deciphering by an eavesdropper, there are many times when hiding the very
existence of the communication is critical. The hiding of communication, termed
covert (private) communication, is important in many domains such as covert
military operations, and removing the ability of users to be tracked in their
everyday activities. It is also important to study how to limit such covert
communications, for example between parties such as terrorists organizing
activities to do harm. This project is focused on understanding what the
potential is for covert communications, i.e., how much information can be
communicated without detection, and the development of practical schemes for
providing covert communications as well as techniques for limiting such
communication.

Covert communication has been historically considered from a practical
perspective. For example spread spectrum communications was developed as a
wireless communication technique to provide covert communications. Systems such
as Tor were developed to provide covertness in the Internet. This project
focuses on the systematic investigation of the fundamental limits in providing
covertness in communications at the physical, the network, and the application
layers of modern communication networks. It will explore the use of noise in
wireless channels and timing variabilities in networks to implement covert
communications. This includes the development of fundamental limits in terms of
the amount of information that can be conveyed covertly without being detected,
while accounting for uncertainties among all participants. The project will also
focus on the development of fundamental limits for application-level covert
communications using voice over IP and image posting on social networks. A key
consideration will be how these limits can be impacted by changes in the
operating environment, including those changes made intentionally by allies of
the communicating parties to enhance covert communications or those made by
adversaries of the communicating parties to limit such. A second focus will be
on the design and evaluation of algorithms that ensure communicating parties
achieve these limits and another set of algorithms that ensure these parties are
detected when they attempt to exceed the limits.