* 1564049
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Composing Interactive Data Visualizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Eugene Wu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,999.00

Data is a growing part of our culture, and visualizations of data are key to
helping people understand and discuss the issues described by the data. Charts
and graphs used to be associated with classrooms and laboratories; today they
appear in mainstream coverage of weather, politics, sports, and other popular
topics. This has happened in part because of advances in the technology for
composing visualizations: it's much easier today to generate custom charts,
thanks to a revolution in toolkits for data visualization driven by the academic
research community. But it is still difficult to author *interactive*
visualizations that allow users to manipulate charts. Research shows that
interactivity helps people better understand and explore data visualizations. A
number of interactive visualizations have appeared in popular online newspapers
like the New York Times in recent years. Unfortunately, current interactive
visualization toolkits are very technical and difficult to use, even for
experts. The collaborative interdisciplinary team involving researchers and
their students at the University of California-Berkeley (IIS-1564351), Columbia
University (IIS-1564049) and University of Washington (IIS-1562182) works on
making it far easier to build interactive visualizations. The goal of this
project is to develop an interactive visualization design framework that will
substantially simplify the task of specifying interaction in visual exploration
of data. This will broaden the population of users and organizations who can
craft rich, interactive visualizations and understand the presented
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores a declarative approach to
specifying interactive data visualizations called "Logical Interaction" (LI),
realized in a new language called LIL. As a high level goal, LIL is intended to
significantly simplify the specification of interactive visualizations, enabling
more widespread use of interactive features in data visualizations. The dynamics
of interaction introduce unique technical challenges and opportunities,
including debugging and testing of asynchronous interaction handlers, and design
tradeoffs between scaling up data and maintaining interface responsiveness. The
hypothesis of the research is that LI can make these challenges much more
tractable, and that LIL can engage visualization designers in widespread,
creative development of new interactive visualizations. The research project
includes exploring the fundamental modeling and language design issues in this
domain, to develop techniques for composing and analyzing interaction code, and
to deliver a prototype language, runtime, and analysis suite that demonstrates
the benefits of our ideas. Results of the work will be embodied in a language
runtime for LI, which will be freely available as open source. The project will
evaluate the effectiveness of LI in terms of its interactivity and scale, the
range of interactive visualizations it naturally supports, and the ability for
users of varying skills to learn and use it. The researchers will also
experiment with LI in university courses on Big Data and Data Science, and share
the curricula publicly along with the software. Project web site
(http://nsfdeclarativevis.github.io/NSFDeclarativeVis/) will provide access to
project software, datasets and educational material, and research results will
be published in the scientific literature.