* 1564643
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Creating a generic workflow for scaling up the production of species ranges
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Brian McGill, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 89,963.00

The science of forecasting where a species can live and how it responds to
climate change is still in its infancy. A species' geographic range is the map
of where a species can be found. It is fundamental to understanding species'
ecology and evolution and increasingly plays a vital role in conservation.
Collections of species ranges covering most of the 30,000 terrestrial vertebrate
species are already available for scientific analysis. However, collections of
species ranges from the other ~95% of species on the planet are rare. The time
is ripe to change this. New access to vast quantities of data from biological
inventories, museums, citizen science, and previously funded studies mean that
adequate data are available to estimate the ranges of many more species.
However, we are currently missing robust forecasting methods and the
computational tools to produce large numbers of ranges. This project will
develop the novel computational methods and algorithms needed to forecast the
current state and future fate of the many thousands of poorly studied species
ranges. These methods will be applied to forecast how 100,000+ plant species in
the New World will respond to climate change. The researchers will test key
assumptions in conservation biology about how species respond to changing
climate and the geographic constancy of diversity hotspots across North and
South America have/will change over time. The end result of their work will be a
novel tool for the ecological community that has tremendous potential to guide
biological sampling strategies, particularly in conservation and citizen science
applications.

The proposed research will examine whether biodiversity hotspots are constant
through time and whether species climatic niches are phylogenetically conserved,
two implicit assumptions with wide-reaching implications in conservation biology
and basic ecology. This research will develop a workflow to predict species
ranges for any taxonomic group using by combining occurrence data with GIS data.
This workflow will be applied to all New World plants to study basic questions,
such as how species richness varies across space and time (a topic studied
almost exclusively in vertebrates and trees). Computationally, the project will
address core challenges in data scrubbing, niche modeling practices, novel niche
modeling methods, and mega-phylogeny analysis methods. A freely available
generic pipeline will be capable of linking biodiversity occurrence data to
species ranges and scaling these computations to 1000s or 100,000s of species.
This integrated pipeline will be implemented by: 1) appropriately scrubbing data
to remove taxonomic and geographic errors, 2) identifying clear best practice
methods for range modeling applicable across diverse species, 3) innovating
range modeling methods that integrate diverse data such as presence only museum
collections and abundance-based plot data 4) scaling computationally-intensive
range modeling in an HPC environment, and 5) placing the outputs of the products
in a phylogenetic context. This project will develop such a pipeline using a
novel database of 20,000,000 observations of 100,000+ species of plants in the
New World. The range forecasts produced will be used to test key assumptions in
conservation biology about the phylogenetic conservatism of species climatic
niches and the geographic constancy of diversity hotspots over time. This
research will make substantial contributions to scientific infrastructure
through the development of a scientific codebase for the production of high-
quality species ranges from primary biodiversity data. The results of the
project can be found via the following websites
(http://bien.nceas.ucsb.edu/bien/ and bien3.org).