* 1564487
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Stability of Structures Large and Small
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Miranda Holmes-Cerfon, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2019
* USD 78,506.00

This award supports collaborative research efforts in the area of materials
science by an interdisciplinary team comprising pure mathematicians, applied
mathematicians, computer scientists, and physicists. Answers to natural
questions about the stability and rigidity of material structures involve
understanding the geometry of their components. Recent advances in materials
synthesis have emphasized the need for a deeper understanding of the geometric
stability of physical structures at the atomic scale and the need for insight at
all scales, from atomic to macroscopic. Key mathematical tools for this analysis
come from the area of "rigidity theory," which studies the mathematical
properties of discrete sets of points with the distances between certain pairs
of points held fixed or constrained by distance inequalities. Rigidity theory
lies at the nexus of discrete geometry, graph theory, and algorithms, and it has
deep connections to semidefinite programming and convex geometry. This project
aims to deepen understanding of the stability of material structures.

One goal of this project is to develop a mechanistic explanation of tunneling
between asymmetric stable configurations of two-dimensional disordered
materials, such as glass. Construction of accurate mechanistic and computational
models requires deep mathematical analysis and development of appropriate
algorithms. A second goal is to develop methods for predicting the stability,
configurational entropy, and kinetics of small short-ranged-potential systems in
three dimensions. Examples of such distance-constraint systems include small
molecular structures, as well as colloidal clusters, containing a few particles
bound together by reversible attractive interactions, modeled as sticky spheres.
What kinds of rigid configurations are there, and what are computationally
feasible tests for their rigidity? How do these particles move and the
structures deform? There is a tight link between rigidity theory and the general
convexity and duality properties of the positive semidefinite cone, a central
concept in numerical optimization. Finding a recursive decomposition of a
generically rigid framework into rigid subsystems is a longstanding problem.
Additionally, matroid theory, important in rigidity theory, has made the
characterization of rigid systems more approachable and more algorithmically
efficient. Rigidity theory could have implications for algorithms for low-rank
matrix completion as well. These connections, questions, and implications will
be explored in this project.