* 1564839
* STEM Scholars Program:   Developing Tomorrow's Leaders in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Alison Hyslop, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at St. John's University in
Queens, New York will support 70 academically talented, low-income students over
a 5-year period to attain bachelor's degrees in biology, chemistry, mathematics
and physics, to facilitate entry into the STEM workforce or advanced degree
programs upon graduation. In addition to scholarships, students will receive
support in the form of study skills workshops, tutoring, seminars, career-
planning workshops, and peer mentoring by faculty. The project will also help to
increase retention among all first-year science and mathematics students by
establishing a group of faculty who will introduce evidence-based high-impact
education practices in introductory-level courses. Scholarships and support for
low-income and academically talented students, who may not otherwise be able to
obtain STEM degrees, will help to produce a well-trained workforce that will
contribute to the economic well being of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project combines a variety of approaches for improving STEM degree completion. A
faculty working group called the Science Consortium will be created. These
faculty expect to increase retention by improving introductory courses in
degrees in biology, chemistry, mathematics and physics. Project faculty will be
trained in evidence-based, effective instruction and high-impact education
practices and will implement these in introductory-level courses. The core
faculty team will serve as campus leaders training other members of the faculty
and working together to fully transform the introductory-level science and
mathematics curricula. The project will utilize a sophomore seminar as a means
to develop a scholarly community between commuter and resident student
populations and to provide low-income academically talent commuting students
access to high impact practices known to improve retention including
collaborative assignments and projects, research with faculty, and service
learning opportunities. In this sophomore seminar entitled "Solving the Big
Problem," scholars will work in groups and choose their own problem to address
under the guidance of faculty facilitators. Scholars will be encouraged to
choose problems impacting the greater New York City area that can be analyzed
using a multidisciplinary STEM approach. The seminar will form the basis around
which a cohort of scholars will be established. The project will study how this
seminar approach improves retention and helps low-income students, many of which
are non-residential commuting, give these students a community build around
curricular, and co-curricular activities. The study will use a pre-post analysis
of matched comparison groups to determine program effectiveness. The findings
from the program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education community.