* 1564587
* Scholarships For Excellence, Achievement, and Professional Competence in Science, Math, and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2024
* Seti Sidharta, Contra Costa Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,982.00

Contra Costa College (CCC) is a two-year Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)
located in San Pablo 20 miles north of Oakland/San Francisco and 50 miles north
of Silicon Valley, offering associate degree programs and certificate programs
in a variety of STEM fields. This five-year project will recruit high ability,
low-income students in biological science, computer sciences, engineering,
mathematics, and the physical sciences, to receive mentoring and academic
support so as to reduce time to associate degree completion. Four cohorts of 30
students each will participate. Research opportunities and internships for
students will be coordinated by the Center for Science at Contra Costa College,
which engages in collaborative partnerships with many regional National
laboratories and local industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer Lead Team Learning
(PLTL) will be utilized to deepen conceptual knowledge and understanding. A
learning community will be built through participation in the Center for
Science, which models the approach of Uri Treisman for student support. Experts
from the Lawrence Hall of Science will oversee the research aspects of this
project. Together with members of the principal investigator (PI) team, they
will study whether or not reducing students' financial burden helps them to
complete their academic goals, whether or not summer bridge activities improve
the STEM pipeline, and how the PLTL model helps student learning and increases
student success. Broader impacts will be gained via workforce development
opportunities for students as well as promoting transfer to 4-year institutions.
Metrics for evaluating the project's implementation activities will include
short-term goals for scholarship recipients (e.g. 85% year-to-year retention),
mid-term goals for transferring to a baccalaureate institution (80% of scholars
transfer within three years), and long-term graduation goals for the transfer
students (90% attaining a baccalaureate degree within six years).