* 1564969
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Upper Delta Region Biodiversity Scholarship
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Kurt Neubig, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,726,969.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project is a collaborative effort between
Arkansas State University, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, and
Murray State University in Murray, Kentucky. The Upper Delta Region Biodiversity
program will provide scholarships and other support to 44 graduate students and
68 undergraduate students from these institutions. These academically talented
and low-income students will participate in scientific research efforts
involving the Upper Mississippi Alluvial Plain. Activities will include the
collection and maintenance of natural history specimens and the use of these in
ecological research for species discovery, patterns of genetic diversity and
isolation, and impacts of habitat degradation and other environmental change.
Student participation in this type of research and associated academic
collaborations with peers are known to improve retention and persistence. This
project will seek to improve student success through scholarship-associated
supports in a program focused on biodiversity and biodiversity collections. The
project will also study how student identification with a research community and
other groups, along with the development of academic peer networks contribute to
student success. Scholarships and support for low-income and academically
talented students, who may not otherwise be able to obtain STEM degrees, will
help to produce a well-trained workforce that will contribute to the economic
well being of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to scholarships, the
Upper Delta Region Biodiversity program will provide support in the form of a
cohort curriculum, peer mentoring, faculty mentoring, professional development
seminars, research participation and support, participation in professional
society meetings, and summer opportunities including specialized coursework and
participation in summer institutes. Network analysis will be used to map the
extensity and density of student academic networks. A matched control group will
be used. The study will help determine the characteristics of student academic
networks and group identification associated with retention and degree
completion. Participating institutions are members of the Delta Research
Consortium, and this project will help to establish a model for multi-
institutional research collaboration helping to promote STEM degree attainment.
The findings from the program will be disseminated to the nation's STEM
education community and will help to increase understanding of the attributes
and practices of successful student scholarship and support programs for
academically talented, low-income students.