* 1564105
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Scaling and Prioritizing Market-Sized Application Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Patrick McDaniel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 547,213.00

The emergence of smartphones and more generally mobile platforms as a vehicle
for communication, entertainment, and commerce has led to a revolution of
innovation. Markets now provide a dizzying array of applications that inform and
aid every conceivable human need or desire. At the same time, application
markets allow previously unknown multitudes of application developers access to
user devices through fast- tracked software publishing with well-documented
consequent security concerns. The science and tools for performing security
analysis of applications have vastly improved over the last decade. However,
market providers have limited capability to apply those analyses at scale to the
massive software markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a crosscutting
research, educational, and outreach plan improving the scalability and accuracy
of smartphone application analysis. The research effort focuses on the creation
of new techniques and algorithms to enable analysis of large bodies of
applications by reducing analysis cost and prioritizing identified security
vulnerabilities by their expected impact. Explored within the context of Android
Intent analysis resolution, the team is developing efficient algorithms and
study the computational complexity of matching application communication sources
and sinks thereby supporting phone-wide information flow analysis, developing
empirical models for estimating the likelihoods of inter-component
communication, and exploring features and metrics indicating their potential
security impacts communication pathways. The approaches are being applied to a
commercial markets (Apple iOS) and domains (web, desktop, and server
environments) and massive application data sets.