* 1564162
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Semi and Fully Automated Program Repair and Synthesis via Semantic Code Search
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Yuriy Brun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,329.00

Many aspects of our economy rely heavily on software working correctly. However,
software errors are common, routinely cause security breaches, and cost our
economy billions of dollars annually. Despite the well-known high costs of
software errors, the software industry struggles to overcome this challenge, as
new errors are reported faster than they can be fixed. Recent research has
demonstrated the potential of automated program repair techniques to address
this challenge. In this research, we develop new techniques to fix software
errors and implement new features automatically. The challenge is to fix code
while not breaking other functionality, and to work toward repairing code of
increasing complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach takes advantage of the
high availability of open-source code that already implements many functions
required for a new software project. The approach is to search for relevant code
in open-source projects, adapt that code to its new context using automated
software repair and generation techniques, and then validate the changed
software. A key component of the approach is semantic code search, which queries
large databases of code to find code snippets that satisfy a behavioral
specification. The project develops novel techniques that (1) encode large,
searchable bodies of code as behavioral profiles, (2) localize bugs and features
to code blocks, modules, and components, (3) extract the desired behavioral
profiles of those blocks, modules, and components, (4) use the extracted
profiles to search the database for potential patches, (5) adapt the potential
patches to fit into the code context, and (6) validate the potential patches.
The project focuses on producing high-quality code, verifying that the injected
code does not break existing functionality. The broader impacts come mainly from
goal of radically improving software productivity through reuse and adaptation
of existing code.