* 1564065
* CHS: Medium: Physical-Virtual Patient Bed for Healthcare Training and Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Gregory Welch, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 918,931.00

Flight simulators offer pilots a chance to safely practice flying a wide range
of aircraft in a variety of scenarios. Similarly, human patient simulators offer
nurses and physicians safe opportunities to practice healthcare on a wide range
of patients and scenarios. Virtual patient simulators use computer graphics to
render humans with a range of visual characteristics including medical symptoms,
personality, race, and gender. However, they are inherently virtual--
practitioners cannot manipulate them with their hands. Manikin-based patient
simulators on the other hand are inherently physical, comprising human-sized
bodies with realistic skin and electro-mechanical simulation of physiological
symptoms. They afford a "hands on" experience but are very limited in their
ability to present visual characteristics. Furthermore, medical educators are
increasingly focusing on interpersonal skills and cultural competency, as these
impact provider-patient relationships, diagnoses, and treatments. Manikins do
not afford the associated humanistic traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers on this project are developing a Physical-Virtual Patient Bed (PVPB)
that combines the flexibility of virtual patients with the physicality of
manikins. The PVPB will employ dynamic computer graphics rear-projected onto a
body-shaped shell mounted in a real hospital bed, along with various sensors and
actuators, to create a patient simulator that talks; appears to sweat, breathe,
and squirm; exhibits a pulse; feels warm/cold on various body parts; and
responds to touch by humans or medical instruments. It will be able to change
race, gender, and visually-apparent symptoms on the fly, and will exhibit real
human emotional complexity via real human agency. The researchers will assess
the effectiveness of the PVPB in simulating certain conditions, and use it to
develop new knowledge about the relative importance of various patient cues, and
provider biases arising from patient demographics.