* 1564535
* Nationwide Preparation for the Eclipse of 21 August 2017
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Kevin Marvel, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 348,763.00

On August 21, 2017, a total solar eclipse will traverse the United States from
Oregon to South Carolina. Millions of Americans will witness totality, in which
the Moon completely blocks the Sun, and over 500 million people across North
America will experience a partial eclipse. In this project, the American
Astronomical Society (AAS) will forge an umbrella organization consisting of an
eclipse project manager, a centralized website of resources, and a mini-grants
program to coordinate and facilitate local and national activities that will
educate the public about the science of this rare event. The project will
leverage this fascinating display of beauty to engage as many people as possible
in the endeavor of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
scientists, educators, and amateur and professional eclipse observers in
developing extensive plans for unique outreach activities to reach a significant
fraction of the diverse U.S. population. The goal is to use the eclipse, which
will generate significant media attention, to educate a broad audience about the
associated science and to encourage young people from widely diverse backgrounds
to pursue careers in science. Special emphasis will be placed on citizen science
projects and on educational activities targeting groups that are
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. A mini-grants program will be established
to fund efforts specifically targeting underrepresented groups in order to
increase their participation. The evaluation plan will focus on the utilization
of the materials on the website and the learning gains of participants in
specific activities funded by the mini-grants. All lessons learned will be
collated in a publicly available formal report and will lay the groundwork for a
strategic plan to fully capitalize on the next U.S.-based solar eclipse in 2024.
Because this project aligns well with the objectives of multiple NSF
directorates, this award is co-funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education
and the Division of Research on Learning in the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources; the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences; and the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences.