* 1564837
* S-STEM: Culture and Attitude II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Michael West, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 982,102.00

The overall goal of S-STEM Culture and Attitude (C&amp;A) II project is to
recruit, retain, and graduate engineering students at the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology. This goal will be met through a program designed to change
the 'culture and attitude' of the campus so as to provide more pathways for a
diverse group of students, in particular women students, to succeed in an
engineering curriculum. The project will introduce new adaptations of curricular
components designed to support intellectual diversity. The project will also
build on existing co-curricular activities that support student success and
self-efficacy by fostering technical skills, professional development, and
personal development. A cohort of 25 students each year will be supported in the
participating programs - Metallurgical Engineering, Industrial Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Mining Engineering, and Civil Engineering. By fostering
an environment of inclusion with emphasis on female students, the project will
result in several outcomes that are expected to have significant institutional
and societal impacts. More women students will enter engineering disciplines,
thereby improving the intellectual diversity of the campus; women students will
persist in engineering disciplines in greater numbers to fill the significant
national need for women in engineering disciplines; students participating in
the program will be engaged in service and outreach that will impact future
students and young women in the community; the project will have a long-term
positive effect within the university and the state by leveraging industrial
collaborations to generate additional scholarships and make the program
sustainable after the funding period ends; and results of the project will be
disseminated to the campus community and a national audience to serve as a model
for other programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives for the project
are to: (1) leverage existing resources to recruit academically talented
students that satisfy program criteria with financial need and a commitment to
an engineering career; (2) strengthen existing programs to retain engineering
students in a positive climate that promotes academic and professional success
by providing a learning environment that supports diverse learning styles,
alternative experiential opportunities, and support for psycho-social
development; (3) place students in appropriate employment or further education
through programs emphasizing career planning and professional diversity; and (4)
change the curriculum to adapt to more diverse learning styles and engage the
institution in the challenge to implement best practices in retaining women and
minorities. The project will employ a robust evaluation plan that will measure
student typology (Herrmann Brain Dominance Inventory) and evaluate attitudes
towards intellectual diversity. In addition, the assessment will examine the
effect of program elements on perception of performance capabilities, which is a
key factor related to persistence.