* 1564520
* The New Scientist Training (NeST) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Matthew Loeser, Yakima Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 447,775.00

The New Scientist Training (NeST) program at Yakima Valley Community College
(YVCC) will improve the performance of low-income and first-generation college
students interested in earning a degree in a STEM. The program will provide
financial support to a minimum of 32 participants organized in four cohorts. The
ultimate objective of the project is to bolster the pipeline of Hispanic and
other first-generation scientists from poorer backgrounds in the Yakima Valley
who excel in technical fields. The program will utilize five key elements:
incentivized scholarships to be awarded for academic performance; undergraduate
research opportunities; formation of a STEM club; expanded tutoring; and
proactive advising. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A two-tiered approach will be
utilized to capture critical data and provide information to substantiate the
degree to which the project is meeting stated outcome objectives. The first tier
of data collection and analysis will be quantitative, utilizing primarily YVCC's
Student Management Information System to collect information about student
demographics and persistence objectives. The second tier will rely on
qualitative data systematically gathered from faculty, staff, and students
participating in various aspects of the project. The result will be evidence
that can be used at other institutions to improve underrepresented student
performance and persistence in the sciences.