* 1564712
* Cohort Community for Academic Achievement Persistence and Perseverance in STEM Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Rhonda Porter, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2022
* USD 649,926.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project will increase the number of students, who major in STEM
disciplines at Albany State University and go on to successfully pursue STEM
post-graduate education or research careers. During the project, 18 scholars
will (a) develop and follow a four-year academic and professional plan that will
include freshman learning community courses, workshops, service learning, and
field trips or visitations under the guidance of a Student Success Coach, (b)
participate in at least one undergraduate research experience, and (c) attend
and present an undergraduate research project at an on-campus or regional
conference. After graduation these talented scholars are expected to join the
STEM workforce or go on to graduate school in STEM, enabling the US to compete
and innovate in a global economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of action for
this project is that psychosocial factors such as STEM identity and self-
efficacy are particularly critical to retaining STEM students. Thus, the project
elements are designed to help students to develop these factors through a strong
cohort anchored around a freshman learning community, targeted and intrusive
advising, mentoring by faculty and peers, and participation in undergraduate
research and internships. Evaluation will address the project's success in
achieving its retention, course pass rate, and graduation objectives. Data
analysis of student academic performance and participation in program activities
will be used to study the effects of interventions like the learning community
and intrusive advising on self-efficacy and science identity for students at a
Historically Black University. The research results will be disseminated at the
University System of GA Teaching and Learning Conference and the Understanding
Interventions that Broaden Participation in STEM Careers conference. Manuscripts
will be submitted to the Journal of Higher Education and the Journal of College
Science Teaching.