* 1564385
* Moduli Spaces, Motives, Periods, and Scattering Amplitudes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alexander Goncharov, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2019
* USD 193,999.00

Recently, new ideas in pure mathematics have had a strong impact on theoretical
physics, and vice versa. In particular, the ideas of one of the most
sophisticated areas of mathematics, the so-called theory of motives, which is
part of algebraic geometry, found application in the calculation of scattering
amplitudes from the data observed in experiments. On the other hand, the general
notion of quantization that originated in theoretical physics has found concrete
realizations in many of areas of pure mathematics. Using these new insights,
this project will investigate several concrete questions in number theory,
algebraic geometry, and representation theory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project involves research in several related topics. In one direction, the
project will study scattering amplitudes in quantum field theory by using theory
of mixed motives and theory of cluster varieties. In a second direction, the
project will further develop the on-shell approach to scattering amplitudes,
with the goal of finding effective ways to calculate scattering amplitudes. In a
third direction, the project will study a quantum field theory approach to mixed
Hodge theory and develop quantum Hodge field theory. In a fourth direction, the
project will study Donaldson-Thomas invariants of three-dimensional Calabi-Yau
categories relevant to representation theory and geometry. In a fifth direction
the investigator will continue work on moduli spaces of local systems on two-
dimensional surfaces and its quantization, and on the relationship with
representation theory and mirror symmetry. In particular, the investigator will
study the hyperkähler structure of the moduli spaces of local systems on
topological surfaces, and moduli spaces of non-commutative local systems on
surfaces. In a final direction, the theory of hyperbolic three-dimensional
manifolds can be viewed as the study of certain local systems on three-
dimensional manifolds with values in one of the simplest complex Lie groups. The
project aims to develop a similar theory for all complex reductive Lie groups,
as well as its quantum analog.