* 1564677
* Supporting Scholars to Succeed in STEM (S4) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Carol Johnston, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2022
* USD 650,000.00

Mount St. Mary's University (MSMU) is a federally designated Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI) in Los Angeles consisting of two campuses. The main campus
(Chalon) in West Los Angeles offers Baccalaureate degrees in 31 majors. The
downtown (Doheny) Campus offers two-year Associate Degree programs and graduate
programs. MSMU primarily serves women and has a long-standing commitment to
providing quality programs to under-served and financially disadvantaged
students. This project entitled "Supporting Scholars to Succeed in STEM (S4)
Program" will support strong education and leadership opportunities for an
ethnically diverse population. New knowledge is added to existing research via
the design and construction of the S4 data dashboard to track impacts of each
program activity on STEM enrollment, retention, success, and graduation of low
income women. Eighteen talented students will be recruited and provided with
S-STEM scholarships to retain, support and graduate the students into the
workforce or to graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research indicates that
institutions with high retention rates consistently use retention software
incorporating an early alert system to identify students at risk of dropping
out. Building upon this research the S4 program will improve data analytics and
early alert mechanisms by creating the S4 dashboard to identify factors
contributing to low retention and graduation rates, to diagnose these factors
and enable the leadership team to use the data reports generated to inform
targeted responses. The analysis of on-track indicators by discipline and
student subgroup, will enable the team to understand which milestones students
are failing to reach, which subgroups are struggling most to reach each
milestone, and why students are not reaching specific milestones. The research
enables STEM faculty, administrators, and student support staff to identify the
variables contributing to low retention and graduation rates. The aim is to
diagnose the results of the various strategies used to ensure success, to
measure the impact of each curricular and co-curricular support service thereby
helping the Leadership team to make data driven improvements to curriculum,
instruction, support services and institutional policies. An external evaluator
will provide formative and summative evaluation applications and metrics for
each of the project's five program objectives.