* 1564925
* ABI Sustaining: Enabling the preservation of research data underlying scientific findings through the Dryad Digital Repository
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Todd Vision, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 762,089.00

The Dryad Digital Repository is a curated repository for data that are integral
to the findings of scientific and medical publications. The repository receives
data directly from original researchers, typically at the time of publication,
preserves it for the long term, and makes it freely available for reuse. Through
partnerships with journals, scientific societies and publishers, Dryad makes
possible the successful implementation of a diverse set of data archiving
policies. It is managed by the Dryad not-for-profit organization, which has a
scalable and distributed source of revenue through one-time data publication
charges, purchased both by organizations and individual researchers, and a
secondary source of revenue, as well as a mechanism for stakeholder governance,
through organizational memberships. This award will enable Dryad to achieve the
scale required for sustainability through continued growth and extension to new
research communities. At the same time, it will enable the continued growth of
the repository's valuable collection of diverse and high-quality data for
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dryad Digital Repository is a
highly customized instance of the DSpace open source repository platform. A key
distinguishing feature of Dryad is the ease with which researchers can deposit
their data alongside their manuscript through integration with the manuscript
submission process. Another key feature is curation: data is inspected prior to
release by professional data curators and, optionally, by expert peer reviewers.
Success of this award can be measured by the use of the repository by the
research community. Indicators include the number of new datasets released; the
number of datasets downloaded; the number of instances of data reuse that can be
tracked; the number of integrated journals; the number of new members; the
number of new sponsors; and the revenues received through data publication
charges. The Dryad Digital Repository is available at http://datadryad.org.