* 1564212
* CHS: Medium: Nanophotonics Phased Array for Virtual and Augmented Reality Multifocal Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,199,743.00

The current explosion of virtual and augmented reality (VR and AR) technologies
is the subject of much academic, industrial and popular enthusiasm.
Unfortunately, these technologies have also been shown to induce a host of
serious user complaints, including headaches, nausea and blurred vision. This is
particularly problematic for 3D displays and content, and the National Academy
of Engineering has identified "enhancing virtual reality interfaces" as a grand
challenge for the 21st century. Studies have suggested that the vergence-
accommodation conflict (or the decoupling of the intended "virtual focus" from
the actual focal plane of a display) is the cause of many of these
psychophysical problems. The PI's goal in this project is to address this
mismatch by utilizing advances in silicon nanophotonics to develop a prototype
natural-to-the-senses VR and AR multifocal display along with the requisite
visual computing algorithms for multifocal and automultiscopic displays. The PI
will also design and carry out user studies to validate the new technology
(display and algorithms). Project outcomes will not only directly impact the
fields of computer graphics and visualization, but an array of other fields as
well. Multifocal accommodative-accurate stereo visualization of large-scale
fluid flow simulations would represent a breakthrough in science and engineering
generally, in areas ranging from the design of artificial arterial valves to
aerial vehicles, the rational drug design process through protein docking, and
in surgical advances that could take advantage of real-time MRI technologies and
other high-dimensional medical imaging data. No less important are the potential
educational benefits of the new technology, which would unleash the power of VR
and AR to immerse young students in worlds to which they would normally not have
access, providing excitement, engagement and a breadth and depth of context that
is nearly impossible to achieve in a traditional classroom
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heart of this project lies in the design and
implementation of a novel nanophotonic phased-array chip that will enable the
generation of arbitrary radiation patterns with large-scale phased arrays, which
would extend the functionality of phased arrays beyond conventional beam
focusing and steering, communication and radar, and would open up new
opportunities in image processing, 3D interactive holography, and virtual
reality. This project brings together collaborators with significant expertise
in 3D computer graphics and scientific visualization, in nanophotonics and
plasmonics for the sub-wavelength confinement and steering of light, and in
microelectronics, integrated circuits, and microstructure science and
technology. The research will involve three thrusts: (a) slow light to
significantly reduce the size and power requirements for the nanophotonics chip;
(b) separate electronic and optical components of the chip to better optimize
each; and (c) develop efficient algorithms to render and validate, through user
studies, multifocal 3D graphics in the Fourier domain. The design of the
multifocal display is the highest-risk and highest-gain component of the work;
the team has contingency plans in place to proceed if necessary with developing
multifocal and automultiscopic display algorithms, and for conducting user
studies, employing existing multiple-focal-plane displays.