* 1564348
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Online Social Network Fraud and Attack Research and Identification
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jun Li, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2022
* USD 523,052.00

Online social networks (OSNs) face various forms of fraud and attacks, such as
spam, denial of service, Sybil attacks, and viral marketing. In order to build
trustworthy and secure OSNs, it has become critical to develop techniques to
analyze and detect OSN fraud and attacks. Existing OSN security approaches
usually target a specific type of OSN fraud or attack and often fall short of
detecting more complex attacks such as collusive attacks that involve many
fraudulent OSN accounts, or dynamic attacks that encompass multiple attack
phases over time. This research, dubbed oSAFARI (Online SociAl network Fraud and
Attack Research and Identification), models, analyzes and characterizes OSN
frauds and attacks; designs, develops, and evaluates a new approach to detecting
static OSN frauds and attacks; and further enhances the approach to handle
dynamic attacks with multiple phases. The research team plans to develop a new
course focused on OSN attacks and defenses, which has the potential to be
offered across many institutions. To increase public security awareness, the
team also plans to develop tutorial courses on typical OSN attacks and their
defense and offer them at popular public events and in freshman classes. The
research team will broadly disseminate their results, tools, software, and
documents to the research community, IT industries, and to OSN
companies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project embraces a systematic,
comprehensive study of OSN frauds and attacks. It models OSN threats by viewing
an OSN as a graph embedded with attacker nodes and edges, identifies and
analyzes specific forms of frauds and attacks, and evaluates state-of-the-art
attack analysis and defense approaches. It develops a spectral-analysis-based
framework for OSN fraud and attack detection. The framework transforms
topological information of an OSN graph into patterns formed by spectral
coordinates in the spectral space, and introduces the use of the spectral graph
perturbation theory to more easily model and capture changes of spectral
coordinates for attacker, victim, and regular nodes. Further, this research
develops spectral-analysis-based detection approaches for complex networks where
nodes can carry attributes and edges can be negative, weighted, or asymmetric.
Through a novel combination of the network dynamics and the vector
autoregressive model, it develops an automatic spectral-analysis-based approach
to detecting dynamic attacks while avoiding the high cost and low accuracy of
traditional approaches. It also transforms attack characteristics from high-
dimensional spectral spaces into distinctive visual patterns, and develops
interactive mechanisms for analysts to incorporate domain knowledge and flexibly
handle attacks. The research team will build a simulation framework to evaluate
the detection approaches against different types of OSN attacks, where one can
plug in different OSN datasets to evaluate and compare different detection
approaches. Moreover, the research team will build a prototype oSAFARI on top of
an OSN, and evaluate how oSAFARI can withstand various attacks in a real
setting.