* 1564840
* ABI Innovation: DeepStruct:  Learning representations of protein 3-d structures and their interfaces using deep architectures
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Charles Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 570,295.00

Proteins perform many cellular functions, made possible by complex networks of
interactions; knowing the location of the interaction sites on the proteins is
key for understanding exactly how they work. Important applications include
designing drugs and therapeutic agents. Experimental techniques for determining
the interfaces between proteins are expensive and time consuming, so
computational structural biologists seek to predict these mathematically.
Current prediction methods use a limited number of features hand-crafted by an
expert. An alternate approach is to learn the important features directly from
all of the data, using a method called deep neural networks. This proposal
explores a combined approach: use expert intuition for some features but add the
power of unsupervised learning with deep neural networks to learn additional,
novel features. The results will enrich the way protein structural features are
understood in terms of their functional properties, whether those are catalytic
sites, protein-binding sites or other sites important to the protein structure.
Certainly in the prediction of protein structure itself machine learning scoring
methods are showing great promise. Aspects of the research will be used in
courses offered through a recently awarded NSF-NRT training grant, The training
grant establishes an interdisciplinary program at the interfaces of biology,
engineering, math/statistics and computer science. The program prepares students
for a variety of career paths. Research and education experiences will provide
students with valuable expertise in a computational area that is highly valued
by top technology firms, such as Google and Facebook, which have research teams
exploring the possibilities of deep neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work proposes a paradigm shift in the field of protein interface prediction and
scoring: from hand-crafted features and standard off-the-shelf classifiers to an
approach that augments existing features with automatic learning of the features
that characterize the 3-d structures of proteins, combined with the use of
learning algorithms that are specifically designed for the characteristics of
the problem. The proposed approach has multiple novel aspects: the proposed
learning approach leverages information contained in the entire protein data
bank (PDB) to learn features that characterize protein structures at multiple
scales and levels of abstraction. It introduces a novel neural network
architecture and regularization terms that constrain the solution towards
biologically relevant results. The primary alternative to this machine learning-
based interface prediction uses docking simulations; however, current docking
energy functions are not accurate enough, so that a near-native solution is
often not ranked high enough on the list of outcomes to be useful. Extensions of
the proposed architectures for interface prediction will be employed for re-
scoring docking solutions to improve their predictive success. A workflow that
integrates docking and machine learning-based interface prediction and scoring
is proposed to explore the synergism between these tasks. Information on the
progress made on the project is available through the project website:
http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~asa/projects.html.