* 1564608
* Science Scholars for Social Justice
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Kimberly Boyd, Cabrini University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2022
* USD 649,773.00

NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
project will support 16 highly qualified, low income biology and chemistry
majors. Academic and social support activities for the scholars includes (a)
cohort-based learning communities, (b) peer and faculty mentoring, and (c) early
and consistent research experiences via course-based research and other more
traditional student faculty collaborations. The project is anchored in Cabrini
College's Justice Matters core curriculum, which has been recognized nationally
for its innovative approach to integrating civic and social responsibility into
student learning. Through it scholars will be provided with opportunities for
meaningful community engagement related to their STEM major. This effort will
address the national need to increase the number of American STEM majors while
at the same time developing future scientists with a strong social justice ethos
and commitment to serving the community, both locally and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ambitious plan is based on the hypothesis
that engaging the S-STEM scholars in STEM learning and career exposure through a
framework of social justice will help to secure their retention to graduation
and placement in graduate or professional positions in STEM fields. The Justice
Matters curriculum will be designed to include a sequence of developmentally
linked, writing intensive courses taken each year that will help students to
develop knowledge, critical thinking, values, and skills that can benefit others
and link issues of social justice, ethical decision making, and civic engagement
to science-based topics. Undergraduate research, career preparation activities,
and service projects will also bridge science to themes related to social
responsibility. All courses, program elements, recruitment strategies, and
support services created or modified for the purpose of this project will be
carefully evaluated in terms of their impact on student recruitment, learning,
retention to graduation, and career/higher education placement. This project
will investigate how impactful a social justice curriculum is on students' STEM
career/higher education choices, and it will also examine the way in which a
mentoring program with specifically defined activities contributes to student
success. Faculty and students will share results from the project at Faculty
Development Workshops and Cabrini's annual Art and Research Symposium.
Manuscripts will be submitted for publication and results will be presented at
regional and national conferences.