* 1564879
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Foster the Next Generation of STEM Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Alix Fink, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2022
* USD 649,932.00

Recognizing that there is an established need in the United States to increase
the number of American scientists in the workforce, this NSF Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project aims to
increase retention and graduation rates in biology, chemistry, environmental
sciences, and physics and prepare participating STEM majors for post-graduate
success. The objectives of the project are to (a) provide 24 academically
talented, low income students at Longwood College with high quality support
services and curricula that incorporate evidence-based practices, (b) provide
professional development activities that will prepare students for future
careers, (c) maintain a high level of faculty participation in curricular and
co-curricular activities, and (d) investigate the outcomes of the implementation
of a learning community and career-readiness activities. This S-STEM project
will have a significant impact on the region surrounding Longwood College
(Southern Virginia), which has a low high-school graduation rates, low college
attendance, low family incomes, and a high
unemployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from emerging research on retention
of STEM majors, this program will address the scholars' needs as they transition
to the university environment and grow personally, academically, and
professionally. Scholars will develop as scientists by honing their skills in
quantitative reasoning, modeling, and simulation and learning to apply
interdisciplinary approaches to complex real-world issues through an early
research experience and subsequent course-embedded collaborations. Additionally,
students will be immersed in an ecosystem of support designed to foster strong
cohort development, build meaningful relationships with trained faculty mentors,
and cultivate mindsets for postgraduate success. Throughout their college
experience, students will collect key artifacts and reflect on their development
as scientists using e-portfolios. Faculty mentors will initiate regular
conversations about the e-portfolio work and use the information to engage the
students in conversation about their progress. Formative and summative
evaluation of each project component will determine the extent to which the
curricular and co-curricular activities on promote students' retention to
graduation. Research will address the mentoring relationship as it relates to
students' transition to college and professional development. The PIs will
disseminate findings, in journals such as Science Education and Civic
Engagement: An International Journal, Primus, Journal of College Science
Teaching, Physics Teacher, and Honors in Practice.