* 1564349
* Adaptive QM/MM Methods for Proton Transfer in Complex Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2016,02/29/2020
* Hai Lin, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 02/29/2020
* USD 405,000.00

Hai Lin of the University of Colorado at Denver is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop and
apply computational methods to study proton transfer in biological environments.
Just as every day we walk through doors of houses, offices, schools, and shops;
every minute, ions that are essential to life pass through doors of biological
cells. These doors on the surface of cells are called ion channels and
transporters. Situated in cellular membranes, these special proteins control
which ions move across the membrane and when. Among these proteins are the CLC
proton/chloride antiporters, which regulate the influx of protons and the
outflow of chloride ions in a coupled manner. Details of how the CLC
proton/Chloride antiporters work in transferring protons remain elusive.
Moreover, it is still under debate if (and how) the proton interacts with
chloride ions during its journey through the translocation pore. Professor Lin
and his research team, which includes two undergraduate students, seek answers
to these questions through computer simulations. They are developing advanced
computational techniques that combine quantum- and classical-mechanical models.
They then apply these methods to study the CLC transporters. As malfunctioning
doors can block us from reaching our destination, malfunctioning ion channels
and transporters can disrupt normal life processes and cause diseases. The
research by the Lin group seeks to deepen our understanding of how the CLC
transporters work at a fundamental, molecular level, which may, in turn, assist
the development of novel therapies for diseases related to these protein
malfunctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Grotthuss-shuttling mechanism for proton
transfer involves dynamical reorganizations of covalent and hydrogen bonds.
While reactive force fields (also called molecular-mechanics, or MM) and
multistate empirical valence bond models are efficient in treating water
dissociation and proton hopping. The extension of these models in complex
environments is challenging because of the rapidly increasing number of
potential parameters needed to account for more valence configurations.
Moreover, electronic-structure information is missing for the bond
breaking/forming processes, which are described ideally by quantum mechanics
(QM). QM simulations are limited to small model systems (~hundreds of atoms) due
to high computational costs. The Lin group is developing novel adaptive-
partitioning QM/MM methods for proton transfer in complex environments. The
adaptive-partitioning schemes feature an on-the-fly smoothly updated mobile QM
region that follows the proton wherever it goes. As such, a finite-size QM
region becomes infinite and can, in principle, sustain simulations as long as
needed. The new algorithms are applied to the study of a prototype CLC
antiporter from E. coli. With on-the-fly computed QM/MM potentials and an
explicit treatment of protons, the dynamics simulations explore the hydrophobic
pore hydration, water wire formation, proton translocation, and chloride ion
protonation in the CLC antiporter.