* 1564022
* NeTS: CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Wireless Datacenter-on-Chip (WiDoC): A New Paradigm for Big Data Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Radu Marculescu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 07/31/2019
* USD 649,974.00

This project focuses on a new paradigm for Big Data computing, namely a
Datacenter-on-a-Chip (DoC) consisting of thousands of cores that can run
compute- and data-intensive applications, orders of magnitude more efficiently
compared to existing platforms. Indeed, nowadays data centers and high
performance computing clusters are dominated by power, thermal, and area
constraints; they occupy large spaces and necessitate sophisticated cooling
mechanisms to sustain the required performance levels. In contrast, this project
relies on emerging many-core processors that can run Big Data applications while
provisioning the system resources for the necessary power/performance/thermal
trade-offs. Consequently, various big data applications like social computing,
life sciences, networking, or entertainment, can benefit immensely from this new
design paradigm that aims at achieving server-scale performance from hand-held
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work introduces a new direction in
networked system design enabled by the emerging wireless on-chip interconnect
paradigm. Indeed, achieving DoC level of massive integration requires
significant innovation at multiple levels of abstraction, ranging from the
design of the on-chip network and associated physical layer, all the way to
mapping and runtime management of various applications. To this end, the
research goals include:&lt;br/&gt;- Design of a small-world wireless network
architecture as a communication backbone for manycore-enabled wireless DoC
(WiDoC) &lt;br/&gt;- Design methods at physical layer for highly-integrated 3D
wireless DoC suitable for low latency data communication &lt;br/&gt;- Evaluation
of various latency-power-thermal (LPT) trade-offs for the proposed WiDoC
platform with relevant big data applications.&lt;br/&gt;While most of the prior
work considers 2D many-core platforms where communication happens through wired
links, this proposal redefines the very foundations of on-chip communication via
3D small-world network architecture with sub-THZ wireless links in the planar
layers and inductive coupling-based wireless interfaces in the vertical
direction; this allows for full flexibility and reconfiguration and makes such
platforms suitable for processing big data applications at unprecedented levels
of energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is unique as it
brings together highly novel and interdisciplinary concepts from network-on-chip
(NoC), wireless, and complex networks, communication circuits, and optimization
techniques aimed at single chip solutions for achieving data center-scale
performance. The educational contribution of this work will help establishing an
interdisciplinary research-based curriculum for high performance many-core
system design meant to increase the number of students attracted to this area of
engineering.