* 1564652
* Scholarships Targeting Recruitment of Individuals for Degrees in Environmental Science (STRIDES)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* David Serrano, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2022
* USD 941,265.00

Broward College (BC) is both a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and a Minority
Serving Institution (MSI). The college offers bachelor's and associate degree
programs and certificate programs. A 2+2 program in Environmental Science offers
an experiential learning curriculum which combines general cognitive and
workplace knowledge with applied science and industry specific skills. This
five-year project entitled "Scholarships Targeting Recruitment of Individuals
for Degrees in Environmental Science" (STRIDES) is selecting 30 high ability,
low-income students recruited from one of three cohorts chosen to participate in
a new bachelor's degree program which has BioSecurity as one focus. Students
complete an internship, independent study or a research project as part of the
program. The program is developed in response to an unmet need in the
geographical region for biological/environmental science graduates. Program
staff work with local companies to provide internships, job shadowing, industry
mentoring and jobs for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focuses on a
study of retention rates via analysis of various aspects of the problem such as
financial assistance and the level of Perceived Education Support (PER) with a
comparison of community guided research versus faculty guided research as
parameters. The program provides students a combination of campus based and
field activities which reinforce learning through individual and group work. The
college's Academic Support Centers (ASCs) offer academic support, tutoring and
career exploration programs. STRIDES students work one-on-one with subject
matter experts located in the newly established STEM Center to deepen conceptual
knowledge and understanding. Tutors working in ASC's are required to attend
training to become certified in order to practice. Faculty who are active
members of professional societies and community research receive training in the
mentorship of students. The Management Team comprises faculty, STEM
administrators, a Support Services administrator and a researcher. Project
evaluation(both formative and summative)is accomplished by both internal (BC's
Institutional Research department) and external experts (MN Associates). Program
assessment occurs at the end of each semester. The database tracks year to year
retention and graduation rates for women, minorities and transfer students. Data
from prior years serves as a benchmark for success in improving retention and
graduation rates.