* 1564893
* Scholarships for Success of Engineering and Computer Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chance Glenn, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Scholarships for Success of Engineering and Computer Science Students
project in the College of Engineering, Technology &amp; Physical Sciences at
Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU) will provide financial support for 20
talented, low-income Mechanical &amp; Civil Engineering, Construction Technology
and Computer Science majors in amounts up to $6000 per year for up to 5 years.
AAMU is among those institutions classified as Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and because of the mostly African-American population, the
scholarships will significantly affect minority students thereby contributing to
the important task of broadening participation in STEM fields of study.
Additional program elements include: 1) Providing faculty development workshops
on evidence-based instructional practices; 2) Facilitating adaptation of
evidence-based pedagogies in STEM courses and studying their effects on
retention, student success, and degree completion; 3) Identifying the special
needs of low-income students and providing academic support in the form of
supplemental teaching, faculty monitoring, technical workshops and research
opportunities; 4) Providing career counseling including preparation for graduate
schools and effective employment strategies; and 5) Addressing local educational
and industrial needs by producing STEM graduates. The project expects at least
15% increase in first year retention, 30% increase in overall retention, and 85%
of students to be employed or enroll into graduate school upon
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals include studying how
implementation of evidence-based instructional practices (in addition to
scholarships) enhance minority students' learning environment and affect their
retention, academic success, and degree attainment at an HBCU. The scope of the
project activities at AAMU can demonstrate how other minority institutions can
address similar problems. The assessment plan includes a faculty survey to gauge
the current awareness and use of evidence-based instructional approaches at
AAMU. A student self-defined improvement survey will be conducted at the end of
the semester for each course where evidence-based pedagogy has been applied.
Data analysis will provide overview of the extent to which effective pedagogies
are practiced at AAMU and help to design faculty development workshops.
Formative and summative evaluation will be employed. The formative evaluation
will consist of collecting both implementation and progress data of the
objectives and activities associated with the project goals and will continue
throughout the project. Evaluation data will be analyzed and used as feedback to
monitor progress and close the loops, including mid-course correction. The
summative evaluation will highlight the outcomes of the project. Results
obtained will be disseminated through project web pages and STEM-related
professional conferences and journals.