* 1564550
* Quantitative Characterization of 3D Vector Fields in Advanced Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 12/31/2019
* USD 455,765.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnets and magnetic materials
play an important role in today's technological society. Many commercial
products, e.g., modern cars, have hundreds of both permanent magnets and
electromagnets in them. In the micro-electronic world, magnetic components
appear at all length scales, from centimeter-sized magnets in power transformers
to tiny magnetic components in computer hard drives. To describe the central
goal of this research project, it is useful to think about how magnets are often
introduced in a high school physics class: a magnet is placed on a level
surface, and a sheet of paper is placed on top. Then, fine iron filings are
poured on top of the sheet and they arrange themselves along the magnetic field
lines, thus making the magnetic field visible. In the proposed project, The PI
intends to perform a similar experiment to make magnetic field lines visible in
the space surrounding nano-scale magnetic objects. This requires (1) the use of
an electron microscope to deliver the high magnification needed to visualize
nano-scale objects; and (2) the development of mathematical models to interpret
the images observed in the microscope, and turn them into a three-dimensional
representation of the magnetic field surrounding the nano-sale objects. These
models will operate in a way similar to the use of MRI scanners in the medical
world; a series of microscope images is converted into a three-dimensional
visualization of the magnetic field. This, in turn, allows us to study how these
nano-scale magnetic objects function and how they interact with each other. The
ability to quantify how things work at the nano-scale is crucial to many aspects
of our technological society and may lead, in the long run, to improved
microelectronic devices and magnetic recording techniques. This project
addresses some of the fundamental scientific questions that need to be answered
in order to design and fabricate the next generation of nano-scale devices. The
project will advance the field of nano-magnetics, and will help train both
undergraduate and graduate students in the area of
magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program will create novel
approaches to the reconstruction of 3D vector fields in modern multi-phase
engineering materials. Generalized forward projectors capable of accurately
simulating defect contrast as well as Lorentz images for tomographic acquisition
modes will be created. These projectors will be integrated with tomographic
reconstruction algorithms that are model-based, rather than the conventional
filtered back-projection and simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique
approaches currently in use. Our proposed model-based iterative reconstruction
(MBIR) approach will be capable of incorporating prior physics-based models to
provide reconstruction constraints and realistic boundary conditions. The
algorithms will be validated using dedicated test samples, and applied to 3D
reconstructions of the magnetization in permalloy-based samples, and defect
displacement fields in Mo wires and multi-phase Ni-based superalloys. Portions
of this work will be carried out in collaboration with colleagues at the Ohio
State University, Purdue University, and the Argonne National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MBIR approach will guide the creation of a
novel, efficient, modular, accurate, iterative tomographic reconstruction
technique, which can be used for the reconstruction of 3D vector fields, in
particular magnetization and defect displacement fields. Defect contrast imaging
has been used for many decades in the materials community, but thus far, despite
the importance of defects in the overall behavior of an engineering material,
there have not been any efforts to determine displacement vector fields at the
level of individual defects or defect clusters. The proposed work will lay the
foundation for the eventual routine determination of 3D vector fields by TEM
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has the potential to
impact the broad area of quantitative 3D materials characterization, and will
produce a clearly defined experimental protocol for the efficient collection of
data for 3D vector field reconstructions. All experimental protocols and
numerical algorithms will be made available to the broader materials community
in the form of publications and open source code. The educational/outreach
component of the proposed program has the potential to impact middle and high
school science education in several schools near Pittsburgh. The TACTILS program
(Teaching Advanced Characterization Tools In Local Schools) provides access to
portable scanning electron microscopes for science teachers so that they can
employ these instruments in their class rooms. In addition, the PI will work
with the local Carnegie Museum of Natural History's Hillman Hall of Minerals and
Gems to provide a number of undergraduate materials students with opportunities
to carry out research in the area of structural and chemical mineral
identification.