* 1564577
* Broadening STEM Participation Among Minority Students in a Urban Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Anna Salvati, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 999,998.00

The Borough of Manhattan Community College/CUNY (BMCC) is an urban community
college which qualifies as both a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)and a
Minority Serving Institution (MSI). It does not offer degrees beyond the
baccalaureate level. The project entitled "Broadening STEM Participation Among
Minority Students in an Urban Community College" will support quality education,
mentoring and internship opportunities for an ethnically diverse population.
This initiative builds on the undergraduate research experience for students
developed and implemented by the University of Maryland-Baltimore County (UMBC)
Meyerhoff program. This model of undergraduate research remains a novel concept
for most community colleges. New knowledge will be added by BMCC research
efforts, which will seek to determine the support programs that work to fully
engage students and ensure that S-STEM interventions positively impact retention
and graduation. As an alternative to research students will also be provided the
opportunity to participate in off campus internships. Assignments will be
developed by S-STEM faculty with input from the college's private industry
partners. Students will work much like members of industry based teams, dealing
with problems in areas of basic research, product development and testing,
analytical technologies, risk assessment and regulatory compliance. Each intern
will be supervised by company personnel and visited at the worksite by BMCC
Cooperative Education Internship Coordinators. Sixty talented full-time students
in Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering and/or Science are expected to be
recruited into the program and awarded a 2-year scholarship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research indicates that an undergraduate research
experience as a capstone experience undertaken by students during their final
year of study is successful. The Meyerhoff program success is built upon the
concept that by assembling a concentration of high achieving students in a
tightly knit learning community, students continually inspire one another to do
more and better. That program boasts a STEM retention rate of 86% which is twice
the national average for all students and more than four times the average for
African American students. BMCC has already in place programs and initiatives to
support students success. The project will examine closely how the use of a
structured STEM pathway model involving the use of the learning communities, in
tandem with the Winter Bridge program, and faculty mentored research can achieve
the same outcomes as those commonly found at residential four-year colleges such
as UMBC, and whether these reforms can be sustained and replicated. Ongoing data
collection, abstraction, and analysis will allow the research team to examine in
specific and measurable ways the extent to which S-STEM participants are
effectively being served and the success of program activities on improved
academic outcomes (e.g., achievement, retention, graduation, post-secondary
school enrollment). Collected data will be used to demonstrate if this model is
useful when applied in early stages (critical and decisive years) of STEM
careers. The results of this project will have a profound effect in determining
whether similar reforms can be adapted by a urban community colleges serving
populations traditionally underrepresented in the STEM disciplines.