* 1564850
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: A User-friendly Tool for Highly Accurate Video Tracking
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Min Shin, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,361,015.00

Biological science has made great strides recently both by capitalizing on
automated methods of data collection and by enabling researchers to share
results efficiently via public databases. This project will achieve the same for
applications that use videos to track movement of animals, cells, or robots, by
producing freely available software for efficient and automatic extraction of
movement data and directly adding such data to a public database (the KNB Data
Repository). The software will be easy to use and adapt to new types of videos,
issues that have so far been roadblocks to widespread adoption of existing video
tracking tools. The ability to share both movement data and videos will
stimulate collaboration among researchers. Both functionalities will enable
fundamentally new advances in such areas as animal group behavior, behavioral
genetics, cell biology, and collective robotics, and other fields that record
the movements of many individuals. The software, because of its ease of use and
enabled access to research videos from the database, will also serve as a tool
in teaching at the K-12 and college level. In addition, this project will serve
to train several college and graduate students in both biology and computer
science; such interdisciplinary training is essential for advances in biological
research today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a unique
combination of clear, current graphical user interface design to improve
usability with state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to improve movement
tracking accuracy. In addition, the developed software will enable users to
visualize results for validation and analysis, and include functionality for
users to correct any remaining tracking errors. This will enable users to get
scientific-quality data output without having to employ multiple software
applications and without having to manually post-process data files. In the
context of the project, several workshops will be held and a website developed
to improve accessibility for students and researchers in biology. The project
will also develop a direct link to the existing KNB scientific data repository,
such that users can access the repository, compare their results, or complete
meta-analyses easily. Besides advancing biological research, this will also
generate an extensive resource for computer vision scientists by providing a
large collection of videos with accurate user annotation for improving core
algorithms such as object detection and tracking. More information may be found
at http://www.abctracker.org.