* 1564386
* ODOMATIC: Automatic Species Identification, Functional Morphology, and Feature Extraction to alleviate the taxonomic impediment and broaden citizen science tools.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Gareth Russell, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 432,015.00

The naming and classifying of living organisms is a fundamental principal upon
which biology is founded. Indeed, almost every facet of our lives - from the
food we eat to the medicine we take, the houses we live in to the natural
scenery we admire - has a connection to the biodiversity present on Earth. All
species must be named and cataloged in order for humans to understand the world
around us. The scientific field of taxonomy, responsible for identifying and
describing species, has incurred a reduction in its specialist workforce in
recent decades; this is unfortunate because the need for taxonomy has never been
greater as human activities result in unprecedented decline in the diversity of
life. This project will help to reduce the burden placed on current and future
taxonomists to identify and catalog biodiversity by introducing a set of open-
source, web-based tools for identifying species from images and for measuring
imaged specimens for comparative studies. These software tools will be made
freely available through the publicly-funded CyVerse web platform. In addition,
a system for identifying dragonflies and damselflies called ODOMATIC will be
implemented on an existing web presence, OdonataCentral, allowing researchers
and enthusiasts to accurately identify these insects from images of their wings.
A series of free workshops will be offered in diverse urban communities in New
Jersey and Alabama to increase the diversity of OdonataCentral?s user base,
encourage participation in the STEM fields, and generally increase appreciation
and understanding of the natural world. A series of Google Hangout events will
encourage international user-ship for ODOMATIC from World Dragonfly Association
members in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. In addition, undergraduate students
from Rutgers University-Newark will be recruited to help in designing and
training ODOMATIC, giving them valuable experience in research, programming and
taxonomy. This work will help to reduce the taxonomic impediment - an urgent
need for more taxonomic products, like species descriptions and specimen
identifications, from fewer taxonomist workers - by addressing the time-
consuming, but necessary, task that is species identification. Objectives of
this project include release of a newly-developed system for automatically
identifying Odonata (dragonflies and damselflies) from images of their wings,
which uses computer vision and machine learning to characterize and classify
species. An interface will be deployed making species identification using this
system accessible through the OdonataCentral website (odonatacentral.org). In
addition, stand-alone tools will be developed for automatically describing and
placing geometric morphometric landmarks on specimens in biological imagery for
use in morphology-based comparative studies. The successful completion of these
objectives will benefit the odonatological community by providing dragonfly and
damselfly identification. More broadly, the tools created here will allow
biologists studying other groups of organisms to rapidly extract morphological
data from images of their specimens.