* 1564690
* STEP-UP Scholars: Encouraging Scholarship in Science, Technology, and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2024
* Andrew McMahan, Central Carolina Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2024
* USD 649,609.00

The "Science, Technology, and Engineering Program (STEP-UP) Scholars" project at
Central Carolina Community College (CCCC) will address STEM workforce needs by
promoting the college and career success of academically talented, low income
students using a comprehensive learning community focused on intentional student
support. A total of 52 scholars will be provided with scholarships that will
cover their cost of attending school. This project will draw upon a collection
of student support practices with strong backing from the scholarly literature.
STEM faculty will collaborate with campus partners to sustain a comprehensive
learning community that will provide support for scholars as they work towards
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive and intensive student
services component of the STEP-UP project will be compared with traditional
advisor/success coach models by tracking student retention and graduation
outcomes, resulting in the collection of quantitative and qualitative data on
best practices in student support for both traditional and underrepresented
student populations. This data will make it possible to measure the effect of
scholarships and student support services on student participation, progress and
success, in both the overall student population and the traditionally
underrepresented local Hispanic/Latino population. Analysis of specific
programmatic components, and overall program satisfaction will generate new
knowledge regarding student impact, program impact, and institutional impact.