* 1564959
* SusChEM: The Versatility of Electrophilic Metal N-Aryl Catalytic Intermediates for Carbon-Nitrogen Bond Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Tom Driver, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Tom G. Driver. Professor Driver is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago. He is exploring the
reactivity of metal-nitrogen catalytic intermediates for the formation of
carbon-nitrogen bonds. The goal of this project is to develop new metal-
catalyzed processes to form challenging nitrogen-containing heterocycles in
molecules that exhibit important biological and electronic properties. Nitrogen
heterocycles are pervasive in pharmaceutical agents that have been shown to
improve the quality of life and health of humans. The hypothesis-driven nature
of the project is well suited for the education of scientists at all levels.
Professor Driver's research team includes undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and underrepresented minorities. He has established an
environment for students to advance in their professional development. The
project includes research experiences for high school students to inspire their
pursuit of careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen heterocycles are pervasive in
pharmaceuticals and natural products that may improve the quality of life and
health of humans. Simplifying access to functionalized nitrogen (N)-heterocycles
is useful for the advancement of biological and medicinal studies. The
experiments being conducted use the novel reactivity of electrophilic metal
N-aryl catalytic intermediates in the development of new carbon-nitrogen bond-
forming reactions of aryl azides and nitroarenes. The projects address gaps in
state-of-the-art methods to access complex, functionalized N-heterocyclic
compounds through construction of carbon-nitrogen and carbon-carbon bonds by
developing synthetic methods that are mechanistically distinct from existing
protocols. Towards that end, the principle investigator's goals are to: (1)
develop new metal-catalyzed domino carbon-hydrogen amination reactions to
efficiently access N-heterocycles from aryl azides; (2) synthesize
N-heterocycles from nitroarenes through a metal-catalyzed cyclization-migration
sequence or carbon-hydrogen amination; (3) achieve intermolecular sp2 and sp3
carbon-hydrogen amination reactions using nitroarenes; (4) determine if the
reactivity patterns observed for electrophilic metal N-aryl nitrenes are a
general phenomenon of divalent catalytic intermediates by studying metal-
carbenes formed from N-tosylhydrazones. The compounds resulting from these
studies are added to the University of Illinois at Chicago Center (UICentre) for
Drug Discovery's novel small molecule library and submitted to Professor
Driver's High-Throughput Screening (HTS) facility in order to initiate new
collaborations. This project serves as means for the training of students to
advance in their scientific careers. By emphasizing the participation of female
and underrepresented minority students, this program helps meet the goals
outlined by PCAST (President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology) to
transform and improve the science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) student pipeline.