* 1564418
* GEM Professional Development and Travel Grant to National Conference
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Marcus Huggans, The National GEM Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,981.00

The GEM Consortium has a rich-history in broadening participation among
underrepresented graduate students in engineering and other STEM fields.
Annually, it offers an abundance of opportunities, where underrepresented
graduate students are able to supplement their formal graduate education with
meaningful professional development and formal and informal mentorship from
engineering and other STEM faculty. This workshop/travel grant proposal focuses
on providing underrepresented graduate students with special professional
development opportunities at the 40th GEM Conference &amp; Gala. Through these
professional development opportunities, underrepresented graduate students will
be provided mentorship and other meaningful learning experiences to help them
gain greater understanding and preparation for the professoriate in engineering
and other STEM fields. Progress in diversifying the ranks of the faculty has
been slow in engineering and many other STEM fields. The effort to increase the
representation of African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans in
engineering and other STEM fields is a priority of NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a workshop format, this project aims to advance
underrepresented graduate students' research knowledge and skills, while
exposing them to strong mentorship and support systems in engineering and other
STEM fields. The broader significance and importance of this project is its
focus on positively influencing the STEM faculty pipeline by equipping
underrepresented graduate students with knowledge, skills, and support to
successfully pursue careers at the faculty ranks. This project is closely
aligned with NSF's strategic goals and priorities to increase the participation
of underrepresented groups at all levels of the STEM educational pipeline.