* 1564302
* SHF: Medium: Closing Multiphysics Analysis Gaps in System Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Jiun-Shyan Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 916,000.00

Design tools and methods for electronic components need to ensure that they are
low-cost, low-energy, last longer, deliver better performance, and operate
correctly across a diverse range of conditions. To guarantee this, engineers
need analysis tools that understand mechanical shock, temperature, aging and in
addition to electrical phenomena - in short, many different "physics" that are
all wrapped up into a single analysis question. The analysis must also span time
scales from nanoseconds to years, and spatial scales from nanometers to
centimeters. Such tools do not exist today. This project will develop the
"multiphysics" analysis methods that aims to address such questions for future
electronic system designers. Researchers will bring together techniques from
chip design, thermal and reliability analysis, mechanical simulation and other
domains learning each other?s fields of expertise, and creating new analysis
tools that will be used in both industry and teaching contexts. The outreach
aspects of the project involve training undergraduate and graduate students for
the electronic design automation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
have three main technical goals. The first goal is to come up with fast
algorithms to simulate and predict the physics of heat propagation, mechanical
stress, and electrical signaling in extremely complex structures. The second
goal is to enable computer codes to span multiple scales in space and in time.
This will allow system design tools to correctly analyze propagation of
electrical signals through nanoscale devices as the larger system is subjected
to heating or mechanical shocks occurring at much longer time scales. The third
goal is to develop new ways of efficiently understanding "multiphysics", e.g.,
the interaction between electrical, thermal and mechanical, along with temporal
phenomena, when analyzing an electronic system.