* 1564720
* Promoting STEM Student Success through Individualized Coaching and Interdisciplinary Community
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Thomas Carter, Community College District 502
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2022
* USD 743,302.00

The College of DuPage (COD) STEM Student Success program will provide targeted
STEM student support through the use of STEM learning communities, undergraduate
research and individualized academic assistance to improve persistence among
undergraduate students. COD will award scholarships to approximately 56 students
to complete a two-year program for graduation or transfer in either Chemistry,
Physics, or Engineering - programs chosen for their academic rigor, extensive
use of math, and existing research partnerships with four-year institutions and
national laboratories. A STEM Student Success Coach will provide individual,
cohort, program-specific, and interdisciplinary guidance as a cost-effective way
of addressing attrition in STEM disciplines at the community college level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program objectives are to (1) Increase the number of
financially needy and academically talented students who graduate or transfer in
a STEM program; and to (2) Improve the retention and completion rates of STEM
students through individualized and group support systems. Enhanced educational
opportunities exist through the leveraging of college resources, including
partnerships with four-year institutions and national laboratories for research
internships, collaboration with industry advisory boards to share STEM career
paths, discussions featuring STEM professionals, and more. Both formative and
summative evaluations will allow the project team to assess all components of
the program on an ongoing basis. Quantitative/qualitative data will inform
program decisions, resulting in a replicable model, disseminated through a
variety of professional outlets. The result will be a model of student support
services that may be replicated at other two and four year institutions.