* 1564329
* NeTS: Medium: HayStack: Fine-grained Visibility and Control of Mobile Traffic for Enhanced Performance, Privacy and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Despite our growing reliance on mobile phones for a wide range of daily tasks,
their operation remains largely opaque even for experts. Mobile users have
little insight into how their mobile apps operate and perform in the network,
into how (or whether) they protect the information that users entrust to them,
and with whom they share user's personal information. A number of previous
studies have addressed elements of this problem in a partial fashion, trading
off analytic comprehensiveness and deployment scale. This project seeks to
overcome the limitations of previous approaches by building a handset-,
traffic-, and user-centric mobile measurement platform: the ICSI Haystack.
Haystack offers a novel and flexible mobile vantage point capable of correlating
real-world mobile traffic with user input and high-fidelity device activity at
scale while also enabling mechanisms to aid mobile users to stay in control of
their mobile traffic and personal data. The research community, operators and
regulatory bodies will also benefit from the novel measurement mechanisms and
from the data collected in order to safeguard mobile users and to increase the
operational transparency of mobile apps and trackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve this vision, this project develops novel techniques to perform high-
fidelity mobile measurements by capturing user traffic in user-space on the
device using native platform support. As a result, Haystack will be available
for anyone to install from traditional app stores such as Google Play, thereby
enhancing user reach. In order to gain a truly in-depth and broad understanding
of the mobile ecosystem, Haystack takes advantage of its local operation to
correlate network traffic with user input and local context, such as which app
generated a particular network flow and device location, obtained from the
operating system itself with real network and user stimuli. Critically,
Haystack's system design must be flexible and extensible in order to enable
researchers to conduct a wide range of mobile measurements, to cope with new
mobile technologies, and to reach a broad cross-section of mobile users. The
ability to combine all these features together in user devices makes Haystack an
ideal vantage point to conduct a wide range of mobile measurements such as
mobile traffic characterization in the wild, privacy leak detection, identifying
online tracking services, auditing app security, and network performance
measurements.