* 1564164
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Context in Cartographic Evolutionary Documents to Extract and Build Linked Spatial-Temporal Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Craig Knoblock, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 581,879.00

Millions of historical maps are in digital archives today. For example, the U.S.
Geological Survey has created and scanned over 200,000 topographic maps covering
a 125-year period. Maps are a form of "evolutionary visual documents" because
they display landscape changes over long periods of time and across large areas.
Such documents are of tremendous value because they provide a high-resolution
window into the past at a continental scale. Unfortunately, without time-
intensive manual digitization scanned maps are unusable for research purposes.
Map features, such as wetlands and roads, while readable by humans, are only
available as images. This interdisciplinary collaborative project involving
researchers and their students at University of Southern California and
University of Colorado, Boulder will develop a set of open-source technologies
and tools that allow users to extract map features from a large number of map
sheets and track changes of features between map editions in a Geographical
Information System. The resulting open-source tools will enable exciting new
forms of research and learning in history, demography, economics, sociology,
ecology, and other disciplines. The data produced by this project will be made
publically available and through case studies integrated with other historical
archives. Spatially and temporally linked knowledge covering man-made and
natural features over more than 125 years holds enormous potential for the
physical and social sciences. The wealth of information contained in these maps
is unique, especially for the time before the widespread use of aerial
photography. The ability to automatically transform the scanned paper maps
stored in large archives into spatio-temporally linked knowledge will create an
important resource for social and natural scientists studying global change and
other socio-geographic processes that play out over large areas and long periods
of time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop a
recognition and data integration framework that extracts, organizes, and links
the knowledge found in visual documents that evolve over time, such as a map
series. While past work has focused on feature extraction from single well-
conditioned map images, this framework will handle large volume historical map
archives for efficient, robust extraction of man-made and natural features and
link the features across time (map editions), space (map sheets), and scale. The
framework will perform recognition in maps with poor graphical quality by
exploiting contextual information in the form of linked knowledge. This
contextual information comes from existing spatial data sources or has been
extracted from more recent high-quality map editions, which can be used to
improve and refine the training steps for automatically processing maps in an
archive. The framework also exploits knowledge of the semantic relationships
between features to increase robustness, efficiency, and the degree of
automation of the methods developed and characterize uncertainty in the
extracted data as well as in linking between extracted data across space, time,
and scale. This research project will validate the methods by using case studies
that evaluate the extracted, fully linked data collections for major feature
types (built-up area, infrastructure, hydrography and vegetation) from both the
USGS and Ordnance Survey maps. The researchers will use multiple study regions
that represent different histories in landscape evolution and transitions driven
by processes such as urbanization and its effects on rural and wild landscapes
(e.g., the I-95 megapolitan urban corridor). Publications, software, and
datasets for this project will be made available on the project website
(http://spatial-computing.github.io/unlocking-spatiotemporal-map-data).