* 1564881
* Mentoring and Engaging Computer Science, Cybersecurity, and Bioinformatics Students to Increase Their Recruitment, Retention, and Preparation for the Workforce
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Mary Abkemeier, Fontbonne University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2022
* USD 625,318.00

In response to high workforce demands in the areas of computer science,
cybersecurity, and bioinformatics, the project team for this "NSF Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Program (S-STEM) Capacity
Building" project at Fontbonne University will work closely with industry
contacts to ensure that (1) Fontbonne's degree programs meet local needs in the
St. Louis area as well as address national workforce needs and (2) low-income,
academically talented students will be equipped to enter these careers by
providing scholarships, academic, and career supports for its S-STEM Scholars.
The project will concentrate on increasing enrollment, retention, graduation,
and placement of diverse, low-income students in these focal areas. To foster
this, the project will provide eleven scholarships, mentoring, skills for
transitioning to college-level mathematics, undergraduate research and
internship opportunities, real-world project-based learning, a summer
orientation program, and a seminar series on information technology (IT) project
management. In concert with this, strong industry connections will partner with
the institution on the seminar series, internship opportunities, serving on
advisory boards, and student mentoring to help promote and facilitate computer
science, cybersecurity, and bioinformatics careers and/or entry into graduate
school in these arenas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of the project
is to investigate the effects and challenges of a model for student success in
experiential learning that includes: (a) engagement of industry in providing
internships and developing real-world applications for project-based learning;
(b) a summer orientation program to teach incoming students how to learn
mathematics in subsequent courses; (c) seminars with industry input in project
management; and (d) the implementation of faculty mentoring and cohort supports.
Objectives include: enrolling eleven new S-STEM Scholars who are low-income,
academically talented, and majoring in computer science, cybersecurity, or
bioinformatics; graduating at least nine of the scholars in four years; and
having all graduating scholars either employed in their field or attending
graduate school within six months of graduation. To research and assess the
impact of the various strategies, individually and cumulatively, the project
team will use a qualitative and quantitative mixed-methods research and
evaluation approach in connection with investigating a variety of variables
including financial support, the orientation program and project management
seminar, professional guidance and mentoring, and overall impact of industry
influence and involvement. The research approach will allow the investigators to
measure the success of their strategies, particularly concerning extensive and
gauged interactions with industry. The research and evaluation will generate
evidence that can be used to guide and inform sustained programming and
transferability to other institutions, especially in urban areas.