* 1564382
* Collaborative proposal: ABI Sustaining: The Environmental-Data Automated Track Annotation (Env-DATA) system
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Roland Kays, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2019
* USD 113,568.00

How an animal moves through their environment reveals much about their ecology
and how they respond to modern changes to the planet such as development and
climate change. GPS technology embedded in collars (mammal) or backpacks (birds)
has revolutionized the ability to track animals, providing more detail than ever
before, sometimes in real-time. However, to make the most of these new tracking
data they must be seen in the context of the world through which the animals are
moving by linking their tracks to remote sensing maps showing weather and
ecosystem. With both the animal and environmental data growing rapidly, there
are increasing technical challenges and knowledge gaps that inhibit the
widespread application of linking these types of datasets for movement ecology
research. The Environmental-Data Automated Track Annotation system (Env-DATA) is
a web-based tool to give direct access for movement ecology researchers to
thousands of environmental datasets. It provides intuitive and easy to use
graphic user interface-based access to these datasets. Env-DATA is hosted by and
interfaces with Movebank, a global movement data archive, open to the broad
public worldwide. Env-DATA is open and accessible to anyone. It provides easy
access to already public datasets, as well and some datasets that are not
otherwise open. Env-DATA provides users with tools to publish the combined
environmental data along with the animal track it was used to annotate in the
Movebank Data Depository. Published data sets are allocated a DOI and can be
accessed and searched as electronic publications, provided an agreement from the
owner of the track data. Annual workshops at the North Carolina Museum of
Natural Sciences will reach out to new users within academia, government, and
public organizations that track animals. Env-DATA is at the cutting edge of the
"contextual revolution" in movement ecology where combining analysis of movement
patterns and incorporating the environmental background of the movement has
become a necessary component for understanding and modeling animal movement. By
providing intuitive and easy to use access to an unprecedented number of
environmental datasets and variables, Env-DATA enables animal movement
researchers to overcome technical challenges and knowledge gaps, and to fully
utilize globally available environmental information. Env-DATA links movement
tracks with environmental data from different remote-sensing and global
reanalysis data providers, including NASA, NOAA, and ECMWF. Env-DATA interprets
environmental variables in the correct encryption, grid, and projection systems
and interpolates the data in space and time to the observed animal track
locations, or a collection of comparison points or grid. Funding through this
proposal will allow support of continuous on-going operations of Env-DATA, which
requires regular quality control tests to detect cases where the data providers
to Env-DATA may have changed the metadata, location, or access protocol. In
these cases, technical support to update the system is necessary. It also
requires regular availability of a user-support "help-desk". Outreach and
training of new and existing users, as well as collecting first-hand feedback
from users will be conducted by annual user workshops. All talks and tutorials
in the workshop will be filmed and posted to the workshop website and on
YouTube. Env-DATA PIs, staff, and researchers using Env-DATA will provide
lectures to the broad public in the NC Museum. Undergraduate students will
assist in workshop coordination and Env-DATA user support. To access Env-DATA
and Movebank, visit https://www.movebank.org/.