* 1564282
* III: Medium: Enabling Technologies for 21st Century Entity Matching Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* AnHai Doan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,085,906.00

Entity matching (EM) decides if different data instances (such as "UW-Madison"
and "Univ of Wisc Madison") refer to the same real-world entity. This problem is
critical for numerous Big Data and data science applications. This project will
develop solutions and tools for EM which will significantly advance the state of
the art. Compared to the current solutions, the proposed solutions will consider
the entire EM pipeline, will be usable by lay users (such as domain scientists
and journalists), will scale to large amounts of data, and will exploit
crowdsourcing to maximize matching accuracy. Technologies developed in this
project will be evaluated in three domains: managing scientific data for
limnology (the study of lakes and other bodies of freshwater), product matching
for e-commerce at WalmartLabs, and developing the Internet of Buildings at
Johnson Control Inc. As such, the project will facilitate the widespread
deployment of EM tools, thus resulting in more effective information management
and access for society. Through its release of open-source software it will help
educate next-generation workers and researchers. The research will help domain
scientists in limnology, and can potentially impact hundreds of thousands of
buildings and millions of users via collaboration with Johnson Controls and
WalmartLabs. Finally, a planned textbook and open-source system artifacts from
the project will be disseminated broadly in the research community, to
significantly enhance the data management infrastructure for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will introduce both conceptual and
technical novelties. Conceptually, instead of focusing on just the matching step
(and studying how to match accurately and scalably, as much of current work has
done), the project advocates developing solutions for the entire raw-data-to-
matches EM pipeline. Further, it advocates using the matching step to guide the
execution of the remaining steps in the EM pipeline. Technically, the project
will develop novel solutions for non-matching steps in the EM pipeline, and do
so in a matching-driven fashion. It also introduces new important problems, such
as EM debugging. Finally, it develops novel solutions to scale up the entire EM
pipeline and to exploit crowdsourcing. As described, the project takes the next
logical step in EM research, and can significantly advance the state of the art.
Further, many problems underlying this research have commonalities with other
data management scenarios. Hence, the research has the potential to contribute
to those areas as well. For more information, see the project's homepage at
https://sites.google.com/site/anhaidgroup/projects/nsf-em-project-2016.