* 1564927
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: ORIGIN: Origin Inference from Geospatial Isotope Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Lan Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 412,326.00

Long-distance migration is a unique and important behavior with widespread
implications for environmental and ecological systems. Animals face direct
threats during migration ranging from severe nutritional stress to potential
interactions with wind farms and other anthropogenic hazards. Migration links
the geographic endpoints of an animal?s life cycle, and patterns of migration
determine where and when animals are dependent on habitats that may be
threatened or experiencing change due to human activities. Pathways of migration
represent potential transmission paths for diseases, parasites, and nutrients
carried by migrants. Despite the long-recognized significance of migration,
detailed information on migration patterns for most animals is remarkably
limited. The field of migration research is poised for major advances due to the
development of new technologies and the potential to combine different types of
data providing complementary information on animal migration. The ORIGIN project
will represent a collaboration between biologists, geochemists, and computer
scientists to develop software and database resources allowing researchers to
take advantage of one particularly powerful method of reconstructing migration
patterns ? the use of natural chemical signals preserved in the body tissues of
migrants. In the course of this research the ORIGIN team will develop new
statistical approaches that are widely useful to scientists and will provide
novel interdisciplinary training to graduate students and research opportunities
for undergraduates from STEM-underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the ORIGIN project is to develop data and analytical resources that
facilitate major advances in understanding of ecological, evolutionary,
physiological, and biogeochemical dimensions of animal migration by increasing
the use and standardization of isotope-enabled migration research methods.
ORIGIN will consist of two integrated platforms that together provide the data
resources, analytical tools, and project support necessary to streamline the
analysis of data from migratory animal samples. First, updates to the IsoMAP
web-GIS platform will enhance its ability to provide timely, authoritative, and
comprehensive map data products and models describing patterns of isotopic
variation in the environment. Second, these products will be used by a new
package developed for the R programming environment that will provide an
accessible but flexible suite of tools supporting 1) analysis of isotopic and
non-isotopic data to evaluate the migratory origin of individuals, including two
distinct Bayesian approaches for integration of data from multiple makers, 2)
planning of isotope-enabled migration research projects, and 3) generation of
analytics for assessment of statistical assignment results. ORIGIN will develop
infrastructure that will support a wide range of scientific communities, and
will support training and scientific outreach programs including a graduate
short course in spatial sciences and human migration-focused research
opportunities for undergraduates from STEM-underrepresented groups. Project
results will be disseminated at http://isomap.org.