* 1564366
* Exploitation of Genetic and Epigenetic Variation in the Regulation of Tomato Fruit Quality Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/16/2015,04/30/2022
* Ana Caicedo, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2022
* USD 5,018,470.00

PI: Esther van der Knaap (University of Georgia) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Ana Caicedo (University of Massachusetts); Denise Tieman (University of
Florida); Lukas Mueller (Boyce Thompson Institute)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Joaquin Ca√±izares, Maria Jose Diez, Jose
Blanca (Universitat Politecnica De Valencia); Sofia Visa, Dean Fraga, Simon Gray
(College of Wooster)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high quality tomato is
expected to have good flavor, size, color and firmness. Years of selective
breeding have produced the modern tomato, and yet the quality and production
efficiency of the crop still needs improvement. Despite this need, desirable
traits that will improve fruit quality are often hard to find, partly because
the underlying factors that specify fruit traits are not fully known. Another
impediment is that some beneficial traits were eliminated or hidden during
breeding, thus reducing the available genetic diversity in modern tomato
genomes. Project scientists have discovered an untapped resource to find new
traits from wild tomato relatives and from ancestral populations growing in
diverse geographic locations. These plants may appear undesirable by having
small, seedy, soft or unpalatable fruits. However, these relatives are actually
genetic gold mines: they hold within their DNA useful and untapped traits that
were lost during tomato domestication. New technologies and genetic methods are
now available to mine these wild tomato genomes for new suites of breeding
traits. This project uses the selected wild populations to explore and capture
quality traits associated with fruit weight, firmness, flavor and color. The
project will identify the molecular basis of these fruit traits and will deliver
new traits to improve the breeding potential of the modern tomato. The project
provides interdisciplinary training in genomics, computational data analysis and
breeding to all involved, including post-doctoral researchers and graduate
students. Through summer workshops, high school and college students will be
trained in tomato genomics and breeding, will interact directly with scientists,
and will gain hands-on skills in research. These trained students will be
critical additions to a workforce that advances agriculture through scientific
discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wild relatives and semi-domesticated germplasm
of cultivated plants provide a significant reservoir of genetic and epigenetic
diversity for key regulators of agronomic traits. Future crop improvement relies
on harnessing this diversity. However, mining semi-domesticated and wild
germplasm for beneficial alleles of agriculturally important traits is not
straightforward because fruit quality is quantitatively inherited. Consequently,
visual inspection of unselected germplasm does not readily lead to the
identification of accessions that have desirable characteristics to improve
modern germplasm. The association of traits with genes controlling fruit quality
and the identification of beneficial alleles that may have been lost during
domestication should provide a model for studying how to efficiently mine
germplasm of the closest wild relatives for quantitative trait loci leading to
tangible crop improvement. To identify genes and pathways that control complex
tomato fruit quality traits, this project will (1) assemble and phenotype a
tomato population (Solanum spp.) constituting the continuum of wild, semi-
domesticated and ancestral landraces; (2) identify loci underlying fruit quality
traits through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and differentially
expressed small RNAs; (3) confirm genetically the traits associated with
candidate regions to genes, and (4) analyze the developmental and biochemical
pathways that control fruit quality. The project will result in genome sequence
data for 150 tomato accessions, including 20 from the closest but fully wild
relative of cultivated tomato, 110 from wild and semi-domesticated direct
ancestors of domesticated tomatoes and 20 from the earliest landraces of
cultivated tomatoes. In addition, the project will generate small RNA sequence
data from different stages of tomato fruit development from a subset of this
population, and will provide detailed fruit quality information about flavor,
firmness, weight and palatability for each of the 150 accessions. The
information will be available through a public resource, the Sol Genomic Network
(SGN, http://www.sgn.cornell.edu/), and seeds of the accessions will be
available from germplasm repository sites (TGRC, http://tgrc.ucdavis.edu/; and
COMAV, http://www.comav.upv.es/).