* 1564723
* Scholarship Program for Mathematics and Sciences Study
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Mark Barreuther, Albertus Magnus College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 649,383.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Albertus Magnus College in New
Haven, Connecticut will provide scholarships for talented, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology,
chemistry, or mathematics. In addition to scholarships, the program will provide
academic and other support to increase the persistence of academically talented,
low-income students. The project design includes a comprehensive program that
incorporates critically influential aspects of student success: a strong
academic curriculum, financial support, a wide array of student support
services, and career planning. Additionally, a system of individual supports is
provided by faculty and peer mentors to augment the institutional offerings.
Scholarships and support for academically strong students, who may not otherwise
be able to afford college, will help to produce a well-trained workforce that
will contribute to the economic vitality of the greater New Haven region and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program organization is informed by research
indicating that a significant reason for STEM attrition is poor classroom
experiences of students. In addition to student support activities, the project
will study the impact of a professional learning community of STEM faculty on
persistence and retention. Select faculty at Albertus will participate in a
collaborative faculty development program. The process will involve groups of
faculty developing lessons, teaching these lessons while their colleagues and
knowledgeable others observe, engaging in post-lesson discussions to reflect on
how to improve the lesson, and finally revising and re-teaching the lessons. The
project will study how a professional learning community approach in higher
education can lead to improved retention and degree completion in STEM fields.
The program expects to help talented, low-income students to complete bachelor's
degrees and contribute to the growing bioscience industry in the region. The
findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education
community and help increase understanding of the attributes and practices of
successful student scholarship and support programs.