* 1564274
* CSR: Medium: Augmenting Logs with Static Analysis and Symbolic Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Vikram Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2021
* USD 932,000.00

Internet services such as Facebook, Amazon, Gmail, iTunes, or Office 360 are a
backbone of the modern economy, and include millions of consumer applications
and business services provided by large, medium-sized and small businesses. All
these services are essentially organized as complex distributed software
systems. When such a system encounters a failure (a service outage or an
unexpected performance problem), the potential costs of the failure can quickly
reach millions of dollars in lost revenue or lost productivity. Diagnosing the
root causes of the problem quickly and restoring the service as soon as possible
are both critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic approach to this problem is to
record (or "log") information frequently as system components execute and
interact, and then to analyze these logs after a failure in attempting to
diagnose the root causes. While these analyses use increasingly sophisticated
statistical and machine-learning based techniques, they are limited by the
information gathered in the logs: the state-of-the-art approaches today record
limited information pertaining to major events so that they do not slow down the
services significantly during normal operation. In particular, these systems do
not record detailed internal information within components or detailed network
traffic between components that can be enormously useful in diagnosing failures
more quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new techniques that
make it possible to reconstruct this missing information by leveraging recent
advances in program analysis and automated testing. Moreover, the project
develops a new strategy that breaks down the reconstruction task into small
steps that will allow the analysis to scale to very large distributed services.
The project also develops new, more sophisticated analysis techniques for
individual components that go beyond the current state-of-the-art, by tailoring
them to the specific problems faced in this work. The project engages industrial
partners to evaluate the techniques on their systems, and makes the resulting
software solutions available in open source form to the research community as
well as the industrial partners. Together, these techniques have the potential
to result in large cost-savings for a wide range of Internet services.