* 1564634
* Clear Path - Bachelor's Degree Completion Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Olivia Carducci, East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,039,527.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at East Stroudsburg University of
Pennsylvania will increase the timely baccalaureate degree completion rate among
students transferring from community college in selected STEM fields. The Clear
Path Project will include partnerships with Lehigh Carbon County Community
College, Luzerne County Community College, and Northampton County Community
College. Students transferring to four-year degree programs frequently lack
critical prerequisite coursework and knowledge resulting in many students
leaving STEM or slowing their time towards graduation. STEM transfer students
are also less likely to develop campus level social support or participate in
high impact practices like undergraduate research, peer mentoring and community-
based learning. Through Clear Path, the partnering schools will provide cohort
activities, social support, and scholarships to students who begin their
education in an open access environment to aid in timely baccalaureate degree
completion. The project will study how involvement in these high impact
practices by community college students prior to transferring leads to
improvements in student success such as increased retention and reduced time to
degree completion. Scholarships and support for academically strong students,
who may not otherwise be able to afford college, will help to produce a well-
trained STEM workforce that will contribute to the economic growth of
Pennsylvania and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program organization is
informed by research indicating that a significant reason for STEM attrition of
community college transfer students is incomplete preparation prior to transfer
both in terms of prerequisite courses and the skills and behaviors associated
with persistence and success in STEM degree completion. Through Clear Path,
promising community college STEM students will be identified and recruited for
program scholarships during their first year at community college. This group of
students will also begin receiving support, training, and mentoring while still
at a community college. The social support and cohort activities will aid in the
development of academic adaptive psychological mechanisms, for example,
persistence and study behaviors, associated with college student success. How
the developmental mechanisms associated with academic success are affected by
specific high impact practices will be evaluated. A multivariate examination of
the association between the developmental mechanisms and academic achievement,
with and without the inclusion of demographic data, will also occur. Further
investigation of the role of the cohort activities will clarify how each
activity facilitates student participation in high impact practices, improves
developmental mechanisms, and results in ultimate academic success. Any
differences seen in the benefits of providing resources while students are still
enrolled in community college versus only after they matriculate to a four-year
institution can also be evaluated. Information from all of these findings can be
used to inform policies and practices at community colleges and four-year
institutions. The findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the
STEM education community and help increase understanding of the attributes and
practices of successful student scholarship and support programs for community
college transfer students.