* 1564692
* ABI Innovation: Robotics-inspired modeling & design of proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Tanja Kortemme, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2020
* USD 942,675.00

This research will permit researchers to design proteins that have new
functions, using software tools that improve the success of the production
process. By testing and improving the design steps it will also allow
researchers and engineers to produce proteins that have functions more complex
than could be made before: these new activities have enormous potential to
advance basic research and biotechnology. Proteins perform a vast array of
complex and important functions in cells and in technology settings: they can
speed up the rate of chemical reactions by several hundred fold, they are
responsible for how cells communicate, and they are the basic material for
building cell structures and tissues. The advantages to designing proteins
instead of using those already known include being able to modify what by-
products are made so that there is less damage to the environment, make low-
toxicity sensors that can probe the action of living cells in real time, and
create unique materials that form defined structures at the nanoscale. To ensure
the methods are widely available, all approved computational methods will be
available as source code via the Rosetta software suite. This software is free
of charge for academic users, and is commonly licensed by biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies. The new methods developed under this grant will also
be used in classrooms for team-based projects and for interdisciplinary research
activities that emphasize collaboration between students in the biological and
physical/engineering sciences.

This research aims to address a principal barrier in computational protein
design: the lack of computational approaches that predict both sequence and
structural changes with sufficient accuracy. Design methods change the protein
sequence but in the vast majority of cases allow only minimal structural
adjustments. Yet conformational changes not captured by current methods are the
rule rather than the exception, and a main reason for failed designs. Moreover,
new conformations might be required to engineer new functions, e.g. to reshape
an existing functional site to accommodate a different binding partner. Finally,
many proteins undergo functional conformational changes, such as molecular
switches or enzymes and protein machines that cycle between conformational
states; such complex activities are currently not designable. Aim 1 seeks to
advance methods to model changes in protein structure, and address challenges in
both generating relevant protein conformations and distinguishing correct from
incorrect predictions; established and new benchmarks will be used to assess
limitations and quantify improvements. Aim 2 will develop an approach to design
new functions that require substantial changes in protein conformation. The
approach will be tested by experimental forward-engineering applications. Aim 3
will provide "protocol capture" documentation for tested methods and utilize
developed methods in educational and research activities that seek to broaden
participation. Validated methods will be available as source code via
https://www.rosettacommons.org.