* 1564518
* Renewal for USA Cyber Scholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Todd Andel, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,097,801.00

The University of South Alabama (USA) proposes to add four new cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity with strong emphasis on the cutting
edge of critical cybersecurity research. The program is graduating skilled
cybersecurity professionals with strong leadership skills and a commitment to
public service. The project will have an immediate impact on the cybersecurity
capabilities of the federal workforce by providing graduates with general
computing and security skills. The University of South Alabama has a record of
meeting the needs of a diverse student body and a high percentage of the
students come from rural or financially depressed areas. In the current program,
30% of the SFS Cyber Scholars are female and 15% are members of underrepresented
groups. The project team consists of 17 cybersecurity-focused faculty members
providing education and research opportunities to the SFS Cyber Scholars. The
expert faculty along with the state-of-the-art security laboratories allow
students to be on the cutting edge of critical cybersecurity research issues
facing the nation in one of the best cybersecurity research facilities in the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue the successful SFS Cyber
Scholars program recruiting students throughout the Gulf Coast region and will
enrich diversity and capacity in the national cyber workforce. The USA School of
Computing is unique in this region, consolidating five undergraduate computing
programs in information technology, computer science, cyber assurance,
information systems, and health informatics. The project team brings both
military service experience and experience in managing NSF's scholarship
programs. Graduates of the USA Cyber Scholars program are skilled in research
methodology, develop hands-on cyber knowledge, and are prepared professionally
to enter the federal cyber workforce.