* 1564102
* TTP: Medium: Democratizing Secure Password Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Thomas Ristenpart, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,197,699.00

The theft of passwords and other user credentials from online services has
become an epidemic, with password breaches regularly impacting large user
populations and leaving both consumers and businesses vulnerable to attack. A
number of research results point the way toward methods that could greatly
improve the security of password systems. There is thus both an urgent need and
a clear opportunity to transform the general state of industry practice in
password management. Toward this end, the researchers build an easy-to-deploy
password-protection system called PASS. PASS incorporates recent research on
state-of-the-art methods to protect passwords and related user credentials into
new innovations. PASS aims to make available to even the smallest organizations
a complete, principled, server-side password protection system that offers far
stronger security by default than any known existing system.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PASS transitions later stage research into practice and develops
novel extensions to several of the PIs' recent research innovations, including:
(1) Pythia, a service for password hardening. Password hardening is technique
that applies a cryptographic transform to stored and user-submitted passwords to
render them hard to crack. Pythia incorporates a novel and practical such
cryptographic transformation, known as a verifiable partially-oblivious
pseudorandom function. This transform not only hardens passwords, but also
protects against compromise of the service that applies the cryptographic
transform and makes it easy to update stored password data, thereby minimizing
the impact of a breach. (2) Honey objects: A well established method for
mitigating the damage caused by a breach is to incorporate fake or decoy data or
services into a system. These objects, often called 'honey objects', serve to
divert or deceive an adversary. PASS will incorporate honey objects such as fake
user and administrative accounts, doing so in a way that builds on the PIs'
recent research into principled use of such objects. (3) Typo-tolerance: In
support of an emerging industry practice that enhances usability for clients,
PASS will support the optional acceptance of passwords with certain common
typographical errors. PASS will enable deployers to avoid current ad hoc methods
for such typo-tolerance and instead leverage recent and ongoing research results
to achieve a principled security / usability tradeoff. By offering these novel
tools in a mature, modular development ecosystem for engineers and researchers,
PASS serves not only as a platform to democratize advances in password-
protection technologies but also as a stimulus and proving ground for new,
practice-oriented research in the security community.