* 1564768
* Sophomore Fast-Forward: A Summer Bridge Program to Support Retention in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2023
* David Hall, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,234.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Louisiana Technological
University will increase the timely baccalaureate degree completion rate among
students majoring in mechanical, biomedical, and civil engineering. The overall
objective of the program is to increase engineering retention, leading to an
increase in the number of STEM graduates prepared to enter the workforce and be
successful. The program offers scholarships for rising sophomores who
demonstrate academic talent and financial need. Support includes attendance in a
full-time summer session in which students will take some of the required
engineering and mathematics courses normally taken during the Fall semester.
This approach will provide a smoother transition into more difficult engineering
coursework for this at-risk group. This program will include professional and
student development activities, as well as mentoring from faculty. Scholarships
and support for low-income and academically talented students, who may not
otherwise be able to obtain engineering degrees, will help to produce a well-
trained STEM workforce that will contribute to the economic well being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the identification of a
critical attrition point in the undergraduate engineering curriculum. Louisiana
Tech has identified the engineering statics course as the point at which many
otherwise promising students leave engineering due to poor performance. However,
the failure rate for students taking statics during the summer session is
substantially lower than for the Fall semester. The project will investigate the
hypothesis that encouraging talented but at-risk students to pursue statics
during a full-time summer session will facilitate these at-risk students in
overcoming this identified attrition point in the undergraduate engineering
curriculum. Retaining more students in the critical sophomore transition will
result in more STEM graduates. The cohorts of S-STEM Scholars will be mentored
by a faculty team and participate in other support activities including industry
field trips, professional development training and team-building activities. The
findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education
community and will help to increase understanding of the attributes and
practices of successful student scholarship and support programs for
academically talented, low-income engineering students.