* 1564822
* ABI Innovation: Coalescence-based Inference of Adaptation
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Peter Beerli, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2021
* USD 757,717.00

This project will develop a mathematical framework for investigating genomic
sequences that respond differently to local environmental stresses. This
framework will compare mutation patterns from samples taken at different
locations to estimate possible genealogies of these samples; these genealogies
will be used to estimate the parameters of a number of population genetic
models. These parameters will be able to tell us about potential selection
differences among geographical locations. This new mathematically rigorous
framework has the promise to supersede current ad hoc and inadequate summary
statistics. Potential applications of this framework include improving
interventions for diseases (e.g. individualized responses for HIV patients), and
improving our understanding of which gene regions are responsible for long-term
survival in harsh environments. The framework will be publicly available in
standalone computer software that can be run on small computers or large
computing clusters. This research draws from multiple science and technology
disciplines (biology, computational science, and statistics) and thus will
provide a great basis on which to mentor undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students and foster their interest towards a field that desperately
needs more training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The building blocks for
this framework are rooted in coalescence theory, a branch of theoretical
population genetics discussing the shapes of genealogies of individuals, and
Bayesian statistics evaluating different scenarios and integrating over possible
solutions using Markov chain Monte Carlo technology. The data will be genomic
sequences which are known to contain technical errors; to successfully
differentiate among gene regions that are under selection for particular
environments, these errors must be taken into account, but currently are not.
Additionally, samples from different geographical locations (for example
different patients, different islands, or different habitats) can be grouped in
different ways, which requires that the framework be capable of delivering
optimality criteria that help to order different scenarios. Progress and the
final work will be documented on the websites http://popgen.sc.fsu.edu and
http://peterbeerli.com.