* 1564670
* The Impact of Fire on Entrainment and Precipitation Efficiency Derived from Isotope Ratios
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* David Noone, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 635,235.00

Biomass burning in central and southern Africa produces some of the world's most
dense layers of smoke. The smoke plumes and transported over the southern
Atlantic Ocean where they merge with wide areas of low altitude stratocumulus
clouds. The details of how smoke aerosol particles and stratocumulus clouds
interact is inadequately understood, despite the disproportionally large role
those types of clouds play in local and global climate. This project seeks to
improve understanding of how smoke changes the way air circulates near clouds,
how cloud droplets in polluted clouds evaporate at different rates from those in
pristine clouds, and how drizzle is modified when smoke is present. Stable
isotope ratios of oxygen and hydrogen in water vapor and cloud liquid will be
measured from aircraft flights though smoke and cloud layers near Namibia to
evaluate characteristics of atmospheric mixing, cloud evaporation and the
fraction of clouds droplets which grow to produce rain. These characteristics
are difficult to quantify from more traditional methods. Isotopic data will be
used to evaluate entrainment and evaporation simulated by the NCAR Community
Earth System Model to evaluate where new understanding from the experiment can
improve model simulations.

Lack of knowledge about cloud-smoke interactions leads to crude treatment of
processes in climate models, which consequently leads important unresolved
uncertainties in climate model simulations. The isotopic study provides a sorely
needed critical check on how clouds are depicted in models and gives specific
guidance as to which mechanisms are incorrectly represented. The datasets
collected enable several research groups to test and compare their models using
isotopic constraints which will serve as a valuable legacy of the experiment.
The data-model synthesis fosters collaboration that bridges between observation
and modeling specialists and enables students training in combining expertise in
modeling and data methods to achieve enhanced knowledge though synthesis. The
project provides opportunities to engage learning at many levels though
incorporation of research experiences in class room teaching at Oregon State
University and in public outreach forums.