* 1564817
* Collaborative Research: Academic Success and Professional Development (ASAP) Project-Based Engineering Excellence Transfer Academy Across Arizona
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Tim Frank, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2022
* USD 125,000.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project is a collaborative effort between
Arizona State University, Central Arizona College, Cochise College, Eastern
Arizona College, Estrella Mountain Community College, Glendale Community
College, Mesa Community College, Mohave Community College, Phoenix College, and
Yavapai College. The program will provide scholarships for talented, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need who are pursuing degrees in
engineering or computer science. In addition to scholarships, the program will
provide academic and other support to increase the persistence of these
academically talented, low-income students. The project design includes an
academic success and professional development course along with project-based
activities. Faculty and industrial mentors help students to envision the
potential career opportunities and benefits available in engineering and
computer science. Nine of the ten collaborating schools are classified as
Hispanic Serving Institutions. Scholarships and support for low-income and
academically talented students, who may not otherwise be able to obtain
engineering or computer science degrees will help to produce a well-trained
workforce that will contribute to the economic well being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to address the need to expand the
engineering and computer science workforce by increasing the success of Arizona
State University students including students that transfer from community
colleges. The program combines a network of engineering mentors with a
successful student-centered and mentor-driven academic success and professional
development course to significantly increase the number of community college
students that consider, choose, continue and graduate with a bachelor of science
in engineering or computer science. At the center of the proposed initiative is
a commitment to involving students in career-shaping projects that will permit
them to discover, nurture, and fully develop their technical interests. Guided
by grounded theory and social cognitive career theory, the project will also
study the factors most central to maintaining effectiveness while scaling up a
successful student-centered and mentor-intensive transfer student support system
to encompass a larger group of collaborating institutions. Community colleges
will play an increasingly important role in educating the nation's engineers.
This statewide project will serve as a collaborative model for four-year and
two-year schools across the nation. This research will provide knowledge helpful
in establishing a transfer student support program in Arizona and will inform
other university and community college networks in other parts of the United
States. The findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the
engineering and computer science education community.