* 1564756
* Collaborative Research: ABI Development: Integrated platforms for protein structure and function predictions
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Yang Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 833,207.00

Proteins are the 'workhorse' molecules of life, they participate in nearly every
activity that cells carry out. It follows that understanding protein structure
and function is essential to understanding life processes, and how to control or
modify them. Biochemistry and biophysics experiments give the most accurate data
on protein structure and function, but the experiments are often expensive and
too specialized for many of the cell and molecular biologists focused on a
particular interesting protein. This means that reliable computational
predictions of protein structure and function are in high demand. These
techniques are also specialized but can be automated, which is the focus of this
project, which aims to develop an integrated platform for high-resolution
protein structure prediction and structure-based function annotation that is
accessible from the Web. This resource will significantly enhance studies of
individual proteins as well as processes in cellular biology and other
biological sciences. Through the collaboration of the two institutions, students
at NCAT will learn state of the art high performance computing methods, and
workshops at both institutions will provide greater understanding of the
capabilities of the new resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins are complex
components of biological systems, and studies on their structure and function
often require multiple approaches to measurement or modeling. Many of the
advanced computer algorithms used in this modeling are highly specialized,
involving a number of complicated processes for each aspect of the protein
modeling. Biologists whose primary interest is the final result often cannot
determine which algorithm or pipeline to choose, how to enter parameters, or how
to interpret the resulting models. While continuing to improve the accuracy of
the core algorithms in protein structure prediction and structure-based function
annotation, this project will also make improvements to domain parsing and
assembly, to improve the quality of complex protein structure and function
modeling. Another major focus of this project is to develop new protocols that
automatically guide protein targets to the most suitable pipelines. In
conjunction with this there will be new confidence scoring systems, both global
and local, to assist biological users as they interpret the modeling results. In
addition, advanced parallel computing and graphic processor unit techniques will
be implemented in order to accelerate the pipelines and reduce user's waiting
time. New opportunities will be made for improving educational outcomes, in
particular for women and minority students, in both University of Michigan and
the North Carolina A&amp;T State University. The on-line protein modeling system
will be accessible to the community at http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu.