* 1564765
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Probabilistic Models using Generalized Exponential Families
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Vishwanathan Swaminathan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2016
* USD 114,649.00

III: Small: Collaborative Research: Probabilistic Models using Generalized
Exponential Families Swaminathan Vishwanathan, Purdue University; Manfred
Warmuth, University of California, Santa Cruz

Machine learning is currently indispensible for building predictive models from
massive data sets. A large majority of widely used machine learning algorithms
are based on minimizing a convex loss function. A fundamental problem with all
such models is that they are not robust to outliers. To address this limitation,
this project develops probabilistic models based on a parametric family of
distributions, namely, the t-exponential family, that lead to quasi-convex loss
functions and yield models that are robust to outliers.

The key challenge when working with the t-exponential family of distributions,
as in the case of the exponential family, is to compute the log-partition
function and perform inference efficiently. The project addresses this challenge
in two specific cases. For problems with small number of classes exact iterative
schemes are being developed. For problems where the number of classes is
exponentially large, approximate inference techniques are being developed by
extending variational methods.

In partnership with Google, some of the data mining algorithms resulting from
this project are being applied to a challenging real-world problem of
recognizing text in photos (the PhotoOCR problem). The project offers
opportunities for research-based advanced training of graduate students as well
as research opportuinities for undergraduates in machine learning and data
mining. Algorithms for constructing predictive models from data that are robust
in the presence of outliers are likely to find use in a broad range of
applications. Open source implementions of algorithms, publications, and data
sets resulting from the project are being made available through the project web
page at: http://learning.stat.purdue.edu/wiki/tentropy/start