* 1564148
* NeTS: Medium: Implications of Receiver RF Front End Nonlinearity on Network Performance: Fundamentals, Limitations, and Management Strategies
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2023
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,011,594.00

Since the introduction of cell phones, the demand on mobile data traffic has
been continuously growing. The efficient utilization of the radio frequency
spectrum and clever wireless network management are key for satisfying this
traffic demand and spurring economic growth. It has been shown that spectrum can
be more efficiently used when shared among users rather than licensed to
specific users and communication systems. However, spectrum sharing technology
and regulations are still in their infancy. In particular, the effect of radio
receiver performance on spectrum regulation and management is not well
understood and needs careful analysis, both theoretical and experimental. This
project will derive the fundamental concepts and management strategies to
educate students, researchers, regulators, standardization bodies and industry
about the importance of characterizing receivers for a successful realization of
dynamic spectrum access systems. The results of this research will increase
social awareness about low-quality wireless devices and their implications on
capacity and serve as an important step towards the healthy obsolescence of bad
receivers from the market. This project aims to redefine the way we understand,
design, and optimize the next generation wireless networks, which will have far
reaching economic and social benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radio frequency (RF)
receiver front ends are nonlinear systems that create inter-modulation
distortion and, hence, can impair receiver performance by creating harmful
cross-channel interference in non- intuitive ways. The need to better account
for adjacent channel interference on network performance becomes indispensable
with the advent of spectrum sharing between heterogeneous wireless systems, and
for communication systems which exhibit poor selectivity, such as millimeter
wave technology. This project addresses the technological challenges in
receiver-centric wireless network design and management by providing a
fundamental analysis that quantifies the implications of RF front end non-
linearity on network performance, utilization, and fairness. The scientific
merit of this project is to (1) derive fundamental models and metrics that
characterize and quantify the implications of RF front ends on network
performance; (2) develop a comprehensive wireless network management framework
and strategies that account for the RF imperfections, transmit masks, and
diversity of heterogeneous wireless devices; (3) establish fundamentals of
nonlinear interference between symbols of adjacent channels for network-level
nonlinear interference avoidance and cancellation; and (4) build a testbed for
the validation of theoretical concepts. This testbed will enable further
research and education beyond the project period and, together with the
analytical framework, initiate the much-needed research on RF front end non-
linearity-aware network design and management for high-performance next
generation wireless networks.