* 1564561
* Emerging Mathematics and Computer Science Scholars (EMACS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Vyas Krishnan, Saint Leo University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 647,626.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Saint Leo University in Saint
Leo, Florida will award scholarships to low-income, academically talented
students pursing bachelors degrees in computer science or mathematics. In
addition to scholarships, the program will provide additional support in the
form of faculty mentoring, interdisciplinary projects with faculty, tutoring and
academic support, along with networking and internship opportunities with
industry. A key element of Saint Leo University's S-STEM program will be the
formation of two interacting cohorts of mathematics and computer science
students. This cohort experience will be an opportunity for students in both
majors to engage effectively in exchanges of ideas, and to appreciate the
interdisciplinary nature of the two fields. At stronger familiarity with the
complementary disciplines of mathematics and computer science is expected to
help broaden the students' career perspectives to include emerging high-demand
interdisciplinary career areas such as cybersecurity and data analytics.
Scholarships and support for low-income and academically talented students, who
may not otherwise be able to obtain STEM degrees, will help to produce a well-
trained workforce that will contribute to the nation's economic growth and
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S-STEM program will increase retention
and degree completion for students majoring in mathematics or computer sciences,
increase students' appreciation and understanding of the benefits each
discipline offers the other, and help these students to develop the
qualifications and interests needed to pursue the expanding career opportunities
at the interface of applied mathematics and computer science. The project will
create interacting cohorts of computer science and mathematics majors. Cohorts
will take classes together, receive faculty mentoring from both disciplines, and
participate in interdisciplinary group projects. Students majoring in the fields
of computer science and mathematics will learn their chosen field of study but,
through an interdisciplinary approach, will develop experience in the other
discipline. It is expected that scholarship students in the program will show an
increased appreciation for the power of integrating these disciplines and
awareness of the extensive opportunities in interdisciplinary career options.
The findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education
community.