* 1564931
* Increasing the Success of Low-Income, Academically Talented Students in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2023
* Martha Mitchell, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

New Mexico State University's (NMSU) S-STEM project entitled "Increasing the
Success of Low-Income, Academically Talented Students in Engineering" is a
synergistic effort between the NMSU College of Engineering and NMSU student
support programs and services. The project will support a cohort of twenty (20)
academically talented engineering students who demonstrate financial need, with
scholarship funding and Cohort Academic and Research Experience (CARE), which
includes individualized self-assessment and monitoring, academic success
workshops, undergraduate research experiences and internships, one-on-one
relationships with faculty mentors, and training to increase self-efficacy,
metacognitive self-awareness and self-study skills. The scholars will form a
natural cohort sharing common challenges associated with low-income status, as
well as common experiences in engineering. Historical NMSU data suggests that
many will also share experiences as first-generation college students and
historically underrepresented minorities, thereby broadening participation for
students from those groups. Through industry partnerships, the project will
enhance professional development and engineering workforce opportunities for
NMSU?s engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project
are to: (1) provide financial assistance to academically talented students
demonstrating financial need, (2) provide students with academic support,
professional development, and research experience opportunities, (3) strengthen
relationships and synergistic efforts with existing NMSU programs and services,
and (4) increase retention of S-STEM scholars to degree completion and
graduation. While implementing activities to accomplish these objectives, the
project team will investigate the hypothesis that students' increased awareness
of metacognition-based strategies motivates them to alter their study practices
and the impact of students' study practices on learning and retention while
iteratively developing valid and reliable instruments for use in this and future
studies about study skills and metacognition-based practices as related to
student success in STEM. Findings on the relationships among student study
habits, learning performance, retention, metacognition, and self-efficacy for
engineering will be of value to the STEM education field in general by providing
faculty increased understanding of the value of metacognitive awareness among
their students.