* 1564902
* Concentrating on Completing and Competing in the STEM Technical Workforce in Urban Polynesia: C3 UP
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Robert Moeng, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 999,997.00

The Cohorts Proposal Concentrating on Completing and Competing in the STEM
Technical Workforce in Urban Polynesia (C4-UP) project is providing scholarships
and programmatic support for financially needy, talented, Native Hawaiian and
other students at University of Hawaii Kapiolani Community College (KCC). Cohort
support activities include Hawaiian cultural enrichment, peer mentoring,
community service and research opportunities, internships, conferences, and
engagement with STEM industry representatives. Broader impacts are provided by
sharing these results with local K-12 partners, community colleges and
baccalaureate programs, the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP),
other minority serving institutions, and other national educational
organizations. A total of 110 scholarships are being awarded to annual cohorts
of KCC sophomores, transferring juniors, and completing seniors. The students
who have transferred will mentor each new KCC cohort, facilitating the transfer
process and improving retention. KCC Academic Advisors and Job and Career
Placement Specialists are assisting with transfer and workforce entry. Among
goals to recruit and support KCC students, faculty/staff from KCC and UHM are
assessing improvement in students' abilities to "write-to-learn" science over
the course of program participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is to build and evaluate an evidence-based model to support
students as they complete Kapiolani Community College's (KCC) two-year Associate
in Science in Natural Sciences degree, successfully transfer, persist and
complete UH Mânoa (UHM) STEM baccalaureate degrees, and compete in the STEM
technical workforce, thus systematically increasing the participation and
success of students in STEM majors and careers. Institutional researchers are
evaluating the impact of program strategies by adapting the Writing To Learn
(WTL) in STEM research framework with C4 scholars at KCC and UHM. The WTL
framework emphasizes that learning is no longer understood as the acquisition of
knowledge, but as the construction of understanding and meaning as a result of
social interaction, such as those between students and faculty, peer mentors,
and cohort members. Formative and summative evaluation will be conducted on the
following C4 scholar success measures: 1) course success (earning a C or better,
earning a B or better); 2) number of C4 scholars with grade point averages of
3.0 or higher; 3) re-enrollment fall-to-spring and fall-to-fall; 4) cohort time
to degree completion, transfer, baccalaureate completion, and entrance into
workforce.