* 1564079
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Beyond the Black Box: Understanding and Designing for User Expectations of Algorithmic Media
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Christian Sandvig, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2022
* USD 353,644.00

This research will study human and machine co-curation of online news feeds and
develop new software to compare the user's intent with respect to idealized feed
curation, when algorithms filter what appears in online news feeds. This will be
combined with research that investigates the user's perception of the
algorithm's actions and the user's perceptions of feed settings in control
panels. Not only are these algorithmic processes opaque to most users, but many
users don't even know that algorithms are making decisions on their behalf.
People who might be aware of algorithmic processes at work have no way to verify
their existence; changes in a user's search results, for example, might have
resulted from a change in the algorithm, or from a change in the user's
activity. This work has the potential to increase public algorithm awareness
that may lead to more in-depth exploration and possibly to learning about
algorithms, with implications for the public understanding of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will generate evidence-based
knowledge in five main areas: (a) the level of social media algorithm awareness
across a general population, (b) how awareness levels and interaction behavior
change when exposed to facets of social feeds via an interactive social feed
visualization tool, (c) whether the use of feed settings results in better feed
perception, (d) what people want to see in their feeds, and (e) how we can
communicate algorithmic process through design of feed content and feed
interfaces. The outcomes of this work will help researchers and practitioners in
various fields (Human Computer Interaction, Social Science, Design, Engineering,
Law, Ethics) critically rethink current computation and design practice and lead
to interfaces that help people understand the algorithms that shape their lives.
Code templates to program unique algorithms will be provided to encourage
algorithm creation, and public repositories will be made available to encourage
sharing.