* 1564381
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Research Costs on the Rate and Direction of Scientific Discovery
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Florenta Teodoridis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 03/31/2020
* USD 156,189.00

Understanding scientific and technical progress requires measures of both the
rate and direction of resources directed to innovative efforts and the outputs
produced. This project leverages advances in computational power to map the
evolution of research fields based on researchers? project portfolios in ideas
spaces. The research takes advantages of shocks, such as changes in policies and
research costs, to use empirical research techniques to understand the factors
that affect the directions into which science and technology evolve. This work
has important implications for understanding the rate and direction of
technological change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project uses
techniques based on machine learning and natural language processing that
measure the incidence and configuration of keywords in published research to
quantify the similarity of groups of such articles to define idea space. And to
subsequently measure the ways in which idea space evolve in response to shocks
in research costs and public policies. The research applies these techniques to
three contexts: (a) how changes in the costs of research materials affect
research trajectories in motion-sensing technology, (b) how researchers in
quantum computing change their project portfolios in response to a controversial
approach that differs from an established research paradigm; and (c) how
pharmaceutical firm research trajectories change in response to news about
rivals? drug discovery projects&lt;br/&gt;