* 1564143
* TWC: Medium: Collaborative: Measuring and Improving the Management of Today's PKI
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* David Levin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), along with the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
and Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocols, are responsible for securing
Internet transactions such as banking, email, and e-commerce; they provide users
with the ability to verify with whom they are communicating online, and enable
encryption of those communications. While the use of the PKI is mostly
automated, there is a surprising amount of human intervention in management
tasks that are crucial to its proper operation. As a result, there have been
numerous instances where mismanagement of the PKI has harmed the security of end
users. This project is developing techniques to better understand and improve
the management of the PKI, helping to better secure the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four research foci, each
examining the management challenges faced by different players in the PKI:
Content Distribution Network (CDN) administrators, Certificate Authorities
(CAs), end-users, and non-Web protocols. First, the project is conducting
measurements to better understand the frequency of sharing private keys between
sites and their CDNs, and to improve the security of this practice. Second, the
project is developing new incentives for CAs to ensure information about their
revoked certificates reach end users. Third, the project is aiming to better
understand how the PKI will evolve as the Internet of Things (IoT) grows and the
PKI is forced to quickly scale up. Fourth, the project will expand existing
measurement approaches to understand the difficulties of PKI management in non-
Web protocols (e.g., IMAPS), which have traditionally been less-well maintained.