* 1564330
* RI: Medium: CompCog: Automated Discovery of Macro-Variables from Raw Spatiotemporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2021
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,100,000.00

Observation and careful experimentation provide the basis for scientific
inquiry, which in turn guides our understanding of the world and policy
decisions. Today, scientific data is collected from a vast array of sensors:
satellite images and radar, neuro-imaging, microscopes, body monitoring, socio-
economic indicators, to name just a few. While models and theories were
traditionally derived via careful handcrafting by domain experts, the new data
deluge makes direct human analysis impossible. We need intelligent machines that
can process vast amounts of sensory data into interpretable quantities that
provide actionable information. This project will develop machines that will be
able to learn on their own, purely from experience, produce and test hypotheses
on causes and effects in complex dynamic scenes, and better collaborate with
human scientists and analysts. For generality, we will develop and test our
theory in two different domains. Amongst the immediate benefits of our project
are methods for discovering the causal relationship between genes, brains and
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our objective is to develop theory
and practical algorithms for automatically interpreting a dynamic scene
containing interacting agents. This will involve automatically identifying the
main spatial locations, the objects, the actors, their actions and goals, and
their relations to one another. The output is a description of the events, and
hypotheses on the actors? goals, cause-effect relationships and likely
developments. The key technical questions that we will tackle are how to infer
semantically meaningful "macro" variables (i.e. agents' role and goals, actions,
objects, special locations) directly from raw sensory data (mostly video), how
to infer the causal relationships among such variables, and how to adaptively
plan new experiments, including collecting feedback from human experts, to
resolve ambiguities in the model. The intellectual merit of our project lies in
developing an end-to-end, pixels-to-causes approach to the automatic analysis of
dynamic scenes. To this end, we will integrate, build upon, and transcend the
capabilities of extant "low-level" correlational machine learning and "high-
level" causal inference approaches, combined with interactive learning
approaches to sequential experimental design.