* 1564392
* Enabling Student Success through a Four-Year Seminar Series and S-STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Michael Huggins, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2021
* USD 649,888.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project will expand a highly successful graduation and retention
program for chemistry majors to all STEM majors at the University of West
Florida and develop a smaller cohort of 28 academically talented, low income
students. The project will focus on student engagement in the context of (a)
academic and social integration, (b) knowledge and skill development, (c)
support and motivation, and (d) monitoring and advising. A key feature of the
project is the new STEM for Life seminar series designed to prepare students for
academic success and future careers. A systematic examination of the factors
influencing STEM student retention at this regional, comprehensive institution,
with a high percentage of commuter students, will be conducted using data
collected as part of the project evaluation. The location of the institution in
a county of low average income where only 26% of the population holds a
bachelor's degree or higher provides an opportunity to decrease the local
college attainment gap while at the same time addressing the national need to
increase the number of American scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
College Strengths Inventory, the project team will create individual support and
intervention plans that will be implemented and revised as needed throughout
each student's college career. The STEM for Life seminar, which will serve as a
platform for skill building and career readiness, will also be used to manage
individual plan advisory discussions and goal setting. Outcomes evaluation will
address the extent to which the project retention and graduation goals are met.
Process evaluation will determine the extent to which the project is delivering
high quality academic and social supports. Research will focus on understanding
which set of S-STEM activities are most influential for student retention with
an emphasis on the effectiveness of the seminar series. The research results
will inform the institution's efforts to coordinate student development programs
that use early identifiers and proactive interventions. The data will be
disseminated at PKAL and Gordon conferences to bridge gaps in best practices
designed for moderately selective, regional comprehensive state institutions
with a high percentage of commuter and working STEM students.