* 1564736
* NBO: ABI Innovation: Multiscale Multimodal Mouse Connectomes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Tianming Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2021
* USD 425,501.00

The aim of this project is to map neural circuits and their activities in the
mouse brain, from the small scale level of the synapse to the neurons involved,
their larger circuits, up to overall neural systems. Different data modalities
will be merged in order to carry out this integration. Mapping the brain can
mean showing the layout of anatomical features, showing where functional
connections occur, or both, as for this project. Different features require
different data collection modalities, and merging these different types of data
correctly is one of several technically challenging tasks this research will
perform. This type of multiscale, multimodal brain mapping is one of the
scientific Grand Challenges, as such it is a top U.S.A. research priority, one
recognized by the BRAIN initiative. This award will contribute to NSF's
commitment to develop a National Brain Observatory (NBO) to enable this
initiative. By integrating structural and functional connectomics, this project
will show how they work together when brain circuits change with different
activities. By deciphering and measuring of real-time neural codes this research
will let us better understand how brain activities create unique cognitive and
behavioral capabilities. The project includes plans to integrate the research
data and techniques into educational and outreach activities, encouraging
interest in neuroscience research in the next generation of scientists.

The objective of this project is to create a multiscale, multimodal mouse
connectome for better understanding of brain function. Specifically, the project
aims include: 1) construct, cross-validate, fuse, and integrate multiscale
multimodal mouse brain connectomes, including macro-scale mouse connectomes
based on diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), Susceptibility Tensor Imaging (STI)
data, and meso-scale mouse connectomes based on publicly available serial two-
photon tomography data; 2) utilize multiscale structural connectomes for
exploration of functional connectomics and circuitry dynamics, in particular,
focusing on the fear memory system; and 3) design, develop and disseminate the
structural and functional connectomics tools and resources to the brain mapping
research community. To achieve the above goals, the investigators will design
and apply innovative computational and informatics methodologies and approaches
for multiscale mouse connectomics research. Specifically, both mesoscale and
macroscale structural connectivity data will be used as follows. First, the
Allen Mouse Brain Connectivity Atlas (ACA) will be used, which provides a
comprehensive meso-scale mouse brain neuronal connectivity map via anterogradely
traced axonal projections using serial two-photon tomography from over one
thousand different injection sites. Second, at the macro-scale, the noninvasive
diffusion tensor (DT) microimaging technique will be used to track global fiber
connections in the whole mouse brain at the micron-scale spatial resolution.
Subsequently data will be fused and integrated, to acquire the advantages of
both meso-scale serial two-photon tomography data and macro-scale DT
microimaging data when constructing and cross-validating multi-scale, multimodal
mouse connectomes. Finally, these structural connectomes will be the basis for
exploring functional connectomics and circuitry dynamics, thus significantly
advancing the understanding of brain structure and function and their
relationships. All of these structural and functional connectomics tools will be
released to the brain science community at the project website:
http://mbm.cs.uga.edu/