* 1564427
* Conference:Funding to support graduate students and post docs to attend Halophile 2016, the international congress on halophilic microorganisms; May, 2016; San Juan, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Bonnie Baxter, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2017
* USD 16,000.00

Hypersaline environments such as the Great Salt Lake or the Dead Sea are
ecosystems where salt concentrations are five to ten times higher than seawater.
Despite these extreme conditions, the waters are teaming with salt loving
microorganisms, "halophiles", which are adapted to these exceedingly briny
habitats. Halophiles in all three domains of life (Bacteria, Archaea and
Eukarya) and their viruses are the focus of "Halophiles 2016: The 11th
International Congress on Halophilic Microorganisms May 22-27th, San Juan,
Puerto Rico" (Conference website: http://www.halophiles2016.org/), which is a
multidisciplinary and international conference for researchers working in this
field. The mission of the Congress, which has met triennially since 1978, is to
explore all aspects of microbiology in salt-enriched environments and to draw on
expertise from numerous disciplines in order to facilitate quantum advances in
understanding life in high salt ecosystems. The objective of NSF support for the
Congress is to help provide students and early career researchers with access to
this unique scientific gathering, especially those who are members of groups
underrepresented in Science/Technology/Engineering/Mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Halophiles conference series is the primary
meeting that discusses halophilic microorganisms, and highlights halophile
adaptations, ecology, geographic distributions, physiology, evolution, taxonomy,
biochemistry, genetics, genomics, metagenomics, biotechnology, metabolic
engineering, and bioremediation. Attendees will be immersed for six days in this
intellectual atmosphere, attending lectures given by highly respected and
published researchers, and gaining a wide range of knowledge regarding the
current, emerging and broad state of the halophile field. Though the application
process will be open to all, priority will go to qualifying
undergraduate/graduate students and post-docs who are from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. The International Halophile Congress has a long
history of broadening participation in science.