* 1564611
* ABI Development: CAFE for very large comparative genomic datasets
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2020
* Matthew Hahn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2020
* USD 794,338.00

Genome sequencing projects have revealed frequent gains and losses of genes
between species. These changes have been shown to be responsible for
morphological, physiological, and behavioral differences, and to contribute to
the diversity observed in nature. Advances in sequencing technology are making
new genome data available at faster rates than ever before. As the number of
species with sequenced genomes grows, so will the number of researchers wanting
to take advantage of these valuable resources. They will come from a wide range
of biological fields, and have an equally wide range of experience with
computational tools. CAFE (Computational Analysis of gene Family Evolution) is a
software package that allows researchers to better understand rates of gene gain
and loss. This project will result in a version of CAFE that adds to the
national infrastructure by enabling new biological discoveries to the benefit of
scientists working in many fields. CAFE will be a useful tool in science
education, and will also improve and accelerate biological research that can be
expected to have multiple societal benefits, including understanding the genetic
basis for important biological phenotypes. A vigorous outreach and information
dissemination plan will ensure that researchers and faculty engaged in research
education are aware of CAFE and able to use it effectively, and will promote the
development of a technology-savvy 21st century biology research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of gene families are essential to a
number of research areas, including gene regulation, human disease, and
evolutionary genomics. CAFE enables these and other studies into cutting-edge
areas by providing a likelihood method for analyzing gene gain and loss over a
phylogeny. This method has been shown to work well with the error-prone genome
assemblies currently available for most organisms, as well as when analyzing
dozens of genomes at a time. This project will extend these capabilities to
hundreds or thousands of genomes. To accomplish this goal, several of the
maximum likelihood methodologies implemented by CAFE will be re-designed. These
changes will include allowing rate variation among gene families, optimizing
likelihood calculations on trees, and improving specification of several
probability distributions used by these calculations. The quality of the code
will be enhanced through best practices in software engineering and the
development of better, faster, and more scalable supercomputer versions of the
software. All software will be available at www.indiana.edu/~hahnlab/.