* 1564000
* AF: Medium: Dropping Convexity: New Algorithms, Statistical Guarantees and Scalable Software for Non-convex Matrix Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Inderjit Dhillon, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 902,415.00

An image from your camera is a matrix of numbers, but most matrices of numbers
would not look like an image -- the matrix of numbers in an image reflect
structure from the scene. Many applications of data analysis across science,
engineering, and business can be viewed as taking a matrix of observations and
fitting low-rank or otherwise structured matrices to explain their
relationships. Image and video analysis is not the only example; the problem
arises in structural analysis of social networks, divining user preferences for
new products and services, and many other analysis tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the scale and dimensionality of these problems
increases, the data analyst is faced with a gap between rigor and scale:
theoretically sound algorithms often have requirements (e.g. repeated/random
access to data) that are feasible only on medium-scale datasets, and even then
may not provide answers in "interactive time" (i.e. smallish time scales
required for a human interactively analyzing data). Thus practice has turned
towards methods that lack rigorous guarantees, but that are scalable and have
been observed to provide decent approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
project aims to narrow this gap by two technical observations: &lt;br/&gt;(a)
Recognizing that fast matrix inference necessitates non-convex algorithms, it
focuses on developing a rigorous analysis of the same, and &lt;br/&gt;(b) by
explicitly incorporating big-data architectures (out of core, and distributed
multicore) in the algorithm design and statistical analysis stage itself. it
focuses on several specific tasks, including pass-efficient low-rank
approximation, minimizing general convex functions over the non-convex set of
low-rank matrices, robust matrix estimation, and non-linear and kernel matrix
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project trains graduate students
in the mathematical and computational development important for data analysis.
The promise of big data can only be realized by scaling infrastructure with data
to continue to provide statistically meaningful insights; this project aims to
realize this promise for a large suite of matrix estimation problems.