* 1564955
* ABI Development: Developing RaptorX Web Portal for Protein Structure and Functional Study
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Jinbo Xu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 557,028.00

Proteins play fundamental roles in all biological processes. Complete
description of protein structures and functions is a fundamental step towards
understanding biological life and has various applications. Millions of protein
sequences are available, but a majority of them have no experimentally-solved
structures and functions. This project aims to greatly improve RaptorX, a fully-
automated web server for computational prediction of protein structure and
function, with the goal to deliver a long-term sustainable web portal to
facilitate transformative research in biology. This web portal shall benefit a
broad range of biological and biomedical applications, such as genome
annotation, understanding of disease processes, drug design, precision medicine
and even biomaterial and bio-energy development. The results will be
disseminated to the broader community through a variety of venues: web servers,
standalone software, publications and talks. Since late in 2011, RaptorX has
served >25,000 worldwide users including middle- and high-school students. The
standalone programs have been downloaded by >1500 worldwide users. After this
project is fulfilled, RaptorX will contribute much more to the broader
community. Students involved in this project will receive training in the
intersection of computer science, molecular biology, biophysics, and
biochemistry. Undergraduate and underrepresented students will be recruited
through summer intern programs and collaborators. The research results will be
integrated into course materials and used in the Illinois online bioinformatics
program.

The RaptorX web server was originally developed for only template-based protein
modeling. This project will transform RaptorX by first developing a few novel
and powerful deep learning (e.g., Deep Conditional Convolutional Neural Fields)
and structure learning (e.g., group graphical lasso) methods to significantly
improve the accuracy of protein structure and functional prediction and then
conducting an efficient implementation. The resultant RaptorX will be able to
perform much more accurate prediction of protein secondary and tertiary
structure, solvent accessibility and disordered regions, and the quality of a
theoretical protein 3D model (in the absence of natives). This project will also
expand the RaptorX server to perform contact prediction and contact-assisted
protein folding for proteins without good templates. The RaptorX web server is
available at http://raptorx.uchicago.edu, from which users can also download the
standalone programs.