* 1564940
* Collaborative Research: The Redshirt in Engineering Consortium
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kevin Pitts, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2022
* USD 822,896.00

Low-income students are underrepresented in engineering and more likely to
struggle in engineering programs. Research has found that increasing first and
second-year retention enhances the ability of academically talented low-income
students to successfully graduate with engineering degrees. In this
collaborative research project six institutions will replicate, improve, and
test a model of student success originally developed at the University of
Colorado, Boulder. The model is designed to increase the retention, success, and
graduation of low-income (Pell-eligible) academically talented students from
underserved populations. The project will make scholarship awards to 800
students across a consortium of the six partner institutions. To support the
students, the project will adapt and implement an ecosystem of high quality
evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities. Members of the
consortium are: the University of Colorado, Boulder; the University of
Washington; Washington State University; Boise State University; the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; and the University of California, San Diego.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Redshirt in Engineering Consortium is committed to
propagating the "Redshirt" model, which focuses primarily on the first-year of
college and consists of intrusive academic advising, an innovative first-year
academic curriculum, community building, and career awareness. The term
"redshirt" refers to the idea of providing an extra year of preparation for the
rigors of engineering curricula. A quantitative and qualitative mixed methods
research study will examine the implementation of the model under different
conditions and with different student populations. A comparative longitudinal
study will examine differences in expected student outcomes between scholarship
recipients and similar students who are pursuing engineering degrees. The
primary analytic approach for the ethnographic research will be the Constant
Comparative Analysis, which will involve concurrent engagement in data
collection and data analysis.