* 1564009
* TWC: Medium: Handling a Trillion Unfixable Flaws on Billions of Internet-of-Things
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Srinivasan Seshan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,199,999.00

The Internet-of-Things (IoT) has quickly moved from concept to reality, with
estimates that the number of deployed IoT devices will rise to 25 billion in
2020. However, studies show that many IoT devices have serious security
vulnerabilities. Moreover, the limitations of IoT devices and scale of networks
of IoT devices often make traditional IT security approaches impractical. This
project takes a first-principles approach to rethinking network security and
address these concerns for IoT networks: (1) scalable alternatives to simple
perimeter defenses; (2) new methods to manage security in deployed networks of
IoT devices; and (3) new security policies with sufficient generality to
administer IoT devices and networks in many diverse use-cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing a principled architecture to secure IoT
deployments, the project will help realize the full potential societal benefits
of IoT. The project will result in the development of novel open-source tools,
modeling abstractions, algorithms, and prototype implementations that will
reduce the time to deploy novel IoT security solutions, and make the results of
the project available to the community. The project's PIs will engage in
educational and outreach activities to train the next generation talent for the
emerging area of IoT. In particular, the PIs plan to integrate the
interdisciplinary research ideas into courses spanning security, networking,
systems and cyber-physical systems. The project will also actively encourage
participation from underrepresented groups. Finally, the tools and measurements
generated by this project will inform and accelerate the industry transition to
pervasive IoT deployments that are safe and secure.