* 1564787
* Mentoring Students to Success in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Bethany Miller, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 649,997.00

The "Mentoring Students to Success in STEM Fields" project at Cornell College
will increase access to a rigorous education in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields for students with the intellectual
ability to have successful careers in and make contributions to STEM fields, but
who would otherwise not be able to access such an education because of financial
constraints. The program will provide scholarships of up to $10,000 per year for
18 students whose full financial need for attendance at Cornell College has not
been met. Scholarship recipients will participate in special programming, which
includes living on a Science, Technology, and Mathematics Interest Living and
Learning Community residence hall floor in their freshman year, career and
graduate school preparation and planning during their sophomore and junior
years, and travel to local and national scientific meetings. Faculty mentors
will work with the STEM Scholars throughout their time at Cornell, to help the
Scholars navigate challenges and take advantage of
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess the effectiveness
of curriculum-based living-learning communities at small liberal arts colleges
in improving retention, graduation, and career success in STEM fields.
Specifically, this project will investigate the efficacy of nine model practices
for retaining students from underrepresented populations in STEM fields and
whether or not these practices also improve retention for all low income
students. The impact of the activities and programming on retention and
graduation in STEM fields will be evaluated during the project and at its
culmination, providing direction for improving the program while it is in
operation as well as providing a final picture of the program's success. In
addition, STEM faculty members will explore research-based teaching methods, and
the biology department will evaluate Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experiences (CUREs) in its introductory courses, increasing the diversity of
CURE models and contributing to the understanding of the impact of CURE courses
on students' development as scientists.