* 1564466
* ABI INNOVATION: Characterizing protein-DNA interactions from high-resolution assays
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Shaun Mahony, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2020
* USD 657,054.00

The identity and health of a particular type of cell depends on the proteins
carrying out its functions, and how the functions change depends on the cell's
environment. Many of the responses in a cell are due to changes in what proteins
are produced; cells turn on protein production, or turn it off, when a
particular group of proteins, regulatory proteins, interact with the DNA.
Regulatory proteins may act alone or in groups to turn genes on and off, and the
timing and number of combinations in these binding events can be very
complicated. There are experiments that show where a specific protein attaches
to the DNA, giving us clues that regulation might be occurring; with improving
laboratory methods we are able to find the DNA binding locations (profiles) of
more and more proteins very specifically. This research will develop special
computational and statistical methods for analyzing all of this data together,
so that we can see what combinations of proteins act together to regulate genes.
From these results we will understand much more about how gene regulation is
working in functioning cells. All products produced by this research will be
made freely available and accessible to other researchers and the public.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to use these bioinformatics
research techniques, and strong efforts will be made to recruit students from
under-represented groups. Interesting exercises will be created, based on the
research methods and results, for undergraduate bioinformatics students and for
students in workshops, as well as lessons suitable for high school students
studying genetic regulation in their biology courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current bioinformatics analysis techniques do not fully
capture the structural information provided by the shape of read distributions
produced in high-resolution genomic assays. For example, careful analysis of
cross-linking patterns in collections of ChIP-exo datasets can potentially
inform which proteins are interacting with one another in higher-order protein-
DNA complexes. This project aims to develop a suite of shape-aware machine-
learning tools for the analysis of high-resolution protein-DNA binding data that
will: 1) deconvolve distinct genomic interaction modes from a single dataset; 2)
detect and correct experimental artifacts and biases that arise in the new
assays; 3) characterize the organization of higher-order protein-DNA complexes
across multiple data types; and 4) detect changes in genomic event locations and
interaction modes across multiple experimental conditions. This project will
therefore enable integrative models of diverse protein-DNA complexes, directly
impacting our understanding of gene regulation in a wide variety of organisms.