* 1564565
* Improved Understanding of Vertical Mixing in the Lower Atmospheric Boundary Layer in the Presence of Wind Turbines via Numerical Simulations and Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Cristina Archer, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 401,776.00

Wind energy has been growing steadily in the U.S. and worldwide in the past
decades and it is projected to continue its growth in the near future. Wind
energy has countless benefits: it is renewable and abundant, does not produce
any harmful pollutant or greenhouse gas emissions, and is so technologically
advanced that it is often economically competitive with other traditional energy
sources. However, concerns are rising about possible undesirable effects of wind
turbines in the lower boundary layer, especially on near-surface temperature.
The literature is highly divided about what these effects could be. Numerical
simulations have shown: warming during day and night; warming at night and
cooling during the day; warming or cooling depending on atmospheric stability;
cooling; and no significant effects. These contradictory findings highlight the
inherent complexity of the feedbacks between wind turbines and
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Only one mechanism, however, has been widely
accepted (but never tested) to explain how wind turbines affect the lower
boundary layer, namely that turbulence generated in wind turbine wakes enhances
vertical mixing. Wakes are plume-like volumes downwind of wind turbines that are
characterized by lower wind speeds and higher turbulence than the undisturbed
upwind flow. Enhanced vertical mixing would manifest as increased vertical
momentum fluxes (thus increased wind shear) and increased turbulent kinetic
energy (TKE) near the ground. The few observational campaigns that have measured
changes in near-surface properties by wind turbines have been flawed or
inconclusive and have not measured directly vertical momentum flux changes.
Therefore, no direct evidence of the enhanced vertical mixing mechanism is
available today. In addition, enhanced vertical mixing does not explain all the
observed effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
research hypothesis put forward in this project is that vertical mixing is
generally not enhanced, but, more likely, reduced near the surface downwind of
wind turbines. The vertical wind profile is greatly altered due to the
extraction of kinetic energy by wind turbines in the region around the rotor
disk of diameter D spanned by the turbine blades, but the resulting wind shear
near the ground is generally unaltered or reduced, not enhanced, below the
rotor. Near-surface heat, moisture, and momentum fluxes, and eventually
temperature, are therefore generally not directly affected by wake turbulence,
but rather by a combination of the reduced, not enhanced, wind shear,
atmospheric stability, and undisturbed flow properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
test this hypothesis, a combined observational and numerical approach will be
carried out. The measurement campaign, named VERTEX for VERTical Enhanced
MiXing, will be conducted near the University of Delaware Gamesa 2-MW wind
turbine in Lewes, using 12-15 surface flux towers, a 60-m meteorological towers,
and 2 scanning lidars. VERTEX will quantify changes in momentum and heat fluxes,
air temperature, and TKE near the ground due to the wind turbine. The
interactions between the wind turbine and the atmospheric flow will be simulated
with at least two state-of-the-art numerical codes that can resolve the details
of the turbulent wake down to a few meter resolution. Data from VERTEX will be
used to validate the simulations. The sensitivity to a variety of inflow and
atmospheric stability conditions will also be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide an understanding if and how wind turbines can alter near-surface
properties in any significant way. This understanding is important because it
will either enhance wind energy deployment or slow it if such changes are
considered too dramatic. Research findings will be communicated to: 1) the
scientific community via participation to conferences and peer-reviewed papers;
2) the general public via targeted outreach efforts, including an exhibit at the
annual University of Delaware's Coast Day and press releases; and 3) university
students via a newly developed graduate and undergraduate course on "Energy in
the atmosphere".