* 1564379
* GOALI: SusChEM: An Industrial-Academic Collaboration for High Throughput Discovery of Base Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Rebecca Ruck, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 516,000.00

Professor Paul J. Chirik of Princeton University is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to develop efficient catalysts
from Earth-abundant metals for the sustainable synthesis of single enantiomer
drug-like molecules. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with
Industry (GOALI) project is conducted in collaboration with Dr. Rebecca T Ruck
of Merck &amp; Co., Inc. Single enantiomer compounds, those that can be
distinguished from their mirror image counterparts much like a pair of hands
often exhibit unique biological function and constituted two-thirds of FDA drugs
approved in 2015. Preparing these chiral compounds as single enantiomers, or
hands, is often challenging but transition metal catalysis has revolutionized
the field by providing direct routes to these compounds from abundant
precursors. Traditional catalysts often rely on the rarest elements on Earth and
raise concerns about the overall sustainability, carbon dioxide (CO2) footprint
and toxicity of these processes. The research team focuses on new reactions
unique to Earth abundant transition metals that are desirable for sustainable
reactions. Interfacing with the Merck team provides access to high throughput
experimentation, a technique that enables rapid evaluation of numerous chemical
reactions in parallel. This approach, coupled with molecular understanding
developed at Princeton, enables rational catalyst design and generates insights
that enables new sustainable synthetic methods as well as diagnostics to probe
drug safety and efficacy within the pharmaceutical industry. Through an
industrial-academic partnership advances are possible that would not be had the
two group acted independently. These studies also provide fundamental catalyst
design principles that may ultimately translate to other areas of catalysis
beyond of the pharmaceutical industry. In addition, students and postdocs
involved in the project gain unique experience working with industrial chemists
and gain invaluable career advice and mentorship not typically found in
traditional graduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal catalysis
has revolutionized chemical synthesis and is a key component of sustainable
chemistry. Use of Earth-abundant rather than precious metals is not only
economically and environmentally advantageous but the variable electronic
structures, density of states, and coordination geometries that are available
with first row transition metals open pathways for new chemical reactivity. The
intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the rational application of
electronic structure control to address long-standing challenges in base metal
catalysis with applications in the pharmaceutical industry. Sustainable methods
for the preparation of single enantiomer compounds and the reduction of
heterocycles are described. Hydrogenation catalysts that operate by 3 distinct
mechanisms, differentiated by the method of electron flow during catalytic
turnover, are investigated. Access to distinct reaction channels involving both
homolytic and heterolytic bond activation from similar catalyst platforms is
unique to base metals and improves the likelihood for success to overcome long-
standing challenges such as enantioselective heteroarene hydrogenation and
reduction of substrates lacking coordinating functionality. High throughput
experimentation (HTE) coupled with physical inorganic spectroscopy, structural
chemistry and magnetism provide a unique opportunity to solve fundamental and
applied problems in chemical catalysis. Guided by pharmaceutically relevant
targets, focus is devoted to Earth-abundant metal catalysts that improve the
speed, diversity, complexity and sustainability of transformations used in drug
discovery.