* 1564355
* CIF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Learning in High Dimensions: From Theory to Data and Back
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Alon Orlitsky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 297,994.00

Statistical-modeling is the cornerstone of analyzing modern data sets, and using
observed data to learn the underlying statistical model is a crucial part of
most data analysis tasks. However, with the success of data utilization came a
vast increase in its complexity as expressed in complex models, numerous
parameters, and high dimensional features. This research project studies
problems in learning such high-dimensional models, both in theory and in
practice with actual datasets in cutting-edge
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning high-dimensional models efficiently,
both in terms of computation and in terms of the use of the data, is an
important challenge. The research characterizes the fundamental limits on the
sample and computational complexity of several key distribution learning
problems, as well as the associated optimal learning algorithms that achieve the
limits. The learning problems underpin important tasks such as clustering,
multiple testing of hypothesis and information measure estimation. The new
algorithms and new methodologies developed are evaluated and applied on real
data from three specific applications: 1) denoising of high throughput
transcriptomic data; 2) analysis of omics data for personalized medicine; 3)
ecological population studies. While these applications are useful on their own
right, there will also be many other potential applications in fields such as
speech recognition, topic modeling, character recognition, neuroscience, etc.