* 1564051
* CIF: Medium:  Collaborative Research: Scalable Learning of Nonlinear Models in Large Neural Populations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Viventi, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2020
* USD 415,730.00

Fundamental to understanding information processing in the brain are methods
that can systematically characterize the structure and dynamics of neural
circuits that underlie perception and cognition. Micro- electrocorticography
(µECoG) is the practice of using microelectrodes placed directly on the exposed
surface of the brain to record electrical activity from the cerebral cortex.
Recent advances in µECoG provide unique opportunities to observe large regions
of the neural cortex at unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution. However,
uncovering the structure of complex neural circuits is challenging. This
interdisciplinary project develops methods for learning high-dimensional
nonlinear systems with a particular focus on these systems as they arise in
cortical networks and validates these techniques on state-of-the-art µECoG
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three thrusts are considered: The first considers
the general problem of state estimation in high-dimensional dynamical systems
using decomposition methods including distributed Kalman and particle filtering
and graphical models. The main goal is to provide computationally scalable and
flexible approaches with provable guarantees. The second combines these state
estimation methods with Bayesian parameter estimation and compressed sensing
techniques to identify connectivity and nonlinear dynamics in the networks. The
third validates these methods on identification of neural models from µECoG
arrays. Applications to neural mapping, auditory and visual stimuli decoding are
explored. In particular, the project seeks to demonstrate the method on using
recordings from rat primary auditory cortex and cat visual cortex using a novel,
flexible, high-resolution electrode array.