* 1564387
* RUI:  Investigating the Influence of Halogen Ligands on the Ability of Late Gas-Phase Transition Metal Ions to Activate Bonds in Small Substrate Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* William Taylor, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 223,913.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor William Taylor of the University
of Central Arkansas and his undergraduate research team are studying reactions
between small molecules and ions which both contain atoms of halogen elements
(the halogens include fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine). The ions contain
transition metal elements (for example copper, nickel or gold). Many important
industrial processes today involve catalysts that contain transition metal
atoms. The studies in Professor Taylor's laboratory thus inform the broader area
of catalysis, which is a key part of the production of an estimated 90% of all
chemical products. Catalytic processes have a tangible environmental benefit by
either direct remediation of pollutants or by reducing the environmental burden
of industrial chemical production. Undergraduates participating in this work
benefit from a valuable research experience that increases retention rates in
the sciences, and prepares them for a variety of career
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the influence of electronic
modifications to metal centers via the ligand environment on bond activation in
neutral molecules. Studies addressed in this project examine the chemistry of
MX+ (M=Ni, Cu, Au; X=F, Cl, Br, I) with a number of halogenated compounds known
to be potent greenhouse gases and ozone depleters. In addition, reactions of
CuX+ and AuX+ (X=Cl, F) with methane are examined in order to explore low-energy
processes leading to the functionalization of this abundant, yet relatively
inert, chemical resource. All reactions are studied experimentally in the gas
phase using a selected ion drift cell reactor which generates transition metal
ions in a sputtering glow discharge source. These metal ions are then be
chemically modified with the addition of the desired halogen, mass selected, and
introduced into a drift cell containing the neutral reactant molecule of
interest. Analysis of reaction products is carried out using a second
quadrupole. Experimental results are complemented computationally with density
functional calculations and MP2 theory to gain additional insights into possible
reaction mechanisms.