* 1564044
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Communicating While Computing: Mobile Fog Computing Over Wireless Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Gesualdo Scutari, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 224,829.00

An increasing number of applications, including surveillance, medical
monitoring, automatic translations and gaming, rely on the capability of mobile
wireless devices to carry out computation-intensive tasks in a timely manner.
This requirement conflicts with the expectation that mobile devices should run
on a battery without needing frequent recharging. A promising solution to this
challenge is mobile cloud computing, that is, the offloading of computation-
intensive tasks to a cloud service provider by means of wireless transmission.
However, the energy and latency entailed by wireless transmission may offset the
potential gains of mobile cloud computing. This project proposes to tackle the
outlined problem via the development of effective, low-complexity, scalable and
flexible offloading strategies that operate over a mobile fog computing
architecture, in which small-cell base stations are endowed with computing
capabilities to offer proximate wireless access and computing. The insights
gained from the successful completion of this project will be beneficial for a
gamut of other exciting problem domains that require large-scale optimization,
including big data mining, signal processing, machine learning, and smart grid.
The research agenda is complemented by a multidisciplinary educational plan that
targets both undergraduate and graduate students via hands-on learning and
experimentation activities. Industrial collaboration is also envisaged through
internship and co-op opportunities.

The inter-layer optimization of the computation and communication resources in a
mobile fog computing network yields unstructured nonconvex mixed-integer
problems, which are unexplored and challenging, and whose formulation depends on
whether the mobile applications are splittable, i.e., divisible into subtasks
that can be individually offloaded, or not. Since the problems at hand do not
lend themselves to the application of existing iterative optimization
techniques, such as Difference-of-Convex programming, a class of scalable and
flexible solution methods with controllable convergence, complexity and overhead
is introduced based on a novel successive convex approximation framework. In the
case of splittable applications, the analytical and algorithmic framework is
augmented by the application of message passing strategies that leverage the
call graph representation of the mobile applications.