* 1564663
* Investigation of Vapor-deposited Glasses by Nanocalorimetry and Dielectric Relaxation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Mark Ediger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 504,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Mark Ediger (University of
Wisconsin-Madison) and Ranko Richert (Arizona State University) are studying
organic glasses prepared by deposition from the gas phase. Glasses play an
important role in modern technology. For example, many cell phone displays are
organic light emitting diodes and organic glasses are the active layers in these
devices. This project seeks to determine properties of glasses and this
fundamental understanding may enable the production of improved glasses that are
useful in applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project characterizes the
properties of vapor-deposited glasses using nanocalorimetry and dielectric
relaxation. Recent work has established that vapor-deposited glasses can exhibit
very high kinetic stability and other unexpected properties. The researchers
study the extent to which secondary relaxation processes in vapor-deposited
glasses are suppressed as a sensitive indication of the perfection of packing in
the glass. Deposition in the presence of a large electric field is being tested
as a means of preparing glasses with even higher kinetic stability. In addition,
the project seeks to understand why some organic molecules do not form highly
stable glasses when vapor-deposited. The training of graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students is being advanced through the integration of chemistry
research and education activities. Each summer an educational outreach program
is presented to high school juniors, most of whom are from groups that are
underrepresented in engineering and science, to develop interest in
science/engineering and skills required for success in college.