* 1564477
* CAREER: Toward Cooperative Interference Mitigation for Heterogeneous Multi-Hop MIMO Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2015,06/30/2021
* Ming Li, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 06/30/2021
* USD 445,768.00

The ever-growing number of wireless systems and the scarcity for available
spectrum necessitates highly efficient spectrum sharing among disparate wireless
networks. Many of them are heterogeneous in hardware capabilities, wireless
technologies, or protocol standards. The resulting cross-technology interference
(CTI) can be detrimental to the performance of co-locating networks if not
properly mitigated. Current interference management approaches mostly follow the
interference-avoidance paradigm, where transmissions are separated in frequency,
time, or space to enable spectrum sharing, rather than to reduce or eliminate
interference. This project explores cooperative interference mitigation (CIM), a
new coexistence paradigm among heterogeneous multi-hop wireless networks. By
exploiting recent advances in multi-input multi-output (MIMO) interference
cancellation (IC) techniques, the proposed approach allows disparate networks to
cooperatively cancel/mitigate their CTI to enhance everyone?s performance. This
research focuses on the following objectives: 1) Develop tractable
models/frameworks to analyze the theoretical limits and performance bounds of
CIM for heterogeneous multi-hop networks, considering various forms of network
heterogeneity; 2) Study the incentives of CIM through a novel game theoretic
framework, that characterizes the conditions of mutual cooperation and thwarts
selfish or malicious behavior; 3) Design distributed performance-approaching
algorithms to achieve CIM and integrate them into practical network/MAC layer
protocols, by exploiting machine learning tools and implicit inter-system
communications. The expected outcomes also include the development of various
simulation toolkits and system prototypes for experimental validation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan includes cross-discipline
curriculum development, student mentoring and outreach. The proposed research
will have broad impacts on unplanned heterogeneous multi-hop networks that share
spectrum resources, such as current and future networks in unlicensed bands, and
secondary networks in TV white spaces. Applications will benefit multiple
domains including healthcare, energy, emergency services and military etc. Major
results will be disseminated via conference and journal publications, software
packages, talks and tutorials.