* 1564855
* EPIC:  Establishing Practices for Integrating Commuter Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Kristi Bugajski, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,991.00

Undergraduate commuter students face unique challenges which impact their
success in higher education, especially within STEM disciplines. The
Establishing Practices for Integrating Commuters (EPIC) program at Valparaiso
University addresses several problems documented in previous research for
commuters to improve the recruitment and retention of commuters within STEM.
This is accomplished primarily through scholarships, social engagement, and
providing substantial interdisciplinary research opportunities across four
academic years and one summer. Additional support mechanisms include training in
oral and written communication, travel to conferences, monthly meal gatherings,
annual retreats and field trips. This program provides direct financial support
for at least 30 STEM majors; many other STEM students also benefit as non-
scholarship recipients are incorporated into program activities. The
scholarships help bring Valparaiso University within the reach of more first
generation students as well as students from nearby economically depressed areas
with large minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the EPIC
program will fill important gaps identified in the literature on recruitment and
retention programs in STEM at liberal arts and religiously affiliated
institutions, especially considering commuter students. The assessment plan
focuses on the three major objectives of the program: 1) improving student
retention, especially among commuters, 2) increasing the number of STEM
graduates prepared for research intensive careers, and 3) increasing the number
of departments with research intensive majors and strengthen existing programs.
Evaluation, both formative and summative, utilizes mixed-methods design,
including in-person interviews, focus groups, archival student data, and survey
research.