* 1564293
* SBE: Medium: User-Centric Design of a Sonification System for Automatically Alarming Security Threats and Impact
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Rattikorn Hewett, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 889,150.00

The Internet has become an integral part of everyday life. The great benefits of
the Internet also come with potential risks, security issues, and privacy
concerns. Internet security products are usually employed to inform users about
security incidents. There are three major problems using these security
products: (1) these tools often overwhelm users with a great many features
making their usability a serious issue, (2) these tools are not always
accessible to every type of user such as those who are visually impaired, and
(3) most of the Internet users are unfamiliar with various types of security
threats and thus their impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project translates
security warnings and threats into various forms of sounds. The introduced user-
centric sonification takes a security warning and maps out the risks and
consequences associated with the underlying security threat into a certain type
of sound that reflects the emotional feelings of the potential risks and harm
caused by the threat. The project builds a repository of sounds tagged with
their emotional impacts such as fear, happiness, and sadness. The project also
builds a second repository of security threats tagged with similar emotional
impacts such as fear of loss of sensitive information, impersonation, and
privacy exposure. The intellectual merit of this project includes introduction
of a user-centric sonification framework in which a cyber threat, along with its
risks, severities, and impacts to users, is mapped out to a representative sound
that reflects the emotional impacts of the threat to the user. The sonified
security warnings undergo extensive usability testing in order to assess the
effectiveness of the sonified security threats. The broader impact of this
sonification project includes introduction of two repositories of possible
sounds and security attacks tagged with their emotional impacts. The constructed
repositories can be useful for music and computer security industries such as
Amazon, anti-virus software developers, and producers of major Web browsers. The
sonification-based technology for translating security warnings to sounds can be
integrated into any popular Internet Web browsers. The project will have direct
impact on the development of technologies that enhance accessibility for
Internet users who are visually impaired and will increase their Internet
safety.