* 1564185
* NeTS: Medium: Improving Network Performance and Efficiency through Multi-Channel Network Links
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Alex Snoeren, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project seeks to challenge the conventional abstract model of a high-speed
network link as a single, logical point of attachment. Instead, the proposed
approach exposes the inherent parallelism that exists within the end host,
network links, and the network fabric as a whole, to applications and the
network control plane. The result is a network fabric consisting of a number of
distinct physical networks that coexist within a single physical topology. By
decoupling the channels making up network links, the project radically redesigns
the network fabric to address today's requirements and challenges. A key
hypothesis of this work is that composing multiple, potentially heterogeneous
networks provides for greater scaling, performance, service quality, and
manageability than maintaining the legacy fat-pipe link
abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will impact the broader
community in four ways: (1) by addressing the societal need of large-scale
networking infrastructure to support next-generation clusters and data centers,
by (2) engaging with industry to help inform the design and construction of new
devices, by (3) interacting with other scientific communities through
interdisciplinary research, and by (4) engaging with graduate and undergraduate
students to translate the resulting research into structured courses and hands-
on learning experiences for traditionally under-represented&lt;br/&gt;student
groups.