* 1564529
* Austin College's Career Empowering STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2023
* Lisa Brown, Austin College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 05/31/2023
* USD 649,161.00

In order to remain vital, the American economy must compete globally, attract
investment, and develop the STEM workforce. This NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project will provide
scholarships for 16 students and provide enhanced support structures to all
students (approximately 600) with STEM career goals, thus increasing their
chances of academic and employment success. Additionally, the scholarship
recipients will be exposed to career exploration opportunities in biology,
biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, mathematics and physics through
connections to local STEM employers, formalized career preparation
opportunities, and job placement services. A key feature of the project will be
the scholars' participation in a STEM leadership program that promotes the
development of interpersonal communication, problem solving, collaborative work,
foresight and planning, and moral consciousness
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research suggests that norms in higher educational
settings typically emphasize independence and may be alienating to students who
come from groups that emphasize interdependence. This project will investigate
the role that the development of interdependent skills in the context of STEM
has in promoting academic success generally, and success in STEM specifically
among academically talented, low-income students. Interdependent skills will be
nurtured through participation in the STEM leadership program and be reinforced
through cohort meetings and individual mentoring. The PI team hypothesizes that
making these interdependent skills a central part of professional development in
STEM may foster the persistence and success of all students; particularly those
eligible for S-STEM scholarships. Formative and summative evaluation will
include collecting data related retention and graduation rates and surveys on
the effectiveness of the graduate school and career preparation activities.
Results from the project will be disseminated via education journals such as the
Journal of Higher Education, Journal of College Science Teaching, and Journal of
Research in Science Teaching and at conferences specific to each STEM major like
the American Association of Physics Teachers meetings, Biennial Conference of
Chemical Educators, among others.