* 1565030
* ABI Development: Pathview: a systematic solution for pathway based analytics and visualization
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2023
* Cory Brouwer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 708,813.00

Omics technologies are revolutionizing scientific research, health care and the
world. It has become easy to screen the whole genome, transcriptome or
metabolome for individual human being and living organisms. These omics profiles
enable personalized/precision medicine, and make it possible to solve complex
biological problems (aging, brain function etc) or diseases (cancers, obesity
etc). However, it remains a major challenge to effectively analyze and interpret
these big and complex datasets. The PI's group recently developed the Pathview
tool set to map omics data onto molecular pathways (or fundamental biochemical
or cellular processes). This project will fully develop Pathview as a systematic
solution for omics data visualization, integration and analytics based on
pathways. In addition, the whole research community will have open access to
this tool and future development. Pathview has generated a global impact within
a short time. As an open source project, Pathview not only creates a big user
base (tens of thousands) directly, but also fosters a community of dependent
projects. Pathview has been adopted by numerous courses in major research
institutions and online tutorials. The Pathview project also recruits and trains
students and developers and prepare them for careers in the STEM fields. Beyond
academia, Pathview is widely used in hospitals, biotech, pharmaceutical and
agriculture industry. With this NSF award, the next iteration of the Pathview
software will have much deeper and broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathway
analysis has been widely used in omics studies, biomedical research and
industry. Pathview maps, integrates and renders a large variety of biological
data on molecular and genetic pathways, and produces interpretable graphs with
publication quality. Pathview was quickly adopted and widely used by thousands
of scientists worldwide. In this Development project, Pathview will be fully
developed as a systematic solution for pathway based analytics and
visualization. First, a Pathview Web server will be developed, which not only
provides a graphic and user-friendly online portal to Pathview, but also extends
the static package into an interactive bioinformatics server. Second, the
Pathview R package will be expanded in its core functions. It will offer
stronger graphic controls for better visualization, and support for more
commonly used molecular data and pathway data types. Third, multiple automated
pathway analysis workflows will be developed based on Pathview for
transcriptomic, genomic and other omics data analysis. More information about
the Pathview project will be available at: http://pathview.uncc.edu.