* 1565149
* STEM-Pros: Growing More STEM Professionals in the Heartland
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Nigel George, Upper Iowa University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2023
* USD 649,960.00

The STEM-Pros project at Upper Iowa University (UIU) will increase recruitment,
retention, and degree completion while preparing STEM professionals for the 21st
century workplace. STEM-Pros scholars will develop their full potential as STEM
professionals by establishing self-identity and acquiring the skills to define
and solve complex problems. With faculty guidance, academic supports, co-
curricular experiences, and innovative family programming, students will more
fully engage in their chosen fields and thus persist in overcoming challenges.
STEM-Pros will focus on four majors (environmental science, forensic science,
computing sciences/information technology, and mathematics), and will provide
support for 14 students over five years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of
family-oriented programming on retention, academic achievement, and STEM career
trajectories of 14 STEM-Pros scholars will be assessed using a mixed-methods,
quasi-experimental study, conducted with an external evaluator. The evaluation
will utilize a nonequivalent comparison group with dependent pretest and
posttest samples. To reduce selection differences, the treatment group (students
that receive family-oriented programming) will be matched with a comparison
group (students in the same program and department, but that do not receive
family-oriented programming) on characteristics associated with outcomes
including gender, GPA, and other factors. Qualitative and quantitative
instruments will be used in interviews and online questionnaires of individuals
including: (1) two STEM-Pros cohorts and their matched comparison cohorts; (2)
local STEM industry partners; (3) family orientation participants and
facilitators; and (4) management team.