* 1565484
* CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service - A Continuation Program at Mississippi State University
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* DeMarcus Thomas, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,280,387.00

Mississippi State University (MSU), one of the sixteen National Centers of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Operations, proposes to continue and expand its
participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. The project will support community college students at the
East Mississippi Community College (EMCC) through early mentoring and advising
activities before their transfer to MSU. The project will have an immediate
impact on the information assurance and forensics capabilities of the federal
workforce by developing well-trained cybersecurity professionals. MSU continues
a strong working relationship with several universities, two-year colleges and
the law enforcement community. They have partnered with several HBCUs including
Jackson State University, Mississippi Valley State University, and Tuskegee
University, as well as other schools, such as the University of South Alabama,
the University of Texas at Tyler, and Saint Cloud State University. This project
will continue mentoring to ensure that more schools build cybersecurity
programs. Within the State of Mississippi, SFS students help with cybersecurity
product evaluation, give internet safety talks within secondary school systems,
and help with GenCyber summer camps. In addition, MSU increases female
participation in cybersecurity by organizing a 10-week Research Experience on
cybersecurity topics, conducted between freshman and sophomore years of college,
followed by summer internships with government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSU leverages their extensive operational
experience and program maturity to graduate SFS students for the government at a
rate of approximately 10 SFS students a year. The program will continue to
benefit from substantial research efforts as each SFS student is required to
participate in a Research Experience and to publish in peer-reviewed outlets.
More than seventy peer-reviewed publications have been published by
undergraduate and graduate SFS students at MSU. Seventeen faculty members from
three MSU colleges are affiliated with four cybersecurity research centers. The
project's cybersecurity curriculum is woven into an overall degree requirements.
Coverage of cybersecurity topics is in the context of specific courses such as
database, programming, or operating systems as well as a capstone projects and
discovery learning in the lab. Students are selected from several degree
programs including Computer Science, Software Engineering, Computer Engineering,
Electrical Engineering, Industrial and Systems Engineering, and Management
Information Systems. All students must take courses in Information and Computer
Security including a lab with a strong emphasis on penetration testing
techniques; Digital and Computer Forensics focusing on computer crime and the
study of evidence for solving such crimes; and Cryptography and Network Security
with a strong emphasis on network protocol vulnerabilities. SFS students
practice in computer security laboratories, SCADA security laboratories, and in
an isolated lab to complete an intensive, team-oriented capture the flag contest
at the end of the semester.