* 1565557
* CRII: SHF: A New Foundation for Attack Trees Based on Monoidal Categories
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Harley Eades, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2019
* USD 70,271.00

Title: CRII:SHF: A New Foundation for Attack Trees Based on Monoidal Categories

Attack trees are a modeling tool used to assess the threat potential of a
security critical system. They have been used to analyze the threat potential of
the cybersecurity of power grids, wireless networks, and many others. Attack
trees for real-world security scenarios can grow to be quite complex and
manipulating such large and complex trees without a formal semantics can be
dangerous. The intellectual merits of the research are twofold: 1) It develops,
using the power of linear logic and category theory, a new mathematical
semantics of attack trees that is more general than existing models; 2) It
designs a new domain-specific programming language for conducting threat
analysis using attack trees. The language is specifically designed for not only
the construction and manipulation of attack trees, but also for the ability to
verify properties of attack trees. The project's broader significance and
importance are improvement of security and reliability of software, training of
a diverse group of undergraduate students at Georgia Regents University in
principles of programming languages and security, and exposing them to research.

The project's first step is to give attack trees a categorical semantics in
symmetric monoidal categories. Then based on this semantics, and the connection
between linear logic and symmetric monoidal categories, the project develops a
new statically-typed linear functional programming language called Lina (Linear
Threat Analysis). Types in Lina correspond to attack trees, and programs between
attack trees correspond to semantically valid transformations of attack trees.
Therefore, designing and manipulating complex attack trees in Lina provides a
higher confidence that the resulting analysis is correct.