* 1565788
* De Novo Asymmetric Synthesis of Natural and Unnatural Carbohydrate Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* George ODoherty, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor George O'Doherty. Professor O'Doherty is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Northeastern University. He and
his group are working to develop practical synthetic approaches to oligo-
cyclitols. Cyclitols are structural mimics of carbohydrates that are resistant
to metabolism. In contrast to the other biological polymers (e.g., DNA and
proteins), there are no practical methods for the construction of stable
analogues of the oligosaccharides. To address this need, the O'Doherty group is
developing a novel method of monomer assembly to prepare oligo-cyclitols. The
O'Doherty group is uniquely positioned to carry out this research, as this
project is based on their previously established method for the synthesis of
oligosaccharides. The project provides access to novel structures for biological
studies. In addition, the research program offers an excellent opportunity to
train undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral associates in
the state of the art methods for complex molecule synthesis. This program
impacts society at numerous levels: making carbohydrate synthesis greener,
improving drug discovery, and furthering student training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has the potential to revolutionize the way
oligosaccharide structures are used in medicinal and biological chemistry
studies. While methods for exo-C-glycosides syntheses have been developed, the
impracticality of these syntheses has limited their use in medicinal chemistry
studies. Dr. O'Doherty's approach to cyclitols (aka, endo-C-glycosides or
5a-carbasugars), mirrors the broadly successful approach to oligosaccharides,
both of which rely on the use of enantio- and diastereo-selective catalytic
reactions (e.g., transition metal or bimetallic catalyzed allylation). The de
novo approaches start with a significantly simplified structure and sequentially
increases its stereochemical and functional complexity to a range of structures,
which in turn enables medicinal chemistry and chemical biology structure-
activity relationship studies. This program impacts society at numerous levels:
making carbohydrate synthesis greener, improving drug discovery, and furthering
student training.