* 1565098
* ABI Sustaining: Supporting Biological Collections Computing with Specify
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Beach, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2019
* USD 816,491.00

For more than 250 years, thousands of professional, student and citizen
biologists have strived through wide-ranging but detailed exploration to
discover, observe and document the diversity of earth's wild species. Hundreds
of biological museums across the U.S. hold the research products from
innumerable biotic surveys and inventories, namely millions of curated specimens
of animals and plants. Those unique vouchers document the identity and
distribution of species across the planet, as well as document geographical
patterns of biological diversity. Research based on biological collections not
only generates scientific knowledge of species and their distributions, it also
employs specimen data in computational models for predicting the biological
impacts of climate change. Specimen data are also used for informing national
and regional conservation priorities, and in environmental education and
professional training. The primary goal of the Specify Project is to provide
software to mobilize all of the taxonomic, geographic and ecological information
associated with museum specimens to internet-based information portals for
public access, policy and research. Specify is used by 284 U.S. research
collections to digitize, manage and publish specimen holdings data. The software
platform also facilitates the tracking of museum specimen transactions and legal
compliance for the acquisition and curation of new collections from earth?s
remaining wild places. Specify modernizes and extends the impact of the
investment made by biological researchers, leveraging the truly monumental,
three-century investment in biological survey and inventory. Specify Project
software accomplishes this by facilitating the publication of data previously
sequestered in museum cabinets with software support to computerize the
information and to bring it to freely-accessible, open access, web information
portals.

During the course of this effort, the Specify Software Project will derive and
implement a business model to financially support its core software engineering
and technical support activities. Through community consensus-gathering
activities, we will obtain advice from university administrators, museum and
research directors from biological collections institutions around the country
in order to identify a revenue model to sustain the technical support activities
of the Specify Software Project. We will interview representatives of U.S.
research institutions currently using Specify to assess the likelihood of their
participation in various fee-based and consortium membership-based options for
ongoing Specify support and software updates. In consultation with business
advisors we will synthesize the findings of those community activities and
propose a revenue structure for financial support of the Specify Project. We
will undertake 'sustaining development' (maintenance and completion) of software
for the Specify 7 data management platform. The Specify Project will continue to
provide technical help desk support services, including outreach and training
for U.S. research collections institutions using and adopting Specify for
biological specimen data processing. The Specify Software Project web site is
located at: http://specifysoftware.org.