* 1565721
* Ion-paired cooperative catalysts for carbon-carbon bond formation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Graham Dobereiner, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 289,554.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Graham Dobereiner of Temple University is developing methods
for using carbon monoxide (CO) in the preparation of important chemicals. Carbon
monoxide is widely used as a feedstock in the chemical industry for the
formation of commodity chemicals. Because its use is so ubiquitous, there is
significant value in finding new approaches to using CO that are more efficient
than those now used. In this project a new type of catalyst, where two separate
parts work together in making chemical bonds, is being developed in order to
reduce energy input and decrease resource consumption relative to traditional
methods. The investigation includes a sustained outreach program with local
schools, as well as readying students for the STEM workforce by organizing
regional meetings for future scientists with interests in inorganic chemistry.

In this project, a general approach to preparing ion paired complexes composed
of two oppositely charged metal complexes is being developed. The purpose is to
provide a library of tunable bimetallic catalysts and to establish the
conditions required for preparing stable bimetallic ion pair catalysts. Using
this library, catalysts are being designed for several catalytic reactions,
including hydroesterification and the selective copolymerization of carbon
monoxide and alkenes. Besides yielding efficient catalytic processes, potential
benefits include an improved fundamental understanding of ion pairing as well as
advancements in the inorganic synthesis.