* 1565627
* Fluorous Phase-Based Fluorescent Chiral Discrimination
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Lin Pu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lin Pu of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Virginia is developing new enantioselective
fluorescent sensors for the recognition of chiral amines in perfluorocarbon
solvents (fluorous phase). These sensors are used to facilitate the high
throughput screening of chiral catalysts for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral
amines that are useful in the synthesis of organic compounds of pharmaceutical
and biological importance. This project provides extensive education and
training for graduate and undergraduate students in areas such as organic
synthesis, spectroscopic study, and catalyst development. This group also
participates in an outreach program to carry out chemistry-based demonstrations
for elementary school students and teachers. This outreach program is dedicated
to providing inquiry-based chemistry instruction at the elementary school level.

Enantioselective fluorescent sensors containing perfluoroalkyl chains are
expected to be more soluble in fluorous solvents than in common organic
solvents. They are used to conduct the enantioselective fluorescent recognition
of functional chiral amines such as diamines, amino alcohols and amino acids in
fluorous solvents. Pseudoenantiomeric pairs of such sensors are prepared. In
each pair there are two sensors having the opposite enantioselective fluorescent
response with two distinctively different emission wavelengths upon interaction
with the two enantiomers of a chiral amine substrate. These sensors are applied
to chiral catalyst screening. A fluorous solution of a pseudoenantiomeric sensor
pair are used to extract the products, generated from the chiral catalyst
screening experiments conducted in common organic solvents or aqueous solution,
into the fluorous phase. Because only the sensors and their adducts with the
chiral products could be dissolved in the fluorous phase, the interference of
other species such as reagents, catalysts and starting materials is minimized.
Through fluorescent measurement, both the yield and enantiomeric composition of
the chiral products is simultaneously determined. The structure of the sensors
is modified in order to conduct the enantioselective fluorescent recognition of
un-functionalized amines. The fluorous phase-based fluorescent detection of this
project has potential to be automated to conduct high throughput catalyst
screening. Under the direction of PI, graduate students and undergraduate
students of diverse backgrounds are recruited to conduct research in organic
synthesis, spectroscopic studies, and catalyst development. Students will learn
many laboratory skills that are useful for their future employment and allow
them to make contributions to the society.