* 1565888
* Bonding Analysis of Ab Initio Electronic Wave Functions in Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Klaus Ruedenberg, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 280,000.00

Klaus Ruedenberg and Mark Gordon of Iowa State University are supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry Division to continue the development of a rigorous and widely
applicable method for understanding the chemical bonding that occurs in
molecules and molecular systems. This bonding analysis quantitatively identifies
and sorts out the different types of physical interactions that act together in
creating bonds between atoms in molecules. As yet, a rigorous understanding does
not exist for this fundamental phenomenon in chemistry. While the discovery of
'bonds' goes back two hundred years, it was only a hundred years later that that
the simplest chemical bond, in the hydrogen molecule, could be quantitatively
calculated on the basis of quantum mechanics. As a result of the recent
development of computers, energies of many molecules can now be calculated quite
accurately. However, the physical origins of the vast diversity of chemical
bonds are still elusive. For instance, only speculations exist on why the carbon
monoxide molecule has a stronger bond than the nitrogen molecule even though
these simple molecules have very similar electronic structures. In the present
analysis, a rigorous quantitative understanding of bond energies in terms of
relevant and familiar physical interactions is developed by extracting this
information from theoretical calculations. The analysis provides a more reliable
guide for intuitive use by practicing chemists in understanding and anticipating
bonding patterns than current qualitative rationalizations. The analysis is also
provides sound material for teaching the physical origin of chemical binding
based on a solid theoretical basis. The goal of the project is to enhance the
impact of rigorous quantum mechanical calculations on practical chemistry. The
bonding analysis is included in the freely available and widely used GAMESS
(General Atomic and Molecular Electronic Structure System) program
suite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the molecular electronic ab initio wave
function, orbitals are deduced that have very large overlap with atomic orbitals
of the free atoms and, at the same time, are adapted to the bonding pattern in
the molecule. The wave function is expressed in terms of these quasi-atomic
orbitals and it, thereby, becomes a sum of three terms. The first term embodies
the juxtaposed atoms in their valence states without electron migration between
them and, hence, without covalent bonding interactions. The second term embodies
electron sharing, and hence, covalent bonding between the neutral atoms. The
third term embodies charge transfers between the atoms. From this resolution of
the wave function, a decomposition of the energy is obtained in terms of five
additive contributions that represent the following interactions: formation of
the atomic valence states, quasi-classical Coulombic interactions, interference
interactions, sharing-penetration interactions, and charge transfer
interactions. These interactions are furthermore resolved into contributions of
the various orbitals. On the basis of these resolutions, the bonds that link
various atoms in specific molecules are characterized and compared.