* 1565577
* Rural Access Mechatronics Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Christopher Lewis, Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,596.00

High quality mechatronics technicians with interdisciplinary skills are in high
demand by industry; yet, it is often difficult for students in rural areas to
access and complete traditional mechatronics technician degrees. This project
entitled Rural Access Mechatronics Program (RAMP) at Clark College in rural
southwest Washington state is designed to increase the quantity and quality of
mechatronics technicians by developing a hybrid/online Certificate of Completion
in Mechatronics Fundamentals. This will provide rural students, under-and
unemployed workers, and incumbent workers a new option for an educational
pathway from a certificate in mechatronics to an Associate in Applied Technology
(AAT) degree with anytime anywhere courses resulting from the hybrid format.
Upon successful completion, students will be prepared for either technician
positions or be ready to progress on the educational pathway to a baccalaureate
degree. The objectives of the project are to institutionalize hybrid learning
options through faculty professional development and increase the number of
quality mechatronics technicians. The curriculum will be validated by multiple
advanced manufacturing employers in the region who are concerned by the rapidly
growing need for more skilled mechatronics technicians in the Washington Oregon
border area. Through the RAMP pilot, Clark will make significant contributions
to the larger technological education community as the RAMP model will be
replicable in other rural communities where access to education is an
issue.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The hybrid modality of the certificate opens up
access to stackable certificates and an AAT degree for more rural students. The
project addresses critical barriers to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education such as mathematics prerequisites by embedding the
needed mathematics competencies into the mechatronics classes of the hybrid
curriculum. Faculty members are being prepared with the skills needed to deliver
hybrid curricula, designed specifically to meet the needs of a rural population,
thereby expanding hybrid learning options throughout the educational pathway.
RAMP builds upon and expands the work of other ATE centers and projects
including 1) applying best practices gleaned from iMEC (1304835) to guide the
transition of curricula into a hybrid format; 2) partnering with CA2VES
(1501695) to leverage their knowledge in hybrid/online delivery; utilize their
modules/virtual labs; and investigate their video library for use in RAMP
professional development efforts; and 3) utilizing the best practices of CARCAM
(1304036) for recruitment and retention of rural and first-generation students.
Employers are being engaged in the curriculum development process to assure that
mechatronics technicians have the skills and knowledge to be well prepared to
work in industry. A comprehensive evaluation is being developed to continuously
enhance the project activities and provide opportunities for researching and
evaluating the success of the project and its deliverables, as well as the
sharing of best practices.