* 1565780
* New Molecular Systems Based on Indenofluorenes and Expanded Quinoidal Analogues: Experimental, Theoretical, and Materials Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2021
* USD 614,500.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Michael Haley in the Department of Chemistry &
Biochemistry at the University of Oregon. Prof. Haley and his students are
preparing molecules based on or inspired by the indenofluorene skeleton to
answer fundamental scientific questions as well as to explore their materials
properties. A key goal is to develop simple synthetic methods for the assembly
of these strongly electron-accepting molecules. Once in hand, the Haley group
examines the optical and electronic properties of all new molecular scaffolds
with an emphasis towards utilization of these materials in optoelectronic
devices such as organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and organic
photovoltaics (OPVs). The broader impacts of this program include industrial
internships for graduate students at local and regional companies, the exchange
of graduate students with those of foreign collaborators, the hosting of
extended stays of visiting scientists including professors from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs), and continued substantial involvement of
undergraduates in chemical research via programs which promote participation of
underrepresented groups.

Research on non-benzenoid molecules has experienced a renaissance over the last
decade as chemists have recognized their potential as organic semiconductors
characterized by low Highest Occupied Molecular Orbitals (HOMO) and Lowest
Unoccupied Molecular Orbitals (LUMO) energy levels and small energy gaps. This
projects sets out to: (1) explore the fundamental properties and reactivity of
the fully conjugated indenofluorene (IF) core leading to asymmetrically
derivatized structures, (2) prepare a library of derivatized IFs and IF-diones
for detailed structure-properties relationship studies, (3) extend our synthetic
routes for the preparation and study of unknown, fully conjugated topologies
such as indeno[1,2-a]fluorenes and indacenodiacenes, and (4) prepare expanded
quinoidal IF analogues based diindeno-fused acenes and explore their open
shell/biradical character. The molecules developed in these studies present
opportunities for practical applications, particularly in the area of
nanotechnology and low-cost electronics. Moreover, this project serves as an
excellent training ground for graduate and undergraduate researchers in
fundamental and applied chemical synthesis. The studies provides the researchers
with broad experience in organic synthesis, computational chemistry, x-ray
crystallography, and the interplay between electronic structure and molecular
architecture.