* 1565140
* PERSIST Promoting Engagement, Retention and Success in STEM Training
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jack Eichler, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,961.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of California-
Riverside will provide scholarships for low-income, talented students with
demonstrated financial need pursuing bachelor's degrees in the sciences. In
addition to scholarships, the program will provide academic and other support to
increase the persistence of academically talented, low-income students. Project
efforts focus extensively on sophomores to facilitate transition to upper-level
science coursework. The project has identified the sophomore year as a time when
many capable students leave science majors. The results of this project will be
applicable to other institutions seeking to increase retention of second-year
science students. Scholarships and support for academically strong students, who
may not otherwise be able to afford college, will help to produce a well-trained
workforce that will contribute to the economic vitality of California and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress has been made in identifying some of the
factors which can help improve the success of undergraduate science students in
the first year. However, a challenge remains as a significant percentage of
students do not persist in science majors beyond the end of their sophomore
year. This project will focus on sophomores to facilitate upper division
continuation at a time when many students leave science majors. The scholarships
will decrease the need for low-income students to work part-time and thus
increase their opportunities to be involved in second year undergraduate
research and internships with industry. The academic support will include
curricular and co-curricular activities such as research methodology, peer
mentoring and career exploration workshops. The project will eliminate or reduce
the need for low-income students to work part-time and increase students'
aspirations towards further participation in STEM research and internship
experiences. An additional emphasis will be on talented students who begin in
precalculus. These students were found to have lower graduation rates in STEM
compared to students who are ready to take calculus in the first year. Lower
graduation rates are due in part to a need to pay extra tuition to catch up in
mathematics and science courses the summer after the first year. By focusing on
a time that is particularly important for undergraduate persistence in STEM and
on a particular sample of students who have an even less likelihood of
persisting, this program hopes to positively impact the trajectory of talented
low-income students typically underrepresented in STEM fields. The findings from
the program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education community and help
increase understanding of the attributes and practices of successful student
scholarship and support programs.