* 1565180
* ABI Innovation: New Algorithms for Biological X-ray Free Electron Laser Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Richard Kirian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2020
* USD 761,649.00

Major advances in structural biology have often resulted from novel approaches
to data collection and analysis. Historically, increasingly powerful X-ray
sources led to great leaps in the ability to obtain information about structures
of biomolecules, which is critically related to the molecules' biological
function. The first X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) came online in 2009 at SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory, granting researchers the unprecedented ability
to see the detailed atomic arrangements in, and movements of, biological
molecules in their natural state (i.e. warm and wet). Serial femtosecond
crystallography (SFX), a novel extension of crystallography making use of the
extreme flux and ultra-short duration of XFEL pulses, has produced new insights
into fundamentally important processes such as photosynthesis, helping to
understand how plants and bacteria convert sunlight into energy and create the
oxygen we breathe, making life possible on earth, as well as improving human
health by aiding pharmaceutical drug design, for example guiding improvements in
pain killers and blood pressure regulators. However, XFEL experiments with
biological targets typically require very large volumes of data and thus a
correspondingly large volume of scarce, precious protein, to obtain high-
resolution molecular structures. Furthermore, XFEL facilities typically host
only one or two experiments simultaneously, and only two XFELs presently serve
the global user community, while more will be coming online in 2017. The number
of biological targets that can be studied and the rate of discoveries can be
dramatically increased through the development of innovative, advanced
algorithms that reduce the number of necessary measurements and extract more
information from the samples by fully exploiting the information content that is
unique to XFEL diffraction, and by extending XFEL use to uncrystallized targets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main objectives: (a) explore
algorithms for improving data accuracy in XFEL serial femtosecond
crystallography through modeling and optimization (beyond the Monte Carlo
approach for data merging), (b) explore and develop novel phasing methods which
exploit the full spatial coherence of the XFEL for 2D and 3D nanocrystals, and
(c) develop structure-determination methods that can be applied to samples that
cannot be crystallized, through XFEL fast solution scattering (FSS). FSS can
provide dynamic structural information from "snapshot" diffraction from
particles that can be studied dynamically in solution, broadening the range of
samples suitable for XFELs. Further development of this approach to include
statistical intensity correlations that are unique to XFEL measurements can
potentially displace the need for crystal growth altogether. These new
algorithms, which will be freely available to the scientific community, will
increase accessibility and applicability of the revolutionary capabilities of
XFELs for biological imaging by significantly decreasing the amount of sample,
data and experimental time (and therefore overall costs) necessary to obtain
high-resolution structures. Thus the project will contribute directly to
improved understanding of the fundamental biomolecular mechanisms by providing
time-resolved images of molecular machines at work. The results of this project
will be available at http://www.public.asu.edu/~nzatsepi