* 1565822
* From Atomic Scale Strain Probing to Smart 3D Interface Design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2022
* Haiyan Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 722,267.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The project explores the fundamental understanding of
atomic-scale strain at heterogeneous interfaces which allows the design of
nanostructures with new or significantly improved materials properties. This
study is having direct impact on advanced materials (in thin film form) for
memories, data storage devices, superconductors, and solid oxide fuel cells. The
fundamental knowledge gained is also shedding light on the interfacial phenomena
observed in many other ceramic nanocomposite systems with heterogeneous
interfaces such as microelectronic and optoelectronic devices, thin film solar
cells, etc. The education and outreach activities are integrated with the
research (in particular, with the strain mapping results) and include: (1)
further development of a teaching model "The Art of Laying Apples", (2)
multidisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students at Purdue
University and national laboratories, and (3) dissemination of research results
to a much broader audience through a high school teacher's research program, on-
campus outreach activities and a research website for all self-learners and
materials scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project
focuses on the design, synthesis, and characterization of heterogeneous
interfaces in epitaxial ceramic nanocomposites, in particular on the atomic
structure and strain distribution at the lateral and vertical interfaces. The
goal of the project is to achieve oxide-based 3-dimensional (3D) strained
hetero-structures by exploring the nature of lateral and vertical strained
interfaces. These new materials are expected to have enhanced physical and
chemical properties as ferroelectrics, multiferroics, superconductors, and ionic
conductors. The specific tasks are: (1) conducting an atomic scale quantitative
strain mapping/analysis on new layered oxide systems (e.g., Bi3Fe2Mn2Ox
(BFMO)-based systems), (2) exploring the strain evolution in vertically aligned
nanocomposites (VAN) (e.g., BiFeO3 (BFO) and La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (LSMO)-based VAN
systems), and (3) achieving 3D interface designs by combining the aforementioned
lateral and vertical nanostructures. All the oxide thin films are being prepared
by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Various characterization techniques such as
high resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD), combined geometric phase analysis-
scanning transmission electron microscopy (GPA-STEM) for strain mapping and
electrical and ionic transport property measurements are being used. It is
anticipated that the fundamental strain study could reveal the growth mechanisms
of these complex systems. Moreover, development of new 3D heterogeneous oxide
thin films could lead to novel functionalities with 3D interface designs
including enhanced ferroelectric and multiferroic properties, electron transport
path for enhanced magnetoresistance properties, and ionic conductors for
electrochemical cells.