* 1565607
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Research Obstacles and Problem Solving in Scientific R&amp;D Teams
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Erin Leahey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 12/31/2017
* USD 29,421.00

Scientific teams allow for the integration of individuals? expertise into a
coherent effort, benefitting from depth and breadth of knowledge - a winning
combination for creativity and novelty, two cornerstones of innovation. However,
obstacles arise that must be overcome in order to fulfill the aims of research
yet little is known about what kinds of obstacles are confronted and how and
whether they are resolved. A greater understanding of strategies to deal with
research obstacles will benefit academics interested in problem-solving and team
science, managers seeking to increase their teams? problem-solving capabilities,
and funding agencies and science policy experts as they seek to increase the
effectiveness of research investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
introduces and explicates the concept of a research obstacle, develops
measurements of this concept, and investigates problem-solving processes of
scientific research and development (R&amp;D) teams. Qualitative analysis of in-
depth interviews with project leaders and scientists seeks to understand the
problem-solving routines of multi-disciplinary/ multi-functional pharmaceutical
R&amp;D teams. Additional analysis explores how routines break under the weight
of serious research obstacles. Scientists are surveyed to discern the efficiency
of problem-solving communication patterns and to uncover the inter- and intra-
team communication structures that promote team-based problem-solving
capability.&lt;br/&gt;