* 1565728
* Protein Folding Dynamics: Folding: The Landscapes of Natural and Synthetic Life" to be held at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston,  Texas, January 10-15, 2016
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2016
* Peter Wolynes, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2016
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Protein Folding Dynamics "Folding: The
Landscapes of Natural and Synthetic Life" will be held at the Hotel Galvez in
Galveston, Texas, January 10-15, 2016. The meeting will bring together senior
scientists, postdoctoral researchers and graduate students from a wide range of
interests and approaches to protein folding dynamics. The nature of the
conference allows close interaction among participants, who can share their
ideas and results. By bringing together researchers from chemistry, physics and
biology to explore recent exciting developments in this field in a concrete
forum that encourages open discussions from researchers working on different
systems, the new paradigm of cross-disciplinary research is
strengthened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will assemble experimentalists
and theoreticians to discuss basic issues in protein folding dynamics and their
role in function, in the evolution of protein sequences and in disorders
associated with protein misfolding. It has become increasingly clear that
understanding the details of protein folding dynamics is crucial in describing
virtually all processes of life, including protein synthesis, co-translational
folding, protein allostery, protein function and diseases related to protein
misfolding. The conference will cover a range of topics namely in vitro and in
vivo folding, protein aggregation, protein evolution and design, and the role of
protein dynamics in function. The 2016 conference is expanding to include
complete formal sessions on protein evolution and the folding of non-biological
foldamers and even complete chromosomes. This expansion was partly in response
to requests from previous years' participants but also the current organizers
believed that extending the range of topics would add to the intellectual merit
of the conference. Participants will able to spend time together over a week of
talks and presentations, thus allowing synergy of ideas and identification and
solutions of a variety of problems.