* 1565066
* Building a Sustainable Institutional Structure to Support STEM Scholars at IPFW
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Shing-Chung Max Yen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 649,998.00

A wide gap in rates of degree completion currently exists between highly
selective colleges and universities and those that are nonselective. Indiana
University-Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW) is an urban, nonselective
institution with a high percentage of returning-adult, commuter, under-prepared,
first-generation, and low-income students. This project will investigate what
institutions like IPFW can do to help students decrease the time it takes to
complete their undergraduate degrees in engineering, engineering technology, and
computer science. S-STEM scholars, who will receive scholarships during their
junior and seniors years, will be selected based on their high-ability or high-
potential and demonstrated financial need. A team consisting of teaching
faculty, academic advisors, and peer mentors will be created to supports the
S-STEM scholars. Because many of the IPFW students are commuters with employment
outside of school, it is expected that the program will accelerate the degree
completion of the participating students and lead to a stronger Northeastern
Indiana workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commuter students attend school full-
time or part-time, they live off campus, and their daily obligations are divided
among home, work, and school. This project will lead to advancing our
understanding of the factors, practices, and experiences (curricular and co-
curricular) that affect these students? success, retention, and degree
completion. Areas of focus include (a) learning how commuters prioritize the
three aspects of their lives (home, work, and school), (b) understanding the
impacts and use of the financial assistance these commuter students receive, and
(c) investigating best practices and interventions that lead to academic success
for commuter students. This project has several broader impacts: (a) scholarship
recipients will receive funding and enhanced academic assistance, (b) STEM
degree completion will be made more visible to the greater population of IPFW
students and pre-college students in local schools, (c) there will be enhanced
collaborative partnerships among students, faculty, and local employers, and (d)
knowledge gains on supporting the success of commuter students will contribute
to the body of knowledge and to STEM workforce development.