* 1565328
* CHS: Large: Collaborative Research: Computational Science for Improving Assessment of Executive Function in Children
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Vassilis Athitsos, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,371,495.00

The identification of cognitive impairments in early childhood provides the best
opportunity for successful remedial intervention, because brain plasticity
diminishes with age. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a
psychiatric neurodevelopmental disorder that is very hard to diagnose or tell
apart from other disorders. Symptoms include inattention, hyperactivity, or
acting impulsively, all of which often result in poor performance in school and
persist later in life. In this project, an interdisciplinary team of computer
and neurocognitive scientists will develop and implement transformative
computational approaches to evaluate the cognitive profiles of young children
and to address these issues. The project will take advantage of both physical
and computer based exercises already in place in 300 schools in the United
States and involving thousands of children, many of whom have been diagnosed
with ADHD or other learning disabilities. Project outcomes will have important
implications for a child's success in school, self-image, and future employment
and community functioning. The PIs will discover new knowledge about the role of
physical exercise in cognitive training, including correlations between
individual metrics and degree of improvement over time. They will identify
important new metrics and correlations currently unknown to cognitive
scientists, which will have broad impact on other application domains as well.
And the PIs will develop an interdisciplinary course on computational cognitive
science and one on user interfaces for neurocognitive
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve four thrusts. The PIs
will devise new human motion analysis and computer vision algorithms that can
automatically assess embodied cognition during structured physical activities,
and which will constitute a breakthrough in improving the accuracy and
efficiency of cognitive assessments of young children. Intelligent mining
techniques will be used to discover new knowledge about the role of physical
exercise in cognitive training and to find correlations between individual
metrics and degree of improvement over time. A methodology will be developed
using advanced multimodal sensing to collect and process huge amounts of
evidence based assessment data with intelligent mechanisms that learn about a
child's executive function capabilities and help uncover possible causes of
cognitive dysfunctions. And a closed loop cognitive assessment system will be
designed and implemented to understand and monitor a child's progress over time
and provide recommendations and decision support to cognitive experts so they
can make better treatment decisions.