* 1565937
* CRII: III: Children and Information Retrieval Tasks: Search Intent, Query Suggestions, and Adequate Online Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Maria Soledad Pera, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2019
* USD 174,973.00

Children are introduced to the Web at increasingly young ages. While early
exposure can help them build foundational skills vital in a knowledge-rich
society, search tools were not designed with children in mind nor do retrieved
results explicitly target children. Most engines do not support children's
inquiry approaches (or do not support them well) and typically do not return
content suitable to children's interests or reading levels. This need is
important to address given that early experiences can affect attitudes in using
the Web, skill development in making adequate use of resources for personal and
educational interests, and the ability to leverage information and use it to
make contributions into adulthood. The PI and her team will design and develop
software modules as search engine add-ons to meet the needs of children
searching the Web. The modules, which will upgrade current computation
infrastructure, will be domain-independent, tailored to children, and usable on
Google, to locate child-friendly educational- and leisure-related information.
Research outputs will facilitate children's engagement with technology by
improving their interactions on the Web. The proposed work can potentially
further computer science research across a wide range of possible applications
to impact the development of increasingly essential research and analysis skills
among the general population of K-9 school-aged children and the underserved.
Partnerships with Idaho K-9 classrooms will allow the research team to gather
feedback from children and teachers and verify the usefulness of the proposed
modules in their intended, formal setting. An underrepresented minority in
computer science, the female, Hispanic PI will recruit and mentor female and/or
Hispanic graduate student researchers. The team will disseminate research
results at interdisciplinary conferences, and make educational material produced
as part of the research effort available to teachers.

The proposed work will advance computer science research and technology and
benefit childhood instruction across a wide variety of ages and domains. It will
also address three significant problems in web information retrieval for
children: search intent, query suggestion, and information filtering. Common
Core state standards of education and online sources will help define target
content areas. Together, the proposed modules offer children a way to post
(natural language) queries that overcome common search challenges. The proposed
modules will: (1) identify search intent on-the-fly given a child's natural
language or keyword query; (2) suggest queries based on keywords and phrases in
child vocabulary lists, literature, content written by children, and subject
areas appealing to youngsters; and (3) filter results to meet readability and
suitability levels as well as domain categories that children prefer.
Researchers will conduct studies to verify module usefulness and measure the
degree to which search environments enhanced with these modules can benefit
educational tasks. The team will also integrate research and education by
facilitating student research, advancing current technology, and contributing to
the specific needs of children. For further information see the project web
page: http://cs.boisestate.edu/~sole/web/index.html#projects