* 1565511
* What are the seismic expressions of deep thermal and thermochemical plumes?
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jeroen Ritsema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 194,195.00

Hawaii and Iceland are classic examples of volcanic islands associated with
dynamical upwellings (i.e., plumes) from the deep mantle. Plumes form naturally
and abundantly in laboratory simulations of Earth convection. Yet, there is no
consensus among Earth scientists whether rising plumes exist in the Earth. The
burden is on seismologists to find expressions of plumes in seismic data. This
proposal is aimed at identifying how physically plausible thermal and
thermochemical plumes may perturb seismic waves and how these perturbations can
be found in seismic data. The project will support one PhD student. The research
expands an ongoing international collaboration that provides important
international experience to the PhD student at Michigan and the two students in
Europe who are directly involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
leverages significant investments made by the NSF in observational geophysics
(including EarthScope and dedicated seismic arrays) by using the available data
and providing a new, interdisciplinary investigation into the resolvability of
mantle plumes by observational geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
multidisciplinary expertise, the work in this proposal will develop high-
resolution simulations of plume formation and plume morphology and it will
quantify the expected plume signatures in seismic data. The research involves
computer simulations of thermal and thermochemical plume ascent, mineral physics
calculations of the seismic wave speed variations within plumes, and 3D
simulation of the distortion of the seismic wave field by plumes. Waveform and
traveltime tomography and receiver function analysis of simulated waveforms will
demonstrate how plumes are imaged tomographically and whether they produce
observable deflections of phase boundaries in the transition zone.