* 1565273
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scaling On-chip Networks to 1000-core Systems using Heterogeneous Emerging Interconnect Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/10/2015,07/31/2021
* Ahmed Louri, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 480,000.00

Power dissipation has become a fundamental barrier to scaling computing
performance across all platforms from handheld, embedded systems, to laptops, to
servers to data centers. Technology scaling down to the sub-nanometer regime has
aided the growth in transistors per chip that has made multi-core architectures
a power-efficient approach to harnessing parallelism and improving performance.
The computing capabilities of these multi-core architectures can be unleashed
only if the underlying Network-on-Chip (NoC) connecting the cores can provide
the required bandwidth within the power budget of the chip. However, the design
of power-efficient, low-latency and high-bandwidth NoCs using traditional
metallic interconnects that can scale to 1000 cores and beyond, is proving to be
a significant challenge of enormous proportions. Research has shown that
emerging technologies such as photonics and wireless have the potential to
alleviate the critical bandwidth, power, and latency challenges of future NoCs.
However, hybrid NoC designs taking advantages of both photonics and wireless
technologies have not been explored.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
proposes to lay the groundwork for completely re-thinking the NoC design and
proposes to explore heterogeneity of emerging interconnect technology for
designing performance scalable, and power-efficient NoCs. The overall objective
is to combine multiple technologies to achieve our challenging goals of (1)
scalability to 1000 cores, (2) power efficiency of at least a 50% power
reduction as compared to the state-of-the-art metallic interconnects, and (3)
high bandwidth and low latency across a wide variety of applications. First, at
the architecture level, optics will be deployed for short-range (&lt; 100 cores)
to improve local communication and wireless for long-range communication in
order to scale the number of cores to 1000 by providing sufficient global
bandwidth. Second, at the circuit level, hybrid transceiver architectures will
be explored to integrate novel ultra-low power wireless circuits based on
SiGe/BiCMOS technology with optical waveguides and ring-resonators to provide
the large bandwidth desired for kilo-core designs. Furthermore, wireless
communication requirements will be addressed by designing mm-wave/THz frequency
broadband and directional antennas based on advanced 3D printing technology.
This proposal describes a transformative and viable approach combining
technology, architecture, algorithms and applications research for designing
scalable and energy-efficient NoCs. The cross-cutting nature of this research
will foster new research directions in several areas, spanning
technology/energy-aware NoC design, novel computer architectures, and cutting-
edge modeling and simulations tools for emerging technologies.