* 1565978
* CRII:  CHS:  Perceptual Data-Guided Computational Design
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Marc Pomplun, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 186,706.00

Perception determines how humans interpret and make use of designs, and is
therefore an important consideration for design. This CRII project investigates
how perceptual data can be used to guide computational design processes. As a
showcase, the PI will investigate how visual perception data obtained from
virtual environments can be used to devise novel computational approaches
capable of analyzing, visualizing and modeling the human affordance aspects of
given architectural layouts. Such approaches can be applied for generating
functional layout designs for a variety of built environments, to enhance
movement comfort, efficiency, productivity and safety. The proposed research
will bring broad impacts on improving transportation, tourism, commerce and
public safety. In addition, the PI will contribute by disseminating the
collected visual perception datasets; organizing vision and cognition workshops
regularly; mentoring a team of undergraduate, master and PhD students to conduct
research, including minority students whom the PI will mentor via the McNair
Scholars Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI will set up a
virtual reality platform equipped with eyetracking capabilities for studying
human visual perception and reactions towards different geometric, spatial and
semantic features in 3D environments. The collected data will form the basis for
developing a 3D scene analysis tool which designers can use to visualize and
understand the effects of layout designs on human visual perception and people
flow, to make informed design choices. Designers can also easily obtain
ergonomic design suggestions via suggestive interfaces driven by an optimization
component which considers multiple visual perception and human affordance
factors. Based on the visual perception data, an optimization approach will also
be devised capable of automatically generating and enhancing 3D layout designs.