* 1565402
* I-CORPS Teams: SMA/FRP Patches for Repair of Metallic Structures
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,08/31/2017
* Mina Dawood, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Steel and other metallic structures may be susceptible to cracking when
subjected to repeated loading. Various types of loads, such as waves, vibrations
due to machinery, wind-induced vibrations, traffic or other cyclic loads, can
induce gradual formation and growth of cracks at critical locations in these
metallic structures. Structures that are susceptible to be cracking can be found
in many sectors including industrial facilities, manufacturing, chemical
processing, marine and off-shore structures and vessels, pipelines,
transportation infrastructure, and energy-related infrastructure. Current
techniques to repair these cracks typically require welding or bolting. This
requires the use of heavy equipment, which may not be feasible when access to
the site is limited. Further, these operations may require a disruption of
service of the structure due to the formation of heat and sparks (which could
lead to explosion in some cases) or due to noise, which could adversely affect
occupants. This project will address these shortcomings by introducing a repair
technique that can be implemented without the use of heavy equipment and which
does not require welding or bolting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon fiber
reinforced polymer (CFRP) composite patches can be bonded to the surface of
cracked steel structures to bridge the cracks, thereby reducing the stress range
near the crack tip and increasing the fatigue life of the cracked element. The
benefit of these patches can be increased by prestressing the patches, such that
they induce compressive stresses near the crack tip and ahead of the crack
front. However, current techniques to prestress these composite patches
typically require the use of cumbersome and heavy fixtures and a stiff reaction
frame, which may be feasible in laboratory applications but impractical in the
field. The proposed study exploits the so-called shape memory effect of shape
memory alloy (SMA) wires to achieve this prestressing effect. By restraining the
thermally induced contraction of prestrained SMA wires and using carbon fibers
to bridge the crack, the proposed SMA/CFRP patches can substantially increase
the fatigue life of cracked steel elements. This technology has the distinct
advantages that it does not require the use of heavy equipment, and therefore
can be installed in locations where access is limited. Further, since the
installation does not require welding or otherwise generate sparks, high heat,
or open flames, it can be implemented with limited or no disruption of service.