* 1565060
* The AugSTEM Program: Informing Institutional Collaboration and Change to Prepare Juniors and Seniors for Careers in STEM
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Rebekah Dupont, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The AugSTEM Program: Informing Institutional Collaboration and Change to Prepare
Juniors and Seniors for Careers in STEM project at Augsburg College will extend
the successes of the AugSTEM Scholars program, which developed a cross-
disciplinary STEM cohort of upper-level students with targeted outreach to
community college transfers. The current S-STEM project extends the lessons
learned to institutional supports for all STEM students at Augsburg. This
project will support low-income students with a cohort of 20 scholars and will
provide 10 smaller scholarships to new transfer students or students who are
building their academic eligibility for AugSTEM through other college access
programs. Community college transfers and alumni of college access programs are
groups with high potential for participating in STEM, but may not be optimally
supported by institutional environments. This project will contribute to
understanding better ways to connect these groups with high-impact practices
such as undergraduate research and internships in ways that could be adapted to
other institutions. Collaboration between 2-year institutions, a 4-year
institution, and a work force preparedness program to support STEM retention,
student success and preparedness for the STEM work force are features of the
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because community college transfers and college
access program alumni are groups with high STEM potential who may not be
optimally supported by institutional environments, the project has goals to
explore institutionally transferrable ways to connect these groups with high-
impact practices such as undergraduate research and internships. This project
will develop qualitative and quantitative evidence grounded in the Common
Guidelines for Education Research and Development to inform institutional
support for STEM students, particularly those who have financial need, including
transfer students or those who participated in a college access program.