* 1565547
* UNM INFORMATION ASSURANCE SCHOLARSHIP FOR SERVICE
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2024
* Christos Christodoulou, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,302,609.00

The University of New Mexico (UNM) proposes to add four new cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity with strong application-oriented
experiences throughout the curriculum. The project will have an immediate impact
on the cybersecurity capabilities of the federal workforce by providing
graduates with general computing and security skills. The program's emphasis on
application-oriented experiences such as national cyber-competitions, courseware
development, fraud prevention audits, and K-12 outreach, will integrate
education and research. UNM is a Hispanic Serving Institution and it enrolls
more Native Americans than any other research university in the country.
Recruitment efforts will focus on attracting minority and female candidates. The
grant will enhance existing relationships with CyberCorps employers and increase
the number and variety of internships. The program results will be disseminated
widely to facilitate replication of unique curriculum features that produce
graduates who can successfully defend the nation's cyberspace by directly
addressing related technical, behavioral, organizational, and economic
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is graduating skilled cybersecurity
professionals with strong leadership skills and a commitment to public service.
The program integrates rigorous, hands-on learning with research, professional
development and outreach activities across a variety of cybersecurity fields and
related disciplines. SFS students participate in research projects with emphasis
ranging across technical, behavioral, organizational, and economic domains.
Program evaluation activities will include collecting quantitative and
qualitative data to refine the program and disseminating outcomes to academic
and professional communities. The instructional team includes nine cybersecurity
faculty members and a diverse group of supporting faculty representing a wide
range of academic departments at UNM and experts from industry. In addition to
the coursework, program components include: a research seminar co-designed by
UNM, Sandia National Laboratory and Intel Corporation which focuses on the
Theory of Inventive Problem Solving; monthly professional development workshops;
and an online learning community. CyberCorps(R) students will collaborate on
real-world projects with federal agency personnel to gain practical experience
and enhance internship and job placement prospects.