* 1565751
* CRII: NeTS: Towards the Design of a Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Network
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Abusayeed Saifullah, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2017
* USD 175,000.00

The objective of this project is to design highly scalable wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) for sensing and control applications over wide areas. WSNs face
significant scalability challenges due to the proliferation of emerging wide-
area wireless monitoring and control systems (e.g., urban sensing, large civil
infrastructure monitoring, oil field management) that require thousands of
sensors be connected over long distances. Due to their short communication
range, existing WSN technologies face critical challenges in terms of energy,
cost, and complexity to achieve scalability in wide-area deployments. To address
this limitation, this project proposes a scalable sensor network architecture -
called Sensor Network Over White Spaces (SNOW) - by designing sensor networks to
operate over the TV white spaces, which refer to the allocated but unused TV
channels. This project will lead to a new generation of WSN that will operate
over white spaces, enabling a broad range of applications that involve wide-area
monitoring and control. Besides its scientific impact across multiple subareas
of computer science, it will impact education, outreach, and diversity. The
scientific contributions of the project will be incorporated in various computer
science courses. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research and
hands-on experimental opportunities will attract diverse students to participate
in the project including women and under-represented students. The principal
investigator (PI) will leverage collaborations with industrial partners to
transfer the technology to industries for future WSN mote design and also will
work with standards bodies to standardize the technology to be developed in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the TV transmissions are in lower
frequencies (50-698 MHz), white spaces have excellent propagation
characteristics over long distances. Compared to the ISM band, they are less
crowded. Long range will reduce most WSNs to a single-hop structure that has
potential to reduce the complexity, overhead, and latency that existing WSN
technologies operating in 2.4GHz face due to multi-hop. SNOW hence can support
large-scale sensor deployments over wide areas. However, most WSN applications
need low data rate, low power nodes, and require scalability and energy
efficiency. The SNOW architecture achieves scalability and energy efficiency
through channel splitting and enabling simultaneous packet receptions with
single radio. The base station is power-rich and has a single transceiver that
uses available wide spectrum from white spaces. The spectrum is split into
narrow subcarriers that have longer range and that consume less power. The
sensor nodes transmit using their assigned sub-carriers asynchronously. The base
station is able to process multiple sub-carriers simultaneously. Enabling such
simultaneous receptions at a node is challenging as it requires a novel decoder
design. In the SNOW architecture, this is done through Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) that provides distinct orthogonal signals. The
contributions of this project will include: (1) the design of the physical layer
of SNOW that includes white space spectrum splitting into narrow band
subcarriers and a demodulator design that can decode simultaneous packet
receptions; (2) the design of the media access control protocol for SNOW that
handles subcarrier allocation among the nodes and their transmission scheduling;
(3) the implementation of the SNOW architecture on a prototype hardware, and
evaluation through realistic experiments.