* 1565646
* Quinone methide - based strategies for reversible modification, protection, and ligation of biological substrates and polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Vladimir Popik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2019
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vladimir Popik of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Georgia is developing new approaches for
modifying the structures of biological molecules and materials using light.
Methods utilizing light-directed reversible derivatization of biological
molecules would allow one to control their properties in time and in space.
Technological applications of such chemical methods may include drug delivery
materials and protein engineering. This project provides students with an
interdisciplinary training at the interface of synthetic chemistry,
photochemistry, and biochemistry. High school students are conducting summer
internships in the laboratory of Professor Popik through the University of
Georgia Young Dawgs Program, and they are experiencing modern scientific
research.

With previous NSF support Professor Popik developed a new family of photolabile
protecting groups and demonstrated the Diels-Alder and Michael reactivity of
photo-generated o-quinone methides. The strategy incorporates several desirable
features: the very fast release of a substrate, "bleaching" of the initial
chromophore, and the generation of a fluorescent marker or a different color.
Photochromic moieties add a built-in timer for photolabile protecting groups.
Professor Popik and his group are designing and synthesizing new o-quinone
methide precursors sensitive to long wavelengths of light. Also, they are
further studying the mechanism of o-quinone methide formation and the pH-
dependence of the thiol- quinone methide reaction kinetics. The pH-control of
cysteine labeling allows for selective derivatization of these residues in
multi-cysteine substrates, so they are applying these methods to the selective
derivatization of proteins under different conditions (pH, light, competing
nucleophiles) and examining the reversibility of the protein modification. Based
upon this chemistry, Professor Popik is also exploring the feasibility of using
o-quinone methide derivatives as protease inhibitors.