* 1565842
* TiO2 Photocatalysis: The coupling of electrons, plasmons, polarons, and molecules by ultrafast photoemission spectroscopy and theory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 714,439.00

Titanium dioxide (Ti02) is a model system for solar energy capture and transfer
to drive chemical processes. The material has the ability to absorb ultraviolet
(UV) light and use it to assist in, or catalyze, the decomposition of water
(H2O) to hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases, which can be stored and later
combined to produce energy on demand. The material can also catalyze the
reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2), a greenhouse gas that is the final product of
burning fossil fuels, and transform this environmentally harmful gas into useful
hydrocarbons for the chemical industry. Dr. Petek is engaged in fundamental
studies of how this material absorbs UV light to create electron-hole pairs and
how these electrons and holes are transported through the material and used to
effect chemical change for sustainable solar energy conversion. The fast speeds
of these reactions are measured in femtoseconds (1 femtosecond equals
0.000000000000001 second), and are studied by ultrafast laser spectroscopy. Dr.
Petek and his collaborator, Dr. Zhao, combine advanced ultrafast laser
spectroscopy experiments with theoretical calculations to understand these
photo-catalytic events. In addition to the broader impacts of the research to
contribute to the development of clean and efficient solar energy capture, there
are substantial educational benefits for the students involved in the project.
The collaborative arrangement that Dr. Petek has established with Dr. Zhao at
the University of Science and Technology China and her co-worker Dr. Min Feng at
Wuhan University provides excellent opportunities for students from the
University of Pittsburgh to work in the Chinese laboratories, as well as for
Chinese students to serve as summer interns in Dr. Petek's laboratory. To
broaden student participation in research, Dr. Petek uses the Pittsburgh Quantum
Initiative to recruit talented undergraduate students into research
assistantships. He is an ardent promotor of photocatalytic research, working to
organize of international symposia on the topic as well as serving in the role
of Editor-in-Chief of the journal Progress in Surface Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Petek and Dr. Zhao study the electron spectroscopy and
dynamics related to photocatalytic processes by means of time-resolved two-
photon photoemission (TR-2PP) experiments and advanced electronic structure
theory. The 2PP spectra and time resolved measurements reveal the polaronic
character of electrons introduced into the conduction band of TiO2, the
interaction of chemisorbed molecules with the polarons, and the unoccupied
resonances of chemisorbed molecules such as CO2. Dr. Petek conducts TR-2PP
experiments on noble metal decorated TiO2 surfaces to reveal the mechanisms of
plasmonically enhanced photocatalysis. In collaboration, Dr. Zhao performs
electronic structure calculations to identify the electron and hole acceptor
states, potentially involved in photocatalysis, for molecules adsorbed on TiO2
surface. In addition, nonadiabatic molecular dynamics calculations are used to
describe the interfacial charge transfer dynamics and carrier energy relaxation
rates for chemisorbed molecular overlayers at finite temperatures. The research
has broader impacts as it brings together experimentalists and theorists from
the University of Pittsburgh and University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC) to work on the fundamental aspects of sustainable solar energy conversion
via TiO2 photocatalysis. In addition to the broader impacts of the research,
there are substantial educational benefits for students involved in the
established collaborative project between the USTC and Wuhan University with the
University of Pittsburgh, which provides opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate student international exchange. To broaden student participation in
research, Dr. Petek uses the Pittsburgh Quantum Initiative to recruit talented
undergraduate students into research assistantships. He is an ardent promotor of
photocatalytic research, working to organize of international symposia on the
topic as well as serving in the role of Editor-in-Chief of the journal Progress
in Surface Science