* 1565765
* Probing the Metal-Carbon Bond: High Resolution Spectroscopy of Grignard Reagents and 3d Metal Carbon Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2020
* USD 466,028.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structures, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
Program, Professor Lucy M. Ziurys of the University of Arizona is exploring the
chemical structure and behavior of small, novel compounds that contain metal-
carbon bonds. Of particular interest are the so-called transition metal elements
like iron (Fe), copper (Cu), cobalt (Co) and titanium (Ti). Understanding how
metal elements interact and bond with carbon is pivotal to the advance of many
other areas of chemistry and technology, including organic and inorganic
chemical synthesis, catalysis, materials science, biochemistry, and even
astrochemistry. Using a microwave spectroscopy technique, Prof. Ziurys is
studying the arrangement of atoms and electrons in these model molecules. The
information obtained then provides important insights into larger, more complex
molecules and in developing theoretical predictions. The research involves a
collaborative team of experimentalists and theorists, with an emphasis on both
graduate and undergraduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ziurys is
studying the geometric and electronic properties of metal-bearing molecules
using high-resolution, gas-phase rotational spectroscopy techniques. The novel
species being studied are small, metal carbon clusters related to
metallocarbohedrenes and endohedral metallofullerenes, and classic Grignard-type
reagents. They are produced by gas-phase synthetic methods utilizing Broida
ovens, organometallic precursors, and laser ablation. In addition, a new
spectrometer is being built to further these studies. A program has been
established for undergraduate students from other, non-PhD granting institutions
to participate in this research project. The broader impacts of this work
include the development of millimeter/sub-millimeter experimental methodologies
that are applicable to analytical chemistry and the detection of trace species
in chemical mixtures. Additionally, this research is providing student training
in precision measurements and experimental techniques, theory, and synthesis
involving metals, all of which are skill sets relevant to the chemical,
catalysis, mining, medical, and semiconductor industries.