* 1565529
* CRII: CPS: Provably-safe Interventions for Human-Cyber-Physical Systems (HCPS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Sam Burden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 194,802.00

Human interaction with the physical world is increasingly mediated by autonomy,
as planes assist pilots, robots assist surgeons, and cars assist drivers.
Automation is introduced in such systems to aid humans and guarantee safety and
performance. However, such guarantees are hard to provide, since humans may
misunderstand the automation's intentions or behave in an unanticipated manner;
tragic examples like the crash of Air France flight 447 illustrate that such
confusion between pilots and autopilots can lead to catastrophic outcomes.
Although some applications may someday yield to full automation (e.g., cars can
already drive themselves in traffic), legal and ethical concerns related to
safety, accountability, and non-repudiation will ensure humans and autonomy must
be capable of handing off control authority at multiple levels in many such
systems for the foreseeable future. The principal investigator (PI) proposes to
flexibly deploy degrees of autonomy in the presence of human collaborators to
compensate for changes in task or environmental conditions. Though PI focuses on
robotic teleoperation for concreteness, the anticipated results will lead to
general principles that benefit a variety of CPS with humans in-the-
loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing safety and performance guarantees for any
system involving humans is a lofty goal. PI proposes to achieve this goal by (i)
targeting our effort on applications in robotic teleoperation and (ii)
integrating findings from multiple established academic disciplines, including
engineering disciplines like human factors and control theory that consider the
interaction between people and dynamic physical processes, as well as scientific
disciplines like neuromechanical motor control and behavioral game theory that
account for how humans interact individually and in groups. The proposed work
paves the way for provably-safe teleoperated robots distributed in an urban area
to provide services in transportation, manufacturing, telemedicine, and
emergency response by developing principles for predictive modeling and
automated interventions. Unlike the present day, where incompatibilities in aims
or means for humans and autonomy lead to performance degradation ranging from
significant to catastrophic, the proposed work envisions a future wherein humans
can be safely deployed amidst cyber-physical systems in society with high
confidence.