* 1565483
* Collaborative Research:  Perdigao--The Stable Boundary Layer over Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Fotini Chow, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 368,827.00

The lowest part of the atmosphere, known as the boundary layer, changes
character from being well-mixed with frequent air movement during the day to a
nocturnal state of stability and stratification. However, despite the overall
stability of the nocturnal boundary layer, there is still intermittent turbulent
air movement. This study will leverage a large field campaign effort in
Portugal, known as Perdigao, to study the stable boundary layer in complex
topography. Better understanding of turbulence and wind flow in complex terrain
will improve numerical weather models and support critical applications such as
air quality, aviation, wind energy, transportation, and climate modeling. The
project will also contribute to the education and training of the next
generation of scientists and the researchers will contribute to public literacy
of science through various outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Perdigao
field experiment is part of a large European campaign to improve the efficiency
of wind energy production. This award will bring in a basic research component
with a focus on studying the mechanisms controlling turbulence intermittency in
stable boundary layers in complex terrain. This will be a combined observational
and modeling effort, with additional observational data provided by the Univ. of
Colorado at Boulder's Tethered Lifting System (TLS) and three profiling Lidars.
The modeling component will make use of the WRF model with an immersed boundary
method (IBM) implemented in order to enable simulation over steep terrain
surfaces, and the model simulations will be able to nest down to 5m in the
horizontal and 0.5m in the vertical. The researchers plan to address the
following questions: (i) What is the structure of turbulence budgets, especially
turbulence dissipation rate, within and above the valley? How does it change
with the evolution of stability, particularly under stable conditions? (ii) What
mechanisms generate intermittency of the turbulence? How is the intermittent
turbulence within and above the valley represented in large-eddy simulations?
(iii) How are coherent structures affected by the wind turbine wake? How does
this influence intermittency? (iv) What physical parameterizations and numerical
techniques are needed to appropriately integrate mesoscale and microscale models
in complex terrain?