* 1565501
* Designing Enhanced Dispersion Force Effects Into Inorganic and Organometallic Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Philip Power, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2022
* USD 660,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Power. Professor Power and his group are developing new classes of
compounds to demonstrate the interaction of the groups (ligands) within a metal
complex. The new compounds differ from those currently known because they are
designed to display enhanced attractive London Dispersion Forces(LDFs) between
molecules. London Dispersion Forces strengthen the bonding and hence the
stability of their extended structures. The London Dispersion Forces describe
interactions between molecules rather than interactions between two atoms
(covalent bonds). To date, such forces have not generally been incorporated into
molecular design. The project is aimed at obtaining a fundamental understanding
of how such forces can be manipulated and exploited in chemical synthesis. The
project lies at the interface of inorganic, organic, and organometallic
chemistry. A variety of spectroscopic, structural, and computational techniques
are used to characterize the new compounds obtained. Besides training in
synthesis, the project exposes students to a variety of physico-chemical and
theoretical methods. The research project also includes outreach activities
designed to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic scientific objective of the
research is to design enhanced London Dispersion Forces into molecules so that
their effects can be calculated, measured, and used to synthesize previously-
unknown classes of molecules. The Power group plans to focus investigations on
alkyl boranes with rigid hydrocarbon substituents derived from inexpensive
natural products. They have already shown that the extended structures display
Lewis acidic properties very different from regular alkyl boranes as a result of
the attractive London Dispersion Force interactions. In addition, the Power
group investigates a variety of disproportionation and dissociation reactions in
both the main group and transition elements that are strongly influenced by LDF.
Examples involve the synthesis of the first stable, two-coordinate copper(II)
derivative. Normally, low-coordinate copper(II) compounds are unstable due to
auto-reduction to copper(I) species or copper metal. Using a ligand that favors
LDF interactions, the reverse reaction, auto oxidation, occurs so that a stable
two-coordinate copper(II) species is obtained from a copper(I) starting
material. A similar effect enables the synthesis of the first two-coordinate
vanadium(II) compound. The investigations have also shown that LDF effects are
important for the multiple-bonded heavier main group compounds, where such
effects usually exceed the weak element-element bonding. LDFs are responsible
for the stability of numerous multiple bonded heavier main group compounds.
Undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows are supported
through this award. The knowledge gained may be fundamental to our understanding
of bonding and how more complex structures are built.