* 1565796
* CRII: RI: Anytime Inference with Confidence Bounds for Graphical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Qiang Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 04/30/2018
* USD 157,670.00

Probabilistic graphical models are widely used throughout science and
engineering to solve difficult problems, understand large data sets, or make
predictions about complex phenomena. Making predictions or decisions out of
graphical models involves challenging #P-hard computational problems, and
efficient approximation methods are highly demanded. The most useful
approximations should give not only accurate estimates, but also (1) come with
tight and conservative error bounds and (2) can be improved continuously to
trade time for increased accuracy in a memory efficient and predictable way (an
"anytime" property). Such algorithms should allow us to solve easy problems with
strong certificates of accuracy, and also identify harder problems together with
clear guidance for further improvement. Unfortunately, most state-of-the-art
methods, including deterministic variational methods and Monte Carlo-based
methods, often do not fully satisfy these criteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a new generation of inference tools with tight non-
asymptotic confidence bounds and anytime property. Based on several key insights
that connect variational inference with non-asymptotic bounds of Monte Carlo,
the PI derives a spectrum of powerful methods that naturally integrate and
combine the advantages of these two approaches, providing a new foundation for
more reliable inference. The project also develops novel non-asymptotic error
bounds for advanced Monte Carlo methods such as annealed importance sampling
(AIS), based on which the researchers construct highly efficient estimates and
bounds built on the state-of-the-art AIS. The approaches are tested extensively
on various application domains, and provide practical guidance and open source
packages for practitioners. The new powerful anytime, error-aware inference
tools will lead much more reliable use of graphical models across different
application domains, greatly expanding our ability of reasoning over large
datasets and complex phenomena.