* 1565049
* Undergraduate Scholarships for Education Excellence in Environmental Engineering and Water Resources Management (USE4WRM)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2022
* krishnakumar nedunuri, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2022
* USD 650,000.00

The Undergraduate Scholarships for Education Excellence in Environmental
Engineering and Water Resources Management (USE4WRM) project will provide
scholarships to the academically talented and low-income Water Resources
Management (WRM) and Environmental Engineering (ENE) undergraduate students at
Central State University (CSU). The USE4WRM project will utilize targeted
enrollment of academically prepared students to improve retention and graduation
rates. The project aims to address the wide gap in enrollment of high school
graduates into college in the STEM fields between low-income and
underrepresented communities and the general population. Traditionally CSU has
attracted large numbers of underrepresented minorities and the program will lead
to the matriculation of a more diversified set of graduates in environmental
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USE4WRM program will recruit 14 high school
students into the ENE and WRM programs in two cohorts. Scholars will receive
scholarships, mentoring, advising, tutoring and personal development services
for four years. Under the guidance of faculty, each cohort will form a learning
community in which curricular and experimental learning experiences through
internships are shared. Academic performance indicators of the cohorts and the
scholar surveys will be used in program assessment. An external evaluator team
will evaluate the success of the program and will utilize data mining techniques
to analyze academic performance indicators of the cohorts and responses from the
surveys by students and faculty mentors. The research team will use this data to
answer the research questions, "Are the support systems planned, fully effective
for the average profile of the student in the program?" and "Are there
differences in the use of support systems based on the gender of the student?"
Results from this research will generate evidence regarding the efficacy of
existing recruitment and retention techniques. Knowledge gained within the ENE
and WRM programs will be extended and applicable to other STEM fields.