* 1565893
* RUI: Diruthenium Catalysts for the Silylation of Carbon-Hydrogen bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Robert Chin, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2021
* USD 202,257.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professors Chin and Hall. Professor Chin is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Northern Iowa, while
Professor Hall is a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at Texas
A&amp;M University. They are developing transition metal catalysts that
transform unreactive and low-value hydrocarbon molecules into synthetically
useful and valuable building blocks. These new building blocks (molecules) are
used in the creation of more complex structures like pharmaceuticals or fine
chemicals. The project has both synthetic and computational components. The
research involves undergraduate students from both universities. High school
students and teachers from the Cedar Valley in Iowa also participate in the
project. The participating high school teachers are able to incorporate the
principles of catalysis and kinetics from the research into their classroom
content. The results of this work are disseminated to the public and to the
broader chemistry community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
developing a series of diruthenium catalysts that cleave the unreactive Carbon
(C)-hydrogen (H) bond of a hydrocarbon while making a new C-silicon (Si) bond,
resulting in new triorganosilanes. Professors Chin and Hall are working to
better understand the mechanism of this reaction using synthetic, isotopic
labeling, kinetic, and computational methods. The synthetic work, performed at
the University of Northern Iowa, involves changing the bidentate ligands at the
ruthenium centers to diphosphines or nitrogen (N)-heterocyclic carbenes. In
addition, the synthesis and reactivity studies of possible reaction
intermediates like sigma-silane complexes and mu-silyl-eta2-silane complexes are
performed. This work is guided by the computational work of Professor Hall using
Density Functional Theory (DFT) at Texas A&amp;M University. The work involves
undergraduate researchers and local area high school teachers and students. The
participating high school teachers are able to incorporate the principles of
catalysis and kinetics from the research into their classroom content. The
results of this work are disseminated to the public and to the broader chemistry
community.