* 1565844
* The Molecular and Fitness Consequences of Spontaneous Mutation Accumulation Under Varying Intensities of Natural Selection
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Vaishali Katju, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 503,950.00

Mutation induces genetic variation. Genetic variation, in turn, fuels
evolutionary change. Experimental investigations into the rate and fitness
effects of spontaneous mutations are central to the study of evolution and
biology. Mutation accumulation (MA) experiments have been instrumental in
measuring the rate of origin of deleterious mutations. However, the vast
majority of MA studies to date are compromised by two major limitations: (i) the
use of phenotypic data to indirectly estimate key mutational parameters, and
(ii) the use of experimental lines maintained at a single, minimum effective
population size. Although population-genetics theory predicts a wide range of
fitness consequences for all classes of spontaneous mutations, their
distribution of fitness effects remains obscure. Furthermore, the loss or
fixation of mutations and their consequences for population fitness additionally
depend upon their individual effect and the efficacy of natural selection, the
latter being influenced by the population size. Spontaneous MA lines of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans were evolved in parallel over 400 generations at
three varying effective population sizes to manipulate the efficacy of natural
selection in different genomic backgrounds. This represents the most ambitious
experiment of its kind within any species. The combination of long-term
spontaneous MA lines under varying intensities of selection and use of powerful
high-throughput genomic techniques will enable unprecedented insights into (i)
the rates of origin of diverse mutations, (ii) their differential accumulation
under varying regimes of natural selection, and (iii) a framework to assess the
interaction between mutation and selection at the molecular level on a genome-
wide scale. The aims are to identify all acquired mutations at the mitochondrial
and nuclear level, investigate their differential rates of accumulation under
varying population sizes and infer their distribution of fitness effects.
Phenotypic fitness-assays will quantify the rate of fitness decay at different
population sizes and determine the extent to which larger populations are
buffered from mutational degradation. By providing a unified account of the
consequences of spontaneous mutations at the genetic and phenotypic levels, this
research will yield significant insights into the evolutionary process for
several different topics, including the genetic basis of variation, the
evolutionary dynamics of mutations under the forces of natural selection and
genetic drift, and their range of fitness effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The experimental lines provide an unprecedented resource to
study biological evolution at multiple scales, from phenotype to protein
function. The experimental MA lines created as part of this research and the
deposition of genome sequences in public databases represent an enormous
community resource to be shared with colleagues in the scientific community. In
addition to the training projects listed with individual aims, this project will
have broad impacts in two areas: academic training/mentorship and public
outreach in an environment with a large fraction of underrepresented minorities.
Data generated by the research will be (i) disseminated to high school students
and the general public via seminars and interactive panel discussions to
communicate its evolutionary implications and promote scientific literacy, and
(ii) employed in the creation of data sets and mini tutorials for high school
students to demystify molecular evolution and introduce them to basic
evolutionary computational methods for analyses of genomic sequences. The
University of New Mexico is the only research-intensive University that is also
Hispanic serving, with two extensive underrepresented student populations
comprising Hispanics and Native Americans. This provides a unique opportunity to
mentor undergraduate minority students, graduate students and postdocs, and
instill in them an appreciation for interdisciplinary research in population-
genomics and bioinformatics. Research stemming from this project is expected to
greatly enhance our fundamental understanding of the evolutionary process and
enable the quantification of several key rate parameters in biology, with
implications for all spheres of biology including an understanding of the
genetic and phenotypic consequences of maintaining populations at small sizes.