* 1565754
* Approaches to Diverse Fluoroorganics and Fluorinated Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Barbara Zajc, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Barbara Zajc in the Department of Chemistry at the City
College of the City University of New York. Professor Zajc and her students
develop novel methods for synthesis of fluorinated organic compounds.
Organofluorine compounds are of importance in diverse fields, including
agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals, materials sciences, and as biological probes.
Approximately one in five pharmaceuticals contains a fluorine atom. Fluorine-18
(18F) labeled organofluorine compounds are often used in medicine (for positron
emission tomography (PET) imaging). As an example, 2-deoxy-2-(18F)-D-glucose is
commonly used in brain imaging. Organofluorine compounds are also rapidly
gaining importance as Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) contrast agents - also
used in the diagnosis of disease. 19F MRI is being studied for brain imaging,
for instance, visualizing amyloid plaque formation in Alzheimer's disease.
Development of novel methods for the efficient synthesis of organofluorine
compounds, which is the focus of this funded project, is therefore of strong
interest. Students in Professor Zajc's research group are of diverse ethnicity
and from an international community. Research projects are designed for training
students at all educational levels, in order to provide experience in an area of
societal relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique and valuable properties of
organofluorine compounds make them important in a range of scientific areas.
However, selective introduction of fluorine atoms into organic molecules
continues to be challenging. This project develops novel chemical approaches to
various classes of regiospecifically fluorinated compounds - those containing
chiral centers. Some of the molecules developed may have a direct impact on
studying neurodegenerative disorders. The approaches undertaken here focus on
modular assemblies using new fluorinated building blocks. Where applicable, the
role of fluorine on reactivity is studied. Due to the widespread importance of
organofluorine compounds in medicinal and biological chemistry, including
diagnostics such as the study of brain disorders using 19F MRI imaging, this
research may have impact in areas beyond chemical synthesis. The research
activities involve education and training of students from diverse ethnic
groups, including those that are underrepresented in the sciences. The City
College of New York has a large minority student population, and their education
and training has an impact on a diversified workforce.