* 1565604
* CRII: CHS: WiFi-Based Human Behavior Sensing and Recognition System for Aging in Place
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Mi Zhang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 171,643.00

As "baby boomers" age, the United States will experience considerable growth in
its elderly population over the coming years. Studies consistently confirm that
the majority of older adults would prefer to remain in their own homes for as
long as possible. Therefore, there is a critical need for home-based assisted
living technologies capable of continuously yet unobtrusively monitoring
activities of daily living (ADLs) and detecting abnormal events, both to reduce
the cost of elder care and to enhance the quality of life. Current human
behavior monitoring systems for aging in place, which are typically based on
cameras, smartphone/wearable devices, or ambient sensors, have fundamental
limitations such as high cost and invasion of privacy that prevent them from
being widely deployed. The PI's objective in this project is to build on his
prior work to establish a research program to investigate a new approach to
aging in place that harnesses the now-ubiquitous commercial home WiFi signals to
monitor ADLs and detect abnormal events. The central idea is that different
human activities cause different changes in WiFi signals; by analyzing these
changes, the activity that caused the change can be recognized. This work will
have broad societal impact both within the United States and abroad, by
contributing to new techniques and systems for WiFi-based human behavior sensing
and recognition in both single-subject and multi-subject scenarios. If the new
system is effective, it will provide a non-intrusive, device-free, low-cost and
privacy-preserving assisted living technology for aging in place. The PI will
integrate research results from this project into both his undergraduate and
graduate courses, as well as the K-12 education program; furthermore, the
hardware and software developed in this research will be open-source, and the
dataset collected during this project will be made available to others for
further research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to exploit the fine-grained
PHY layer Channel State Information (CSI) extracted from the WiFi signals as the
basis for a unified scheme for monitoring both the most common stationary and
moving activities performed daily by older adults in their homes. He will detect
stationary activities by tracking the minute but periodic chest movements caused
by breathing, and he will extract frequency domain features to robustly
recognize the same moving activity even with different movement directions or at
different locations. The PI will develop Markov models to recognize complex
ADLs, and he will leverage the breathing and physical body movement information
to detect abnormal behaviors including accidental falls and disturbed sleep that
are potential issues relating to aging in place. Ultimately, the PI will extend
his techniques to recognize ADLs of multiple persons performed at the same time.
To successfully achieve these objectives, the PI will need to overcome a number
of significant technical challenges, for example detecting minute changes in the
WiFi signal due to stationary activities such as working at a computer or
watching TV while seated on a sofa. Robustly recognizing the same moving
activity (e.g., housecleaning) performed in different ways or at different
locations will also be tricky, because different movement directions or
different layouts at different locations cause different disturbances to WiFi
signals.