* 1565280
* RUI:   Reactions of Aminopyrroles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael De Rosa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,944.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
project by Professor Michael De Rosa in the Department of Chemistry at Penn
State-Brandywine. Professor De Rosa studies the synthesis and chemical reactions
of a particular class of compounds called aminopyrroles. These molecules are
comprised of a ring of carbon atoms with two nitrogen atoms, one within a five-
membered ring and one attached as a substituent to the ring. Professor De Rosa
uses aminopyrroles are to synthesize more complex molecules that contain two or
three rings. These new reactions are important in organic chemistry because they
enable efficient and selective transformation of simple molecules to three-
dimensional molecules of greater complexity. Many biologically active molecules
and pharmaceuticals have three-dimensional structures similar to those
constructed by these reactions. More generally, developments in organic
chemistry advance the fields of biology, medicine, and materials, as well as
promoting economic development and environmental sustainability. Undergraduate
student research training performs an indispensable role in the growth of
students into scientists. Professor De Rosa works with undergraduate students in
this project and prepares them to continue their training in four-year chemistry
degree programs and beyond.

Aminopyrroles are electron rich substances that were prepared for the first time
by Professor De Rosa and his student coworkers. As a consequence of their novel
electronic structure, aminopyrroles act as dienophiles in inverse-electron
demand Diels-Alder (IEDDA) cycloaddition reactions with azines (azadienes).
Complex heterocyclic ring systems are thus rapidly prepared from simple readily
available aminopyrroles in good yield and with minimal organic waste. These
reactions yield novel heterocycles that are not readily prepared using current
methods. This chemistry provides new metal free routes to complex heterocyclic
systems, a goal of green chemistry. The possibility that aminopyrroles can be
used in multicomponent reactions also is being explored. This research project
is carried out in collaboration with undergraduate students, providing valuable
experience to enhance their career preparation.