* 1565276
* Spectroscopic studies of ions and metal-containing molecules and complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stewart Novick, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2021
* USD 509,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemistry Structure and Mechanisms-A Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professors Stewart Novick of Wesleyan University and
Stephen Cooke of SUNY Purchase are using a microwave spectroscopy technique to
study the interactions of hydrogen gas molecules (H2) and other small molecules
that contain metal atoms. These studies seek to advance our understanding of how
atoms interact to form molecules, and how molecules interact with each other.
The Novick-Cooke team is also exploring other molecular systems, including those
containing atoms of the so-called actinide elements, which contain many
electrons and may form unusual chemical bonds and carbon-containing molecules
with missing electrons (making them positive ions) which are implicated in
molecule formation in the interstellar medium. This project involves graduate,
undergraduate and post-doctoral researchers. The laboratory shared by Novick and
Cooke is opened to many scientific visitors, allowing them to perform
experiments that would be impossible for them in their home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecules, ions, and complexes
are produced either by laser ablation or pulsed high voltage discharges coupled
with supersonic expansion. The studies on these complexes, ions, and molecules
are performed with the exquisitely sensitive and powerful high resolution
technique of pulsed-jet Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectroscopy. The
investigations of the intermolecular interactions between molecular hydrogen and
transition metal compounds, for example the complexes H2-CuF, H2-CuCl, H2-AgCl,
and H2 AuCl and have found that the bond strengths are surprisingly large (60 -
160 kilojoules per mole). The bonding is found to be very anisotropic but yet
the hydrogen maintains its molecular identity in all the complexes studied. The
detailed spectra, geometry and binding of H2 with CuO, ZnO, ZnS, AgF, and AuF
are being investigated. The positive ion studies include the so-called Zundel
ion, protonated water dimer, where the highest level calculations have the
proton shared half-way between the two waters. Also being studied are uranium-
and thorium-containing molecules where the f-electrons play an important role in
the bonding.