* 1565649
* Metal Coordination Compounds as Reporters for Biological NO, HNO, and S-Nitrosothiols
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Stephen Lippard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2018
* USD 648,261.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen J. Lippard of the
Department of Chemistry at Massachusetts Institute of Technology explores
transition metal-mediated reactions of nitric oxide (NO), nitroxyl (HNO), and
S-nitrosothiols, three distinct but chemically related biological signaling
agents. The project elucidates physiological and pathological actions of NO and
HNO, with impacts on chemistry, biology, neuroscience, and medicine. The Lippard
group actively supports gender and ethnic diversity, as well as the mentoring
and training of underrepresented minorities in science at undergraduate,
graduate, and postgraduate levels. Professor Lippard participates in workshops
and lectures that instill excitement for bioinorganic chemistry.

Metal coordination chemistry is central to many of the transformations involved
in the biological synthesis and signal transduction of NO. The research
investigates and exploits the underlying mechanisms of these actions in order to
unravel the cellular crosstalk between NO and its derivatives HNO and
S-nitrosothiols. Specifically, three directions are pursued. First, the
chemistry of NO and HNO with synthetic metal derivatives of macrocyclic and
tripodal ligands are utilized to inform the design of next generation
fluorescent probes. At the same time, the putative interconversion of NO and HNO
in biology is investigated with biomimetic models of copper-zinc (Cu-Zn)
superoxide dismutase. Second, metal-based fluorescent sensors for NO and HNO are
made ratiometric, reversible, rapid, and near-IR-emitting. These features enable
analyte quantitation, dynamic monitoring of signaling events, response rates on
the physiological time scale, and deeper tissue imaging, respectively. Third,
Cu(II)- or Zn(II)-promoted transnitrosation reactions are explored with the aim
of obtaining the first fluorescent sensor for direct detection of
S-nitrosothiols in biological media.