* 1565925
* Spin Dynamics of Photogenerated Multi-Spin Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Michael Wasielewski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 09/30/2019
* USD 509,875.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael R. Wasielewski of the
Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University is developing new molecules
with controllable spin transport properties. These molecules target new
information processing strategies and take advantage of the quantum nature of
electron spin. This work may lead to advanced computer technologies with broad
applications throughout society. The use of organic materials and bio-inspired
approaches to achieve this goal offers the possibility of developing new
structures that are not only versatile, but are cost effective and
environmentally benign as well. The group has an ongoing relationship with local
middle and high schools through a partnership with the Office of STEM Education
Partnership (OSEP) at Northwestern University. Working with OSEP, they are
developing educational materials useful in teaching and for incorporating
research into learning and education. Additionally, regular 1-2 day professional
development workshops are held and week-long job shadowing experiences for
teachers are implemented to provide a multiplier effect in connecting students
to the rich learning resources at Northwestern University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fast photo-initiated electron transfer within covalently-
linked organic donor-acceptor molecules having specific donor-acceptor distances
and orientations results in the formation of spin-correlated radical pairs
(SCRPs) having well-defined initial spin configurations and magnetic
interactions. Time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and pulse-EPR
spectroscopy are used to manipulate, control, and observe these coherent spin
states. This new research investigates how spin sharing over multiple radical
sites influences coherence dephasing in SCRPs; how electron transfer from a
photo-excited stable radical to a distant site affects spin coherence; how
coherent spin states can be propagated over long intramolecular distances using
SCRPs; and how a photo-generated SCRP can produce transient spin frustration and
propagate spin coherence within a three-fold symmetric molecular system. The
project lies at the interface of organic, physical, and materials chemistry, and
is therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This
group is also well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and
training for students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving
K-12 students and their teachers are part of the project.