* 1565422
* I-Corps: Icing Detection System
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2016
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Ice accumulation causes accidents and disruptions in transportation activities
around the globe. Roadway ice often occurs in ways that are difficult for
drivers to detect. Similarly, airborne icing conditions are hazardous and occur
in ways that are difficult for pilots to detect. Current motor vehicles and
general aviation ice detection systems are merely simple notifications that the
air temperature is near or below the freezing temperature of water.
Unfortunately, measurements of temperature alone are not capable of detecting
the presence of hazardous icing conditions. Commercial airplanes have more
complex icing detection systems, but unfortunately they measure ice accumulation
on probes away from the areas in which ice accumulation can create hazardous
flight conditions. This I-Corps team has developed a simple optical system
capable of detecting hazardous icing on roads, and capable of detecting icing
hazardous ahead of aircrafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of this project
is to implement the icing detection technology developed at the University of
Michigan into existing cameras and investigate what the best adoption pathway
for it is. A proof-of-concept prototype of a simple system capable of detecting
slippery black ice on roads, bridges, and runaways will be developed. A system
capable of warning drivers about the presence of&lt;br/&gt;slippery black ice on
roads can be fabricated using existing cameras and optical detectors. At night,
light sources covering the spectral range of interest can be used to illuminate
bridges, roads and runways. Once icing is detected, alerts can be displayed on
monitors or via warning lights. As part of this project, a proof-of-concept
prototype will be demonstrated to potential customers.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
technology has been tested successfully in the laboratory and outdoors. It can
be implemented in existing motor vehicle cameras, web cameras currently used to
monitor roads, and in existing aircrafts' camera systems.