* 1565471
* Dynamics and Vibrational Spectroscopy of Ionic Liquids Mixtures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Steven Corcelli, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2020
* USD 464,036.00

In this project co-funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
and the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods programs of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Steven Corcelli (University of Notre Dame) is
using molecular dynamics simulations and theoretical analysis to investigate the
structure and dynamics of ionic liquids. Ionic liquids are a technologically
important class of materials that enjoy unique physical and chemical properties.
These properties can be designed for specific applications by modifying the
molecular ions in the liquid, or by forming mixtures of ionic liquids with other
solvents. Potential applications of ionic liquids include CO2 capture and
sequestration, batteries, solar cells, and reduction of environmentally toxic
gases as a production of combustion.

This project focuses on the ionic liquids that contain small molecular solutes
that serve as spectroscopic reporters. The solutes span a range of different
sizes, shapes, and physical interactions with the surrounding ionic liquid, and
each solute contains a vibrational reporter that is sensitive to its local
environment. The simulations and subsequent theoretical analysis connect
directly to experimental measurements to provide a molecular-level
interpretation. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal
benefits from the discovery of improved task-specific ionic liquids for
applications in the production of environmentally clean and renewable energy and
separation processes. The research program also provides broad training
opportunities for graduate students and undergraduate students in theoretical
and computational chemistry, including students from underrepresented groups.