* 1565979
* CRII: CPS: Towards an Intelligent Low-Altitude UAS Traffic Management System
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Peng Wei, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 174,998.00

The objective of this project is to provide theoretical foundations for cyber-
physical systems to support the increasing autonomy in the presence of other
manned/unmanned air traffic. Currently the United States air transportation is
facing significant challenges due to the rapid evolution of increasingly
autonomous systems such as unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and their expanding
presence. However, there has been little scientific investigation on the cyber-
physical systems that supports unmanned aircraft operations operating in the
presence of other air vehicles. This research project explores novel strategies
of coordinating and managing the UAS traffic to ensure low-altitude airspace
safety and efficiency in near future. This will also help to catalyze additional
cyber-physical systems research in related areas including aviation
infrastructures, navigation and surveillance devices, and unmanned aerial
vehicle technologies. The investigator will work with Iowa State University
Extension and Outreach Office to promote UAS applications in precision
agriculture, aviation safety and responsible uses of
UAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical aspect of the research will leverage
interdisciplinary methodologies in the fields of optimization, artificial
intelligence, and control. The project designs algorithms, implements software
and demonstrates proof-of-concept using low-altitude UAS traffic management as a
challenge application area. This project establishes an unmanned air system
traffic simulation platform, which can be used to validate new methods and
tools, and enable collaborations with government, industrial and academic
partners. The research outcomes are expected to provide a framework to
investigate the feasibility, safety, efficiency and potential benefits of the
increasing autonomy in civil aviation.