* 1565673
* Chemisorbed Aromatic Hydrocarbons on Coinage Metal Surfaces:Formation and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Barbara Hinch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 488,800.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms of the
Chemistry division. The project investigates the properties of charged organic
molecules (organic ions) on metal surfaces. The fundamental studies performed in
the group of Professor B.J Hinch at Rutgers University, are aimed at
understanding how ionic molecules can be strongly bound to metal surfaces, and
yet also display high mobilities on the surfaces. Understanding mechanisms
behind the motion of molecules along surfaces is of significance to lubrication
processes, as well as to the formation of ordered molecular films that can be
employed in molecular electronic devices. International and interdisciplinary
collaborations are also underway to develop respectively theoretical
understanding and electronic characterization of the
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program realizes ionically-bound planar
aromatic chemisorbates, on electronically significant Cu, Ag and Au surfaces,
through exposures of volatile non-aromatic molecular precursors. Thermal
stability and hydrogenation processes are studied with temperature programmed
desorption. Diffusivities, mutual interaction strengths, correlations of dynamic
motion, lateral ordering, are explored with helium atom scattering. DFT
calculations performed in collaboration with Prof. Steve Jenkins, (Cambridge,
UK.) elucidate the potential energy surfaces of the mobile species and
anticipated electronic structure. Valence shell and core level spectra studies
are undertaken in collaboration with Prof. Robert Bartynski, (Physics Dept.,
Rutgers University.) A new ionizer design for time-of-flight He energy analysis
is being developed. This technology has applications in all time-resolved mass
spectroscopies. The experiment design, measurements, local and international
collaborative projects, and instrumental development present challenging
training experiences at all levels of study. Broader outreach programs include
involvement of high school students in applications of new instrumentation, and
development of future collaborative projects with emerging academic research
programs.