* 1565981
* RUI: A New Paradigm for the Design of Fluorescent Anion Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Robert Hancock, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism B
program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Hee-Seung Lee and Robert Hancock
of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of North
Carolina, Wilmington are developing new types of sensors that emit light in the
presence of specific ions. In particular, they are exploring a new design
principle for efficient "turn-on" fluorescent sensors that exploits a
fluorescent molecule competing with the anion for an interaction with a metal
atom. The project brings together various subfields of chemistry and provides
many opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in high level
research. Fluorescent probes have become indispensable tools in modern biology
and biotechnology because they provide real time information concerning the
quantity of ions or molecules of interest within the living cell. Thus, the
anion sensors developed in this project may spur significant advances in our
understanding of cell biology.

In tethered fluorescence sensors, a key factor in quenching fluorescence is
metal-fluorophore pi-contact. Disruption of these pi-contacts by coordination of
target anions leads to restoration of fluorescence that can be exploited to
develop efficient "turn-on" anion sensors. New ligands are being synthesized and
the complexes of these ligands with a variety of metal ions are being evaluated
as the basis of anion sensors. Different fluorophores are being examined to
identify their ability to form pi-contacts with metal ions. Anions of
biological, biomedical, and environmental interest such as nitrate are being
studied. An integral part of this project is the use of density functional
theory (DFT) and time-dependent DFT to understand the fluorescence quenching by
metal ions and the ability of metal-ligand complexes to act as anion sensors.