* 1565843
* Designing and characterizing highly selective heterogeneous catalysts for hydrodeoxygenating bio-oils
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Rachel Austin, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 07/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The majority of waste streams, including industrial timber by products and
municipal solid waste, are generally environmentally and economically
burdensome; yet they have the potential to serve as starting materials from
which fuels, medicines and other consumer products can be made. However, a
number of chemical reactions are required to transform these waste materials
into something useful. Among the most challenging chemical changes needed are
reactions that remove excess oxygen atoms from the waste material. Our team
designs catalysts, materials that aid in a reaction by improving speed,
selectivity and/or energy requirements, but do not themselves become consumed in
the reaction. We are actively developing, characterizing and testing catalysts
that use hydrogen gas to remove excess oxygen from oils made from these waste
streams. Our team combines expertise in making catalysts and controlling their
structure at the molecular level, identifying the type of reaction products that
result, optimizing the reactor process for greater efficiency, and theoretical
modeling to understanding the behavior of solid catalysts and the reactions they
control. Together, we are able to design and study a wide range of catalysts
selected to test specific ideas about how optimal catalysts for this reaction
work and also to lead us towards the design of better and more environmentally
friendly catalysts that use earth-abundant metals. Broader impacts of the
research include environmental benefits of eliminating waste and economic
benefits of producing a chemical fuel and feedstock source from waste products.
All members of our team are committed to diversifying the scientific workforce
and are engaged in activities to recruit and retain in our laboratories members
of groups historically underrepresented in scientific fields. We engage in
active curriculum reform, and cases drawn from current scientific efforts to
improve the sustainability of energy production form the foundation of the newly
redesigned General Chemistry course at Barnard College, an all-women's college
in New York City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, Drs. Austin,
Frederick, Grabow, and Schwartz are supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program at NSF to test the hypothesis that
catalytic materials suitable for highly selective hydrodeoxygenation (HDO)
reactions that cleave C-O bonds require: (1) a metal that can adsorb and split
H2; and (2) an amphoteric support that can serve as a proton shuttle from the
metal to the substrate to weaken the C-O bond. If confirmed, the results from
this work could alter the current paradigm invoking support reducibility rather
than its amphoteric character. A series of supported metal catalysts is being
synthesized and characterized using a variety of experimental and computational
methods. These catalysts are used to catalyze HDO reactions of phenol-derived
model compounds, including some isotopically-labeled substrates, with hydrogen
gas. The products of the HDO reactions are analyzed by gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) measurments. Density functional theory (DFT) is used to
calculate reaction energy profiles, which are then compared to experimental data
to propose detailed catalytic reaction mechanisms. Broader impacts of the
research include environmental benefits of eliminating waste and economic
benefits of producing a chemical fuel and feedstock source from waste products.
Student exchange between four very different labs: a computational lab at the
University of Houston, a chemical engineering lab and a physical chemistry lab
both at the University of Maine, and an inorganic catalysis lab at an all
women's liberal arts college in New York City, will facilitate the broad
development of students working on this project. Significant curriculum
development, using cases from this work and from other research on sustainable
energy development, forms the basis of a problem-based general chemistry course
that serves approximately 150 female Barnard College students each year.