* 1565980
* Development of rare-event sampling techniques for predicting structures and free energies of crystal polymorphs and oligopeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Mark Tuckerman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2020
* USD 580,000.00

Mark Tuckerman of New York University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to
develop methods and software for the prediction of molecular crystal structure.
This award is cofunded by the CISE/ACI Software Reuse Venture Fund. In the
science of materials, ordered arrays of molecules forming structures known as
molecular crystals play an essential role in the pharmaceutical, electronics,
and defense industries. Often, the crucial question is which crystals should be
made for a particular application. It is worth noting that one of the most
widely used pharmaceutical molecular crystals, aspirin, was discovered
essentially by accident. Typically, in crystal engineering, it is necessary to
screen large databases of potential candidate compounds. Unfortunately, making
and characterizing molecular crystals in the laboratory is generally time
consuming and costly, rendering a trial-and-error approach through such a
database impractical. How many more important molecular crystal systems might be
discovered if a systematic, targeted approach could be applied? Theory and
computation, which can, in principle, rapidly predict molecular crystal
structures and their properties, are uniquely poised to play a key role in
creating such a targeted approach. What is needed, however, are robust
algorithms for making these predictions. The Tuckerman group develops
computational techniques and software for predicting the crystal structures a
given compound can form and ranking them according to a thermodynamic property
known as free energy, which has been recognized in the scientific community as
the proper figure of merit for such a ranking but has remained an elusive
property to determine. The Tuckerman group also adapts these algorithms for
studying the conformational preferences of short chains of amino acids known as
oligopeptides in order to explore the role these important biological molecules
play in immunogenicity and the design of new classes of pharmaceuticals.
Tuckerman and his coworkers are engaged in many software activities including
developing a computer package for crystal structure prediction, improving the
efficiency of their molecular dynamics software, PINY-MD and continuing to
contribute software to many community software codes. All of the software
developed in this project is made available to the broader research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic properties of molecular materials in the solid
state are often strongly influenced by the details of their crystal structures
and the existence of polymorphs. Experimental determination of these structures
is costly and time-consuming, which places increased importance on the role of
theory and computation. Similarly, the biochemical function of small
oligopeptides, from immunogenicity to inhibition, is affected by their
equilibrium conformations in different environments. Computational prediction of
structure in complex systems such as these is challenging due to the so-called
rare-event sampling problem on a rough potential energy landscape, which arises
when attempting to study the equilibrium thermodynamics and kinetics of many
complex systems. Roughness on an energy surface refers to the existence of high
barriers to conformational and structural changes. The Tuckerman group has
proposed to develop robust free-energy based enhanced sampling algorithms and
software for overcoming the rare-event problem that arises in the crystal
structure prediction and conformational sampling of oligopeptides, thereby
allowing favored structures to be identified and thermodynamically ranked in an
efficient manner. In the proposed methods, the free energy landscape is
expressed in terms of select set of collective variables (CVs) designed to
distinguish the different structural motifs in these systems. The CVs are first
be subject to new surface navigation techniques in order to identify the minima
and saddles points, collectively referred to as "landmarks" on the landscape,
and then targeted for enhanced sampling in order to produce the free energy
ranking of the landmarks. The new techniques are applied to predict the crystal
structures and polymorphs of both rigid and flexible small organic molecules, to
study the conformational free energy landscape of an immunogenic peptide binding
to the major histocompatibility complex, and to understand the influence of
mechanical force on the unfolding mechanism of Ã¢-hairpin peptide. Software
creation will be accelerated via hackathons organized by the Tuckerman group.
Education of students in rare-event methods is aided through workshops organized
at New York University's global campus sites. Finally, the Tuckerman group
reaches out to underrepresented groups via national organizations having a
presence in New York City in order to help devise and participate in STEM-
related educational activities.