* 1565314
* CSR: Large: VarSys: Managing Variability in High-Performance Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Layne Watson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2019
* USD 1,189,778.00

The usefulness of the smallest mobile system in a pocket and the largest and
fastest supercomputers in datacenters around the world require unrelenting
advances in systems software design. These advances make computers faster, more
reliable, more secure, better able to analyze large data sets, and ultimately
essential to the lives of nearly everyone on the
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variability can wreak havoc on the performance of
large-scale computer systems that support high-performance computing and
e-commerce. In high-performance computing, variability threatens U.S.
competitiveness and our ability to achieve exascale performance within the cost
and energy constraints of supercomputers. In e-commerce (e.g., Amazon and Wall
Street trading), variability threatens profit margins by requiring greater
capital expenditures to compensate for potential swings in the performance of
datacenters and the cloud. System variability also impairs our capacity to
separate malware from normal system activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop techniques to increase the ability to identify and manage
variability in advanced computing systems. Specifically, this project will focus
on developing the VarSys software framework to control aspects of variability
and ultimately improve the design and operational efficiencies of both high-
performance and cloud systems. Furthermore, to highlight the broader impact of
VarSys beyond computer systems design, applying variability identification and
management to improve malware detection will be an important
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to publishing the results and
creating open source software, the project team will be hosting technical
meetings to encourage broad participation in the development of variability
metrics and benchmarks for advanced computer systems. The intent is to develop
an ecosystem of stakeholders dedicated to progress in the emergent area of
computer system software variability. In addition to training graduate students,
there will also be hack-a-thons targeting undergraduate students to educate them
on the future impact of variability and encourage their involvement in related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, computer system variability is often
viewed as noise or an unavoidable consequence of complex designs. This project
isolates causes of variability and identifies conditions when variability can be
managed. When complete, the resulting VarSys software will enable scientific
computer systems research previously impracticable. The usefulness of the
techniques to improve the designs of advanced computing systems including high-
performance supercomputers, cloud datacenters, and malware detection software
will be demonstrated. These advances ultimately impact the lives and livelihood
of consumers as well as ensuring U.S. competitiveness in science and e-commerce.