* 1565541
* Applications of Alkynyl-linked Transition Metal Compounds on Chemically Modified Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* William Geiger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 480,001.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor William E. Geiger of the
University of Vermont is studying electrochemistry in addressing chemical,
biochemical, and environmental problems. The most common type of electrochemical
cell is one in which two metal electrodes communicate through an electrolyte
solution, with chemical reactions taking place at each electrode. Traditionally,
the electrodes have been composed of expensive and rare metals such as platinum
and gold. In the interest of both cost and sustainability, these traditional
metals need to be replaced by cheaper and more common, preferably carbon-based,
materials. However, carbon surfaces themselves lack the chemical structure
needed to carry out many important reactions, such as those required in
efficient fuel cells. The project is designed to molecularly alter the surface
structure of carbon, thereby increasing the efficiency of these reactions. These
studies provide training in electrochemistry and transition-metal chemistry for
undergraduate and graduate students, in addition to high school students. The
students are also experiencing other research groups through a number of
collaborating arrangements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Geiger is developing
a new chemical electrode modification method based on electrochemical oxidation
of either an ethynyl-containing molecule or a metal-activated ethynyl molecule.
An ethynyl group provides a nearly ideal linkage between a molecular substrate
and a carbon surface owing to its ability to offer facile electronic
communication between those moieties, its very strong bonding to the surface,
and its structural integrity. Both organometallic molecules and porphyrin
complexes containing transition metals are being attached to the electrode
surfaces. Routes to electrode modification by porphyrins containing a number of
different transition metals are being be explored, and one or more
electrocatalytic reactions, such as the oxygen reduction reaction, are being
probed. Electrodes also are being modified with ethynyl-linked metal
photosensitizers and ethynyl-linked multi-electron transfer agents, with the
goal of providing new electrode surfaces for efficient biosensors and neural
sensors. A new approach to analysis of chemically modified electrodes by
magnetic circular dichroism is being studied.