* 1565599
* New Concepts for Multifunctional Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Daniel Seidel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2018
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the research of Professor Daniel Seidel. Professor Seidel is a member
of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Rutgers, the State
University of New Jersey. This project aims to advance the field of asymmetric
catalysis on a fundamental level through exploration of conceptually new and
underdeveloped methods of substrate activation. Asymmetric catalysis is the
development of small molecules that can achieve high selectivity in chemical
reactions - producing a specific product in high prurity. Chiral molecules have
a right-handed and left-handed version. These two mirror image molecules are
described as enantiomers. A major goal of this resesarch is the development of
reactions that produce enantiomerically enriched products through intervention
of chiral ion pairs. Novel Br√∏nsted acids and hydrogen bond donor catalysts are
used to facilitate unprecedented enantioselective processes and address
challenging problems. Multifunctional catalysts are being used as a means to
achieve enzyme-like catalysis under mild reaction conditions. The research
provides an excellent training ground for undergraduate and graduate students
and preparing them for future careers in industry or academia. There is a strong
commitment to engage a diverse group of students carrying out this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to prepare complex chiral molecules in the
most cost-effective way possible is directly dependent on the availability of
sustainable synthetic methodologies. The new synthetic methods that are emerging
from this work provide enhanced access to biologically significant, chiral
nitrogen containing compounds such as amines, amides, lactams, amino acids and
indole containing substances that, in turn, help advance the chemical industry.
Furthermore, this project provides an ideal training ground to prepare the next
generation of researchers in the chemical sciences. Students working on this
project gain expertise in modern synthetic methods and laboratory techniques
while being exposed to an intellectually stimulating and challenging environment
that will prepare them for future careers.