* 1565586
* Enhancing Critical Reasoning in Computer Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jonathan Blair, St. Johns River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 196,367.00

Working collaboratively with industry partners, this project at Saint Johns
River State College in Florida is designed to increase the practical knowledge,
critical thinking skills, and work-readiness of computer science and information
technology (CS/IT) graduates to meet local industry demand for highly trained
technicians in the CS/IT fields in Northeast Florida by incorporating problem-
based learning (PBL) and emphasizing critical thinking throughout the computer
education curriculum. Incorporation of PBL in CS/IT is also designed to increase
participation, retention, and success of women. The program will leverage
student talent to address current community problems and expose students to the
need for CS/IT in fields outside the traditional industries by incorporating
community-based learning techniques in the capstone course. The project will be
disseminated through the project website, ATE Central, and an annual Curriculum
Showcase. Curriculum development projects will be widely available for use and
adaption by other CS/IT training programs.

The project will expand the critical thinking skills of CS/IT graduates and
impact more than 200 students per year taking foundational and higher level
courses leading to 11 college credit certificates and 4 associate degrees in
Networking, Programming, Information Technology and Internet Services.
Specifically, 1) the foundational introductory classes will be revised to teach
key technical and critical thinking processes through problems drawn directly
from industry, 2) critical thinking and problem-solving learning outcomes will
be mapped and integrated in higher level courses, and 3) the capstone course
will be revised to require students to work with community and industry leaders
to identify and develop novel solutions for current, real-life challenges. Local
business members will participate as members of the curriculum design team,
provide problems, and review the new curriculum. The entire CS/IT faculty,
including adjunct faculty, will be involved in the program design and
implementation to benefit from the technical expertise of all CS/IT fields and
ensure that new pedagogies are implemented across the curriculum. They will
participate in curriculum redesign efforts and in professional development
activities to share pedagogical changes and incorporate PBL consistently and
effectively. Tutors from academic support centers at the college will be
included in professional development trainings to ensure they are prepared to
assist students with the new problem-based curriculum. Students will develop
technical skills, cultivate critical reasoning and creative abilities, and be
prepared to innovate, adapt and thrive in the competitive and evolving CS/IT
industry. The program will draw from successful PBL programs in engineering and
computer education to integrate additional critical thinking and hands-on
learning with the strong technical aspects of the current CS/IT curriculum. This
will ensure that skills that students need to gain in the courses will meet the
new and evolving needs of industry. New PBL pedagogies will be built-in through
a step-wise process beginning with the foundational courses. The effectiveness
of these changes will be evaluated and improvement made prior to incorporation
into the next level of courses. Gains in critical thinking will be determined
through pre- and post-test assessments. An independent evaluator will provide an
annual summative and formative review of the program.