* 1565169
* Promoting persistence of underprivileged college students in science and mathematics through engagement of their families
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Dawn Bregel, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 649,340.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Pacific University in Forest
Grove, Oregon will award scholarships to 36 low-income, academically talented
students, and provide the recipients specialized on-campus programing. Both
freshmen and transfer students will be eligible for these scholarships.
Scholarships will be offered to qualified students in biology, chemistry,
computer science, environmental science, mathematics, and physics. Elements in
the program will include targeted academic support and cohort development
through co-curricular activities. Scholarship recipients will have access to
STEM career development opportunities including individual mentoring by faculty,
internships, participation in faculty research, and pathways for job placement.
It is anticipated that many of the scholarship recipients will be first-
generation college students and the project includes an effort to include the
families of scholarship recipients in a way that enables the student's family to
appreciate the challenges and opportunities of higher education and to assist in
providing the support students may need to complete STEM degrees. Scholarships
and support for low-income and academically talented students, who may not
otherwise be able to obtain STEM degrees, will help to produce a well-trained
workforce that will contribute to the nation's economic growth and industrial
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While current research provides evidence
for the importance of family support, few published studies investigate college
completion outcomes when the parents and family members of college students from
low-income backgrounds are purposefully informed and included in campus-centered
social support activities. This Pacific University S-STEM project will include
an effort to specifically inform students' parents or other critical family
members about college, including processes such as advising and registration,
college milestones such as declaring a major, and opportunities such as
internships and research. Topics will include the essential time commitment
required for students to be successful in college, and that time spent away from
college studies should be limited to ensure academic success and access to the
economic opportunities of STEM careers. Materials will be multi-lingual and
designed with sensitivity to relevant cultural values and cultural norms of
communication. The project will study ways to help students' families to
understand the investment value for a college education, and thus be more
willing and better able to provide emotional support and encouragement for
completing college. The results will help to inform the nation's STEM education
community about the role of family members in improving retention and degree
completion among low-income and academically talented students.