* 1565138
* Scaffolding Undergraduate Curriculum and Career Exploration for Science Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Michael Alfieri, Viterbo University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2022
* USD 649,997.00

With funds from NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics Program (S-STEM) program, Viterbo University in Lacrosse, Wisconsin,
will improve educational opportunities in STEM areas for low-income, talented
rural students by preparing these students to help address the many current
global environmental and ecological challenges that face the United States. This
S-STEM Capacity Building project will award scholarships and provide community
and academic support to two cohorts of eleven students each for majors in
biology or environmental biology. The underlying impetus of the project will be
to recruit, enroll, retain, prepare, and graduate more biological sciences
majors, especially from rural areas, for employment or graduate programs in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will provide resources for
student success by providing students with: (a) financial, community, and
academic support; (b) traditional and cutting edge scientific knowledge and
skills; (c) real world work experiences through internships and research
opportunities; and (d) specific resources needed to transition to the STEM
workforce or graduate programs in related science fields. The project team will
implement, study, and assess a scaffolding approach which will include: (i)
early academic interventions for students to help overcome deficits in
preparation; (ii) retain science students to graduation through social
motivation and professional advocacy; (iii) provide students relevant, high
impact experiences including job shadowing, internships and undergraduate
research experiences, and (iv) Graduate well-prepared science students and
assist them in obtaining employment or further education in their target field.
To evaluate and advance understanding of the impact of the various activities,
specifically concerning rural students, the project team will use a qualitative
and quantitative mixed-methods research approach to investigate and measure a
variety of impact variables including financial and the other support
opportunities. The program has been designed to: promote broadening
participation for talented, low-income rural students; build capacity and be
sustainable at Viterbo; and be replicable at similar institutions that serve
rural populations.