* 1565753
* Direct Measurement and Modeling of the Importance of Bacterial Adsorption of Cd in Natural Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jeremy Fein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2018
* USD 156,323.00

Bacteria are present in a wide range of geologic environments, with high
concentrations found in surface waters, soils, and even deeper subsurface
aquifers. Aqueous metal cations in surface and groundwaters adsorb onto
bacteria, and this adsorption can affect the global cycling of elements,
biomineralization, heavy metal contaminant mobility in soils and groundwater
systems, mineral dissolution, and the effectiveness of groundwater
bioremediation techniques. Over the past 20 years, models have been developed to
describe metal adsorption onto bacterial surfaces, and calculations suggest that
bacterial metal adsorption can control metal speciation in geologic systems.
However, there have been no studies that directly quantify the importance of
bacterial metal adsorption in complex natural settings. Therefore, although
bacteria exhibit a high affinity for adsorbing metals, there is only
circumstantial evidence that bacterial adsorption affects metal distributions in
real systems. The investigators will use an innovative approach involving
confocal laser scanning microscopy to directly measure the proportion of
adsorbed metal that is associated with bacterial cells in complex samples from
river and wetland water systems. The research will be the first to directly and
quantitatively determine the importance of bacterial adsorption in affecting
metal distributions in natural samples, and hence will also be the first to test
the ability of current thermodynamic models to account for that distribution.
The funded research will ultimately lead to more accurate predictions of the
fate and transport of metals in a range of bacteria-bearing geologic settings,
and can be used to optimize remediation strategies for contaminated groundwater
and surface water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal adsorption onto bacteria
has been measured in scores of studies, and the results have been used to
determine thermodynamic stability constants for metal-bacteria complexes. There
are two underlying assumptions that justify this large body of research: 1) that
bacterial adsorption of metals can affect the distribution of metals in
bacteria-bearing geologic systems, and 2) that the binding constants determined
from simple single metal, single bacterial species experiments can accurately
predict metal distributions in those complex systems. Neither of these
assumptions has been rigorously tested for natural systems, primarily due to the
difficulty of the measuring metal speciation in complex samples. The proposed
research will, for the first time, quantitatively test both of these assumptions
for natural, non-artificial, systems, and hence will improve our understanding
of how bacteria affect mass transport in geologic systems. Investigators will
characterize a range of natural samples, quantifying the bacterial, organic
matter, and mineralogical contents; they will add aqueous metal to each sample,
and they will use a novel confocal laser scanning microscopy approach, in
conjunction with recently-developed metal-specific fluorescent probes, to
determine the concentration of metal bound onto the bacteria in these complex
systems. Independently, investigators will use previously determined
thermodynamic stability constants to predict the distribution of metal in each
experimental system, so that the comparison between the predicted and observed
metal distributions will enable them to determine the accuracy of the modeling
approach. The experiments will be the first to quantitatively determine the
importance of bacterial adsorption of metals in multi-component natural samples,
and hence are transformative in that they will provide both a new understanding
of the controls on metal distributions in geologic systems as well as a means
for quantifying metal distributions in those systems.