* 1565476
* Functional interaction of synapsin and Rab3a in the presynaptic vesicle cycle
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Maria Bykhovskaia, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2017
* USD 452,556.00

Numerous neurological disorders result from disruptions in the communication
between nerve cells. Neurons communicate by releasing neuronal transmitters from
nerve endings. Impaired transmitter release may produce certain forms of
epilepsy. Transmitter molecules are packed into synaptic vesicles, and the
preparation of vesicles for release is regulated by numerous proteins. Synapsin
is the most abundant synaptic vesicle protein, and its deficiency causes
epileptic seizures. Past work shows elimination of another vesicle protein,
Rab3a, rescues epilepsy caused by synapsin deletion. This project will
investigate how these two proteins interact within nerve endings. To do this,
genetically engineered mice that lack synapsin, Rab3a, or both proteins, will be
studied. High resolution microscopy to observe vesicle dynamics, and electrical
recording will be performed to monitor neuronal activity. In addition, a
computational model of the nerve ending will be developed to test whether
hypotheses of the protein interaction correctly predict how synapsin and Rab3a
affect the release of transmitters. The results of our study will elucidate the
mechanisms of synapsin-dependent epilepsy and will suggest new strategies for
its treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Universidad Central del Caribe (UCC) is
a Hispanic serving institution which strives to provide Puerto Rican students
with first-rate education and scientific training. The present project creates a
foundation for an excellent training program. The experiments will be performed
by graduate, undergraduate, and medical students, and thus the project will
provide a support for the students' careers. The project involves collaboration
between the UCC and the Wayne State University, and this creates advantageous
opportunities for Puerto Rico students to have a practice in a research intense
institution. Thus, this project will integrate research and training, advance
careers of Puerto Rico students, and help to promote workforce diversity.