* 1565497
* Developing Structure-Property Relationships for Electronic Structure and Dynamics at Organic Semiconductor Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2020
* USD 509,898.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
program of the National Science Foundation, Professor Oliver Monti of the
University of Arizona is studying organic molecules on metal surfaces, with a
specific focus on how the structure of the molecules and the metal influences
the rate at which electrons can be transferred from the metal surface to the
molecule (and vice versa).  Professor Monti's research group uses several
experimental techniques in this investigation, including scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM), which can image individual atoms and molecules, and
photoelectron spectroscopy, which uses intense laser light to eject electrons
from the sample, and reveals how strongly electrons are bound to either the
molecule or the surface.   This electrons transfer from metal surface to
molecule must be carefully controlled for improved catalysis, new sensor
technologies and novel approaches to energy conversion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a systematic and fundamental
understanding of the interplay of electronic structure, self-assembly and
carrier dynamics at organic semiconductor / metal interfaces. Professor Monti
combines atomically resolved scanning tunneling microscopy with momentum- and
time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy of interfaces with systematically
varied molecular and surface electronic structure to enable predictive tailoring
of charge flow across interfaces. Charge-transfer across interfaces constitutes
a central process in heterogeneous catalysis, electrochemistry and novel organic
electronic technologies. Beyond training the next generation of scientists in
Chemistry, Professor Monti and his students are developing and disseminating a
database of organic semiconductors which links key molecular properties to
device performance. This database is also used in active engagement classroom
activities at The University of Arizona to develop the concept of structure-
property relationships within the General Chemistry curriculum.