* 1565544
* FDA SIR: Architecturally-Integrated Hazard Analyses for Medical Application Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* - Robby, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop new forms of tool-supported safety
analyses for next-generation integrated medical systems that are based on the
concept of medical application platforms (MAP). A MAP is a safety- and security-
critical real-time computing platform for (a) integrating heterogeneous devices,
medical IT systems, and information displays via a communication infrastructure
and (b) hosting application programs ("apps") that provide medical utility via
the ability to both acquire information from and update/control integrated
devices, IT systems, and displays.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in developing novel forms of hazard
analyses (one of the primary forms of analysis used in safety critical systems)
that can overcome the unique challenges posed by MAP-based systems. The project
will develop tool support that will (a) integrate hazard analyses with
architectural models of MAP-based systems and (b) provide significant automation
of analysis steps. In consultation with engineers from the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), the project will construct mock risk management and
regulatory artifacts associated with MAP apps. The impact of this work centers
around helping FDA engineers understand the architectural and safety issues
associated with MAPs and identifying best practices that can lead to high
assurance of MAP-based medical systems. Additionally, the project will produce
concrete hazard analysis examples that will provide science-based inputs into
the design of a new regulatory approach and industry safety standards that
support compositional regulation of heterogeneous multi-vendor MAP-based
systems.