* 1565404
* A Multi-Level Test Approach for Improving Reliability and Performance of Nanometer Technology Designs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/22/2015,05/31/2017
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2017
* USD 80,240.00

Circuit reliability, process variations, and environmental variations have
become major challenges to address in advanced integrated circuit designs,
especially for parts deployed in critical-life applications such as automotive,
medical devices, aerospace, etc. The goal of this project is to develop novel
and efficient test infrastructures, multi-level test approaches, and methods to
eliminate wasteful guardband for improving performance and reliability of the
circuit throughout its lifetime operation under any workload.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits include (1) design of new test and
measurement infrastructure while targeting aging, minimum available slack,
noise, and timing uncertainties in the circuit, (2) generation of test patterns
considering different noise/workload conditions on target paths and selection of
paths to be targeted for test and reliability analysis, (3) analyzing the
measurement data at three different levels, namely manufacturing test and
silicon validation, system bring up, and in-the-field test, and finally (4)
analyzing data collected from a SOC design fabricated in an advanced technology
node. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to reduced design re-spin and
shrinking gap between manufacturing test and system test, thereby lowering
manufacturing cost. The results of this project will alleviate debugging and
diagnosis problems. Resulting benefits for society include: (i) more reliable
electronic systems for critical applications; (ii) cheaper and more dependable
computing platforms; (iii) realization of the much sought-after goal of "zero
defects" in the field for automotive, medical, and space applications. Students
involved in this research will be prepared for the semiconductor industry
workforce.