* 1565961
* RUI: Probing adsorbate interactions in metal-organic frameworks using site selective spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Stephen FitzGerald, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2022
* USD 310,567.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stephen FitzGerald of Oberlin
College investigates novel porous materials for both storing and separating the
different isotopes of hydrogen gas. The lack of viable, on-board hydrogen
storage is seen as the major impediment to the development of fuel cell powered
automobiles. In the case of hydrogen isotopes, used extensively by the nuclear,
medical, and scientific research communities, it is the difficulty of isotope
separation that dramatically increases cost and inhibits greater use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these challenges this project focuses on using a
combination of infrared and mass spectroscopy to understand the quantum behavior
of adsorbate molecules confined within the pores of metal-organic frameworks.
Temperature and concentration dependent spectra revealing site-specific enthalpy
and entropy of adsorption differentiate between different binding mechanisms and
establish the viability of isotopic separation using quantum sieving effects
arising from differences in zero-point energy. This information is used to guide
collaborators at national laboratories and research universities in the
fabrication of new materials with optimized properties for gas storage and
separation. Beyond the societal benefits of hydrogen powered cars and more
efficient gas separation techniques, this work has a broader impact through
mentoring of the undergraduate students working one on one with the principal
investigator. These students perform all the research at Oberlin College, while
gaining experience of a larger collaboration of research universities and
national laboratories.