* 1565719
* CRII: AF: Novel evolutionary models and algorithms to connect genomic sequence and phenotypic data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Kevin Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 174,968.00

An organism's genome is the collection of all of its DNA, which can be written
as a single string. All of the biological complexity of an organism is encoded
within its genome. One of the greatest challenges in science today is
understanding how the "syntax" of the genome gives rise to the "semantics" of
biological function and, indeed, all life on Earth. The theory of evolution
offers a way forward. These seemingly heterogeneous biological features are
merely facets of the common evolutionary process by which they arose. By
querying their phylogeny, or evolutionary history, we can begin to decipher the
living language in which genomes are written and, ultimately, master it for our
own purposes.

Today, phylogenies are primarily reconstructed by computational analysis of
biomolecular sequence data. Crucially, state-of-the-art algorithms treat genomes
as an unordered bag of observations, not as an ordered sequence of observations.
This assumption is made for pure mathematical convenience. In contrast, DNA is a
linear molecule, the information encoded in the genome is understood to be
sequential, and its order matters greatly. Recombination is one of the major
evolutionary processes that rearranges genomes over time, ultimately shaping the
sequential ordering of information. Sequence dependence due to recombination (or
the lack thereof) is an essential aspect of the computational problem of
phylogenetic inference, and yet the common assumption that loci (positions in
the genome) are independent and identically distributed remains a major
methodological gap.

To address this critical need, this project will create new evolutionary models
and algorithms for inferring species phylogenies from genomes while accounting
for point mutations, genetic drift, and recombination. A connection is then
forged to systems biology by building the new evolutionary models into a new
computational method for mapping the genomic architecture of complex phenotypes
(observable traits). The new methods will be validated using an extensive
performance study incorporating empirical and synthetic data. Analyses of the
empirical data are anticipated to result in new biological discoveries such as
understanding the genetic basis of adaptive traits in house mouse, the most
widely used laboratory organism.

This project incorporates significant educational and outreach components. The
new mathematical models, algorithms, and tools proposed in the research
objectives will be the basis for two workshop series: one targeted to
evolutionary computation researchers and the other to evolutionary biologists.
Interdisciplinary training at the undergraduate and graduate level includes
underrepresented minority students. Open implementations of all methods and data
will be publicly available through a collaborative online community.

This project entails three integrated research objectives. First, algorithms for
inferring species phylogenies under a new combined model of point mutations,
genetic drift, and recombination will be developed. The combined model unites
the coalescent model of population genetics with a hidden Markov model to
capture varying degrees of sequence dependence among neighboring loci due to
recombination. A key challenge is scalability, which is addressed using new
approximation algorithms. Second, the new evolutionary models will be fused with
a linear mixed model to capture dependence between genomic loci and a trait
encoded by causal loci within the genome. The new models will be the basis for
new algorithms that address several related problems in functional genomics. One
application is association mapping, which seeks to infer causal loci based upon
significant correlation between allele frequencies and observed trait values.
Third, a performance study will be conducted to validate the new computational
methodologies.