* 1565613
* Reversible Metastable-State Photoacids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* J. Clayton Baum, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Yi Liao and J. Clayton Baum of the
Department of Chemistry at Florida Institute of Technology are investigating a
class of molecules that can reversibly change acid concentrations when
irradiated with light. These molecules, which are called metastable-state
photoacids, allow the control of various chemical, biological and material
processes with light. Applications of metastable-state photoacids include
photoconductive, photomechanical, photochromic, antibacterial, and drug
releasing materials. The materials can also be used to develop biosensors,
microbial fuel cells, and molecular switches. The mechanisms by which they
react, the structure property relationships, and the potential applications of
these photoacids are being studied. The project lies at the interface of
organic, photo, physical, biological, and materials chemistry. The research is
well suited for the education of undergraduate and graduate students. Outreach
activities to high school and middle school students are also part of the
project activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous chemical, material, and
biological processes are sensitive to proton concentration, from acid-catalyzed
reactions to activities of many enzymes. Photoacids that reversibly undergo
proton dissociation upon irradiation promise remote, spatial and temporal
control of acid-sensitive processes. These compounds could provide a way to
convert photoenergy into other types of energy. Although reversible photoacids
have been studied, the photoinduced proton concentration change has not been
high enough to drive or effectively control acid sensitive processes. One major
problem in achieving large proton concentration changes is that the lifetime of
the high-acidity state is limited by the excited-state lifetime. To solve this
limitation, the investigators couple proton dissociation with a reversible
intramolecular photoreactions so that long-lived photoacids can be obtained. In
this approach, the high-acidity state is no longer an excited state, but a
metastable state generated from the photoreaction. Metastable-state photoacids
can possess a long-lived high-acidity state and produce a large acidity change
under irradiation. The design of metastable-state photoacids and the
photochemical behaviors and mechanisms of these photoacids are being studied
both experimentally and theoretically.