* 1565562
* TENNESSEE CYBERCORPS: A HYBRID PROGRAM IN CYBERSECURITY
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Doug Talbert, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 5,058,652.00

This proposal will inaugurate a CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the Tennessee Technological University. The hybrid program, ensuring
students? participation in research and outreach activities alongside education
in cybersecurity, will offer both accelerated and traditional graduate studies
paths to students from Tennessee as well as students from women and
underrepresented minority populations across the nation. The proposed
CyberCorps® is a university-wide effort leveraging resources and expertise from
the Computer Science Department, Cybersecurity Education Research and Outreach
Center, College of Engineering, Student Success Center, Office of Admissions,
College of Graduate Studies, Library, Office of Research, and Career Services.
This CyberCorps® program will be the first one in the state of Tennessee and it
will have the opportunity to serve the Appalachian area in
Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide strategies and
techniques that have the potential to be effective in addressing challenges
associated with SFS program management. The project will take recommendations
from experts based on demonstrated evidence to develop and exercise a suite of
best practices for effective management of SFS program. The project will draw
upon teaching, research and outreach experiences of the investigators, and the
assessment experience of the evaluation specialist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project provides broader impact by delivering a SFS program that will lead to
broader participation and better preparation of the information assurance and
cybersecurity workforce. Students underrepresented in cybersecurity are a major
focus of this project. As such, an expected broader impact of the project is to
contribute to the ability of the United States higher education enterprise to
produce a diverse group of cybersecurity professionals. As part of its broader
impact, this project will contribute to the statewide effort to meet a shortage
of skilled workers by having the CyberCorps scholarship opportunity accessible
to first-generation/low-income community college students impacted by the TN
Promise initiative. Since TTU is situated within and serves Central Appalachia,
this project will have the opportunity to serve the Appalachian area in TN,
which is one of the poorest regions in the country. The region also has a lower
education attainment level than the country as an average.