* 1565640
* Collaborative Research:  Subduction Dynamics, Mantle Structure, and Cenozoic Tectonic Evolution of South America
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Lijun Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2020
* USD 265,000.00

The physics behind several fundamental aspects of the South American tectonics
remains elusive. For example, various geological records suggest that the Andes
Mountains started to shorten significantly since at least 40 million years ago.
However, paleo-altimetry proxy data reveal that most of the surface elevation of
the Andes remained relatively low until as late as 20 or 15 million years ago, a
time frame that is inconsistent with the shortening history. Furthermore, the
early Cenozoic arc volcanism along the central Andes suddenly shifted more than
500 km inland around 30 million years ago and formed widespread silicic volcanic
activity that continues to the present. Consequently, a clear relationship among
these tectonic events is lacking. An important reason is that both the mantle
structures beneath South America and their dynamic evolution remain poorly
understood. In this proposal, the team plans to carry out a multidisciplinary
research project to attempt to improve our knowledge about the observational
records of surface tectonics, deep mantle seismic properties, and their
geodynamic relationship with the temporal evolution of subduction beneath the
continent. By collecting more data related to the tectonic history of South
America and to the present-day mantle interior, they will build a sophisticated
4-dimentional geodynamic model using data assimilation, in order to
quantitatively reproduce the past subduction history. Ultimately, the team hopes
to better understand the Cenozoic evolution of the South American continent. The
team plans to achieve this goal through a collaborative research effort that
involves seismology (led by PI Beck), geology (led by PI DeCelles), and
geodynamics (led by PI Liu). They propose to reproduce the Cenozoic subduction
history beneath South America and associated continental deformation using
geodynamic models constrained by geophysical and geological observations. This
project includes interdisciplinary training of several graduate students at two
institutions, and also involves undergraduates at both institutions who will be
involved in the research and will all students will participate in a summer
field trip to western U.S. Cordillera as an analog for the South American
Cordillera. This multi-disciplinary combination will provide a unique
opportunity for the students to understand orogenic systems at plate
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple fundamental questions exist about the
Cenozoic tectonic history of South America, including the asynchronous crustal
shortening and surface uplift/subsidence history of the Andes, and the enigmatic
Central Andean flare-up magmatism occurring during the late Cenozoic. None of
the earlier proposed geodynamic models for the Cenozoic evolution of South
America could simultaneously explain all these tectonic records and it is
unclear whether these different physical processes could co-exist and interact
in reality. An important reason for the existence of these alternative models is
the uncertain subduction and mantle dynamics due to our imperfect knowledge of
deep mantle structures beneath South America. Key observational constraints on
the geodynamic and tectonic evolution include an improved present-day mantle
seismic structure, especially in the lower mantle, a better identified
relationship among structural deformation, surface uplift and magmatic history
within western South America, and time-dependent geodynamic models that are
consistent with these observational records.