* 1565939
* Non-equilibrium divide-and-conquer method for nanoscale simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Michael Galperin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Galperin, of the
University of California, San Diego, is developing new methods to provide the
theoretical framework to simulate the behavior of nanoscale devices. Interest in
such systems stems from their technological promise and fundamental physical
properties. The goal of the project is to resolve one of the central challenges
of theoretical chemistry: accurate prediction of the electronic properties of
nanoscale systems and their response to external perturbations. This can lead to
an understanding of such devices at the molecular level with predictive theory.
The results are central in developing memory and logic molecular devices,
molecule-based sensors, photovoltaics for solar conversion and new types of
electronics. The ability of the research to interconnect different scientific
communities allows students involved in the project to participate in a flexible
curriculum, thus preparing them to work in either fundamental or applied
sciences, in academy or in national labs, in one of the fields or at interfaces
of many-body theory, molecular spectroscopy, and computational quantum
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical simulations of nanoscale open non-
equilibrium systems mostly employ single-particle basis functions (e.g. orbitals
as in the non-equilibrium Green function density functional theory (NEGF-DFT)
approach). These approaches allow treatment of systems of realistic sizes, but
become inconvenient in treating strong intra-system interactions. An alternative
approach, the non-equilibrium atomic limit (e.g. the pseudoparticle (PP) or
Hubbard NEGF), utilizes many-body states of the isolated system as a basis,
which allows accounting for the system interactions. The applicability of such
formulations is limited to relatively small systems. The project develops a
methodology, the non-equilibrium divide-and-conquer method, which capitalizes on
the strong sides of both methodologies: the NEGF-DFT ability to treat big
systems and the PP and Hubbard NEGF ability to account for strong local
interactions exactly. Partitioning of the original system (either in real or
state space) is utilized with the parts treated by either single-particle or
many-body states approaches. This extends the usual divide-and-conquer
methodology to the realm of open non-equilibrium quantum systems. The results
are central in developing memory and logic molecular devices, molecule-based
sensors, photovoltaics for solar conversion and new types of electronics.