* 1565852
* Reactive Intermediates, Reaction Mechanisms, and Catalytic Cycles in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2021
* USD 380,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Scott Gronert in the Department of
Chemistry at Virginia Commonwealth University. Professor Gronert and his
students are developing and using novel gas-phase techniques to study catalytic
reactions that are important in the synthesis and production of pharmaceuticals
and other fine chemicals. Their methodologies involve converting mass
spectrometers into gas-phase reactors, and allow them to probe individual steps
in complex reaction processes, with the goal of finding ways to improve the
efficiency and selectivity of current catalysts. Professor Gronert and his group
are also using this technology to seek out new catalytic systems that have
superior properties to those currently in use. Professor Gronert's research
program is deeply engaged in training students at all levels and encourages
undergraduates to participate in independent research projects early in their
college careers. In addition, Professor Gronert recruits one student each summer
from a local HBCU (historically black college or university) to participate in a
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exceptional versatility of modern
mass spectrometry offers unique opportunities for studying reactive
intermediates under highly-controlled conditions and probing their intrinsic
reactivity. The Gronert group has converted ion-trap mass spectrometers into ion
reactors and uses them to study gas-phase reaction kinetics and equilibria. A
central focus of the research involves isolating and characterizing key reactive
intermediates in important catalytic cycles. In this project, three systems
involving ligated metal complexes are being investigated: (1) The scope of new
phenanthroline-based iridium(III) C-H activation catalysts; (2) New, 2-electron
reduction methodologies to generate potential intermediates in cobalt- and
nickel-catalyzed C-C coupling reactions; and (3) New 1-electron reduction
methodologies to generate transition metals in unusual oxidation states and
characterize their roles in reaction processes. In addition, a variable
temperature ion reactor are being used to examine enthalpy/entropy effects in
templated, gas-phase reaction systems. The outreach plan is tightly integrated
into the research and a key component involves recruiting students each year
from a local historically black university, Virginia Union University.