* 1565174
* Linfield College S-STEM Scholarship Recruitment and Retention Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Brian Gilbert, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 648,563.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project will contribute to the national effort to produce more STEM
graduates by establishing a cohort of 15 academically strong scholars with
demonstrated financial need. The project will build on Linfield College's robust
interdisciplinary STEM programs, which emphasize experiential learning through a
student-centered approach. Scholars will participate in new and existing
curricular and extracurricular programs along with the broader STEM student
population. Such programs include (a) student-led learning communities organized
around intellectual topics, (b) an interdisciplinary science and mathematics
seminar, (c) career development, and (d) one-on-one student and faculty
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of action for this project is based
on research that shows that cultivating communities in which students connect to
one another while engaging in science can foster their STEM identities and aid
in their retention and persistence as STEM majors. Building upon the success of
and expanding on a prior interdisciplinary initiative at Linfield, this project
will support student collaboration on real-world problems that cross several
disciplines through the science and mathematics seminar. The research team has
developed a modified version of the Colorado Learning Attitudes in Science
Survey to assess students' beliefs about the nature of science and the way it is
conducted, as well as their attitudes about their own abilities to learn science
before and after this intervention. Student interest surveys, participation in
project activities, and monitoring of student retention and graduation rates
will be performed as part of formative and summative project evaluation. Results
from the project will be disseminated via education journals such as the Journal
of Higher Education and the Journal of Science Teaching and at national
conferences sponsored by Mathematical Association of America, American Chemical
Society, and Project Kaleidoscope.