* 1565573
* Scholarship for Service: Education and Workforce Development of Software Engineers with the Capabilities to Build Secure Cyber-Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Luc Longpre, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 3,948,339.00

This proposal will inaugurate a CyberCorpsÂ® Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the University of Texas at El Paso. The UTEP SFS Scholars program
will fund highly qualified students in the Software Engineering of Secure Cyber-
Systems program. They will graduate with the ability to apply disciplined
software development principles and processes that focus on the specification of
measurable attributes emphasizing safety and security, design of solutions that
address such attributes, and verification and validation throughout the software
lifecycle. SFS Scholars will complete a curriculum that is based on a
nationally-recognized set of recommendations for building secure software
systems, participate in an internship to utilize and enhance their cyber-
security knowledge, and transfer knowledge gained from coursework into practice
through hands-on activities that bring real-world experiences into the classroom
and a practicum project with significant cyber-security components. In addition
to providing a well-designed plan of study, the proposed program includes
structured student mentoring following the nationally recognized Affinity Group
model that develops students? professional, technical, and communication skills.
The recruitment plan includes national, regional, and local outreach efforts to
attract applicants, and a selection process that ensures recommendations of
students highly qualified for the program. The effort includes formative and
summative evaluation, a well-defined continuous quality improvement plan to
assess how well the curriculum and student co-curricular activities prepare
graduates for productive careers, and an Advisory Board that recommends program
improvements based on data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recruitment plan includes
strategic involvement with Women in Cybersecurity (WiCyS); Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS),
Center for Minorities and People with Disabilities and the Computing Alliance
for Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI). The recruitment strategies aim for a
cohort that is 40% female and 85% underrepresented minorities. The recruitment,
retention, and student development efforts will impact students beyond those who
are funded. The promotion of the experiences and successes of SFS scholars is
expected to attract more students who seek education and training in secure
cyber-systems. The educational and training materials developed through the
program will be published and disseminated to CAHSI institutions and beyond via
the CAHSI Summit and social media.