* 1565574
* Renewal of the CyberCorps Program at California State University San Bernardino
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Tony Coulson, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,644,545.00

The California State University-San Bernardino (CSUSB) proposes to add four new
cohorts of 10 undergraduate and graduate students to their existing
CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity with
dynamic curriculum, unique applied learning requirements, and a diverse student
population. The curriculum is designed around the needs of government
organizations seeking well-qualified students. CSUSB's service area is populated
with residents from diverse ethnic backgrounds, including those groups that are
currently underrepresented in cybersecurity field. Most SFS students are first
generation minority students, transferring from community colleges, often from
low-income and disadvantaged backgrounds, coming to college less academically
and socially prepared than their non-first generation peers. From tutoring to
etiquette to professional behavior, CSUSB places great emphasis on ensuring that
this diverse student cohort (50% Hispanic, and 43% female) learns the skills
necessary to successfully obtain and retain professional employment. The program
has achieved 100% placement rate of their graduates and has mentored other
institutions as to the best practices in recruitment diversity, placement
strategies, leveraging university resources, and program
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many SFS programs across the country
focus on policy, management of technology, or secure programming and
development, CSUSB has created a curriculum that combines the elements of
various programs, including some elements of national security studies. A
typical CSUSB SFS student is well versed in cyber security policy, tactics,
threat analysis, counter intelligence, networking, database, offensive and
defensive penetration testing, and forensics, all with applied professional
experiences. The project objectives include: 1) recruit four cohorts of
Scholars, each with 10 graduate and undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds; 2) provide academic support and mentoring to the Scholars that
result in a 100% retention rate; 3) facilitate the ongoing application of their
knowledge and skills by participating in at least one workshop per quarter, two
technology competitions per year and at least 50 hours per quarter in the Cyber
Security Center Research Lab; and 4) place 100% of the Scholars in internships
and employment in federal, state, local or tribal cyber service positions by
summer 2021.