* 1565688
* Catalytic Diene-Diol Benzannulation for Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Construction
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Michael Krische, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2020
* USD 480,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Michael J. Krische in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Texas at Austin. Professor Krische and his students are developing
novel, green catalytic methods for the construction of PAH (polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon) - materials that are used broadly in molecular electronics.
Professor Krische's method involves the byproduct-free coupling of inexpensive,
abundant petrochemical feedstocks (dienes) with a renewable feedstock (diols).
PAH materials are formed upon dehydration of the reaction products, meaning
water is the only chemical byproduct. This project lies at the interface of
organic, organometallic and materials chemistry and provides a suitable forum
for the education of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scientists. With
the growing Hispanic demographic in Texas, Professor Krische's group has played
a strong role in the education and training of students from groups historically
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities include an annual research
symposia sponsored by the Center for Green Chemistry and Catalysis led by
Professor Krische, which features lectures by leading chemists in the field of
catalysis, as well as poster sessions hosting undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Krische laboratory is
pioneering a broad, new class of catalytic carbon-carbon (C-C) bond formations
that merge the characteristics of catalytic hydrogenation and carbonyl addition,
representing the first "C-C bond forming hydrogenations" beyond
hydroformylation. This new pattern of reactivity is the basis of a ruthenium(0)
catalyzed diene-diol [4+2] cycloaddition. This byproduct-free transformation is
being used to advance new benzannulation technology for the construction of
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs). Acenes, polyphenylenes, fluoranthenes
and carbon nano-allotropes - there is great interest in such PAH materials in
the field of molecular electronics. However, since the advent of biaryl cross-
coupling technology, the field of PAH construction has remained largely
unchanged. Just as biaryl cross-coupling technology revolutionized PAH
construction, diene-diol benzannulation may unlock new PAH chemical space,
broadly impacting research across the carbon nano-allotrope and molecular device
communities. The educational plan includes annual research symposia sponsored by
the Center for Green Chemistry and Catalysis led by Professor Krische, which
features lectures by leading chemists in the field of catalysis, as well as
poster sessions hosting undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral scientists.