* 1565546
* Operation of the NSCL as a National User Facilty &amp; Research Program
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Bradley Sherrill, Michigan State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2022
* USD 114,000,000.00

This award provides funds to operate and maintain the National Superconducting
Cyclotron&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU) as a
national user facility, to support a&lt;br/&gt;broad program in nuclear
structure, nuclear astrophysics, precision measurements of
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;parameters and symmetries, and accelerator science, and to
support the research programs of MSU&lt;br/&gt;nuclear science faculty. The
award will continue NSCL's national and international leadership
in&lt;br/&gt;these areas by supporting its operation as the nation's premier
user facility dedicated to the&lt;br/&gt;production and study of rare (short-
lived) isotopes. The award will also allow the NSCL to exploit&lt;br/&gt;the
scientific opportunities newly available with the recently commissioned and
world-unique&lt;br/&gt;ReA3 beamline accelerator that enables experiments at
energies that have not been explored with&lt;br/&gt;rare isotopes and are
relevant to supernovae and the structure of nuclei. These opportunities
have&lt;br/&gt;strong overlap with the stated scientific goals of the 2015 NSAC
Long Range Plan, and form a&lt;br/&gt;coherent trajectory towards the next
generation accelerator, FRIB, which is being constructed on&lt;br/&gt;the NSCL
site. Approximately 80% of those conducting research at the NSCL are from
outside&lt;br/&gt;MSU and the support of NSCL will serve a broad scientific
community. As the nation's largest&lt;br/&gt;university-based user facility for
nuclear physics, the NSCL will continue to provide unique
handson&lt;br/&gt;learning opportunities for educating the next generation of
nuclear scientists, accelerator&lt;br/&gt;physicists, and engineers.
Approximately 10% of all nuclear science PhDs awarded in the
United&lt;br/&gt;States are based on research carried out at the NSCL, and
approximately 100 undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students are actively involved in
research at the NSCL each year. The laboratory has extensive&lt;br/&gt;outreach
activities, including facility tours for over 4000 people each year. In
addition, research&lt;br/&gt;is carried out in application areas such as
development of new tools for radiation treatments of&lt;br/&gt;cancer,
systematic studies of how ionizing radiation affects DNA, discovery of novel
atomic and&lt;br/&gt;nanostructures in complex materials, and homeland
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intense beams of stable isotopes are accelerated
using the NSCL's two coupled superconducting&lt;br/&gt;cyclotrons, the CCF. The
nuclei split into fragments as the beam strikes a stationary target.
Each&lt;br/&gt;fragment is itself a lighter nucleus, and many fragments are
themselves short-lived isotopes. The&lt;br/&gt;isotope of choice for a specific
experiment is selected by means of a fragment separator: a
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;chicane that permits only a specific charge and mass through
its pathway. The nuclei emerging&lt;br/&gt;from the fragment separator form a
new beam for use in studying various nuclear reactions. The&lt;br/&gt;NSCL has
seven end stations to where the isotope beam can be directed and each end
station has&lt;br/&gt;a variety of target and detector systems to carry out the
desired measurements. The NSCL can&lt;br/&gt;also bring the unstable isotopes to
a complete stop using a dense gas; this in turn enables&lt;br/&gt;experiments
such as mass measurements using trapping techniques also used in atomic
and&lt;br/&gt;molecular physics. The ReA3 beamline accelerator reaccelerates
stopped isotopes to low energies&lt;br/&gt;(well below in-flight levels) for
experiments that are important for nuclear astrophysics, including&lt;br/&gt;the
origin of stellar energy production as well as the dynamics of the birth and
death of stars. The&lt;br/&gt;reaccelerated beams are directed to one of the end
stations for use in various nuclear reactions.