* 1565959
* GP-EXTRA: Freshman Research in Biogeochemistry for Engagement and Retention
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Thomas Kulp, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 377,555.00

Recruiting, engaging, and retaining undergraduate students in STEM disciplines,
including geoscience and affiliated fields, is a major educational challenge in
the nation's colleges and universities. As part of Binghamton University's
Freshman Research Immersion (FRI) program, a team of five science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) faculty across the geology, biology and
environmental studies disciplines are using the multi- disciplinary field of
biogeochemistry to engage students early in their college years in research
applicable to geoscience careers. Biogeochemistry investigates the
interconnection of biological, geological, and chemical processes. Modern and
ancient lake and ocean sediments, the atmosphere, watersheds and wetlands
provide field sites and samples for the biogeochemistry research. The
biogeochemistry research stream consists of a three course sequence: 1) a
research methods course during the fall semester, 2) followed by training in
analytical techniques during the spring semester that 3) culminates in
completion of a research project the following fall. Funding is being provided
for some of the FRI students to engage in hands-on, outdoor, field based
components of their research projects during the summer between the spring and
fall. This approach allows students to develop projects that incorporate and
evaluate seasonality components critical to the understanding of many
biogeochemical processes. As a part of the outreach program, high school
educators and several of their students participate in a summer workshop where
they learn about FRI opportunities through direct interaction with the FRI
students, faculty and staff. In turn, the FRI students and their achievements
are being used to develop an outreach program that includes visits to high
schools and community colleges. Consequently, this program is working to
increase the numbers and diversity of students trained in Geosciences, thus
meeting a crucial national need within a STEM
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Freshman Research Immersion
(FRI) program is supporting a cohort of 25-30 Biogeochemistry students each
year. The biogeochemistry experience begins with a research methods course that
emphasizes quantitative reasoning, scientific communication and a semester-long
literature review to identify research topics in biogeochemistry. The first half
of the spring semester, students learn analytical techniques applicable to
biogeochemistry research; by the second half of the spring, they begin their
research project. In the fall of sophomore year, students have an entire second
semester to continue working on their research project. The biogeochemistry
stream has a dedicated laboratory equipped for research, and a PhD-trained
research educator who oversees the students, graduate teaching assistant and
undergraduate peer mentors. The FRI program features a combination of the
multiple components. A team of faculty members with well-established research
programs designs and oversees the freshman research themes. The research themes
explicitly address core concepts and core skills of the geosciences. The
participating freshmen develop electronic-portfolios documenting their research
experiences and understanding of the process of science, which they build upon
throughout their college years. Students take a sequence of courses that
emphasize teamwork, thus provides explicit training to undergraduates on how to
work in research teams. The students are exposed to interdisciplinary research
(IDR) and engage in multiple opportunities to develop IDR skills. The
biogeochemistry research projects generate spin-off research modules that are
being infused into other courses; as a result, authentic research experiences
eventually will be provided in regular science courses, contributing to improved
engagement, learning and retention in the sciences. The undergraduates' research
activities are expected to result in students being co-authors of presentations
and peer-reviewed articles. Assessment activities are documenting the impacts of
the stepped, multi-mentored research experience of the FRI program for
undergraduates considering a career in geosciences.