* 1565160
* Preparing and diversifying STEM leaders in a first-year to graduation transition program.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Sabrina Zirkel, Mills College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

For this NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Program (S-STEM) Capacity Building project, Mills College, a women's college,
will improve educational opportunities for low-income, talented women by
creating a new transition program to support STEM undergraduate majors from
first-year through entry into the workforce or graduate school. A special
feature will be on developing leadership skills and tools for women in STEM,
thus addressing a gap in the STEM workforce in this arena. The S-STEM Scholars
at Mills will receive financial support as well as other support including the
expansion of student support systems such as a summer bridge program, targeted
faculty advising, a themed housing community, student participation at
professional conferences, and specially designed workshops focused on academic
and leadership development. To enhance recruiting efforts for minority women, a
special Minority Women in STEM Lecture Series will also be
deployed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the impact of the STEM leadership for
women component and other components of the project, a mixed-method research and
evaluation approach will be employed. The project team will measure a number of
variables including financial support, student workload, workshop effectiveness,
perceived threat level, professional guidance and mentoring, and students'
beliefs concerning their intellectual abilities. In addition, formative and
longitudinal feedback will be utilized to help determine comprehensive
interventions for students who struggle and encounter difficulties in several
realms including academics, personal, emotional, and social. The research
approach will allow the investigators to measure the success of their
strategies, especially when financial burden is lifted via the S-STEM
scholarships. The program has been designed to: (1) promote broadening
participation in STEM fields; (2) be sustainable at Mills; and (3) be replicable
at similar institutions.