* 1565862
* CRII: III: Using Genomic Context to Understand Evolutionary Histories of Individual Genes
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Siavash Mir arabbaygi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Evolutionary trees show relationships between organisms through evolutionary
time, and are central to many biomedical applications such as understanding
protein function and analyzing the human microbiome. Interestingly, evolutionary
histories can change across the genome, creating a complex genomic landscape.
Understanding genome-wide evolution requires sophisticated computational tools
that can analyze the rapidly growing set of genomes sequenced from species
spanning the tree of life. Currently available methods for inferring these
complex evolutionary histories have serious limitations, either in terms of
accuracy or scalability to large datasets. This project will develop new
computational methods for reconstructing evolutionary trees for individual
segments of the genome while considering their connections to other parts of the
genome. The computational methods developed will be made publicly available to
the community of evolutionary biologists, and will help improve various
downstream biomedical analyses. To facilitate adoption, the PI will train
biologists interested in the new methods. Beyond impacting the research
community, the PI will contribute to new promising diversity initiatives at UC
San Diego to engage URM/Women undergraduate students in research projects
defined in the exciting overlap between biology and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A "gene tree" shows the evolutionary history for
a small segment of the genome, and accurate reconstruction of each gene tree can
be difficult because a small segment may provide little data and only a weak
signal. A principled approach for improving gene tree estimation is to consider
the connection between different parts of the genome. However, computational
limitations of such co-estimation approaches have left researchers with only one
feasible option: to infer gene trees independently for each segment, ignoring
the underlying genome-wide patterns of evolution. This project will develop new
scalable statistical methods for inferring gene trees given genomic sequence
data and a genome-wide description of the evolutionary history, the so-called
species tree. The focus will be on a specific probabilistic model of gene trees,
the multi-species coalescent model, that links population level patterns of
allele differentiation to species level histories. Scalable gene tree inference
under this model remains a poorly studied problem. To develop scalable methods
for calculating and optimizing likelihood scores with respect to the multi-
species coalescent model, the project will use algorithmic techniques such as
divide-and-conquer and dynamic programming. Other approaches that will be
explored include designing simplified optimization scores that are easier to
compute than the full likelihood and developing new approximations to the
likelihood function. If successful, the project will produce pioneering scalable
solutions for inferring gene trees given the species tree under the multi-
species coalescent model, and such a method will have substantial positive
impact on downstream biological analyses. Moreover, this project can pave the
way for scalable solutions to an even more complex inference problem, where the
goal is to co-estimate a large number of gene trees and the species tree in one
analysis. For further information see the project web page:
http://eceweb.ucsd.edu/~smirarab/2016/01/27/genetrees.html