* 1565799
* High-Throughput Small-Molecule Catalyst Discovery using Amphiphilic DNA-Encoded Libraries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Ryan Hili, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Professor Ryan Hili of the University of Georgia is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop a discovery platform
for small molecule catalysts using DNA as an encoding element. Bond-forming
reactions are essential to construct molecules ranging from fine chemicals used
in medicine to bulk chemicals such as polymers used as plastics. Catalysts are
needed to construct these bonds efficiently and selectively. This research is
anticipated to greatly accelerate the discovery of new catalysts by enabling
large libraries of chemicals to be screened quickly for desired catalytic
activity. The information garnered from such large screens can be used to create
better catalysts and to increase our understanding of the molecular interactions
that contribute to catalysis. Catalysts that are more efficient and selective
produce more of the desired product and, at the same time, reduce waste and time
to consumer markets. This research is integrated with interdisciplinary
educational and training activities and outreach at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. The Hili Group is dedicated to undergraduate
research, as evidenced by strong undergraduate participation in their lab, and
by papers co-authored by undergraduates. Professor Hili works to rebuild the
Student Affiliates of the American Chemical Society chapter at UGA to promote
the impact of chemistry research on society. He also strives to increase
participation in the Young Dawgs STEM Program, which is a program that
identifies local area high school students and places them in University of
Georgia research laboratories to gain first-hand knowledge and experience in
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outlines the development
of an in vitro selection platform for small molecule catalysts using amphiphilic
DNA, which is soluble in aqueous media and anhydrous organic solvents, as an
encoding element. The ultimate goal is to couple high-throughput DNA sequencing
to the discovery of small-molecule bond-forming catalysts. The immediate aims
are to determine the compatibility of amphiphilic DNA as an encoding element
during various catalytic reactions; to develop methods to generate and screen an
amphiphilic DNA-encoded chemical library for catalytic activity in various
solvents; and to apply the method to screen en masse the kinetic parameters of
individual catalysts within the library. The advantages of the proposed research
over existing catalyst discovery technologies are: (1) higher throughput, with
libraries easily exceeding one million library members; (2) the use of small
amounts of library material; (3) solution-phase kinetics; (4) the ability to
easily multiplex time-points, reaction conditions, and different substrates in
one sequencing experiment; and (5) the reduction of material/solvent waste that
typically accompanies high-throughput screening efforts.