* 1565572
* Renewal: University of Idaho Scholarship for Servi
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Jim Alves-Foss, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,695,360.00

The University of Idaho (UI) proposes to add four new cohorts of undergraduate
and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program in cybersecurity with strong background in cyber defense;
forensics and situational awareness; secure and resilient architectures,
networks, and systems; and security of embedded, industrial, and power control
systems and devices. The project will have an immediate impact on the
information assurance and forensics capabilities of the federal workforce by
providing graduates with general computing and security skills. Both public and
private organizations developing and maintaining information and operational
technology, or real-time control systems, are in urgent need of graduates with a
strong cybersecurity background. The graduates from the UI's SFS program
increase the security and resiliency of federal, state, tribal, and territorial
governments' security systems. The program has a holistic educational approach
with strong computational foundations and hands-on experiences; and the
interdisciplinary nature of the program aids in attracting women and minorities
to the cybersecurity profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is graduating
skilled information assurance and forensics professionals with strong leadership
skills and a commitment to public service. The students will serve as summer
interns to gain practical experience and will join federal agencies or other
eligible entities upon graduation. Graduates from the UI's SFS program have a
foundational knowledge strongly rooted in mathematics and scientific theory, a
practical skillset learned through hands-on laboratories, and a research-
oriented innovative approach to problem solving. They will also develop the
presentation, communication, and management skills necessary to be effective in
the federal workforce. This enables them to design, develop, and maintain secure
and resilient computing systems critical to the government, digital economy, and
national security. By grouping students from multiple disciplines into the same
labs and seminars the program provides a diversity and synergy that enables
participants to appreciate the multifaceted aspects of cybersecurity, including
perspectives from software, hardware, and management. The SFS scholars have
hands-on laboratory experiences with a variety of network configurations
including reconfigurable attack-defend scenarios, real-time embedded systems,
and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems.