* 1565983
* Methods for Late-Stage Nucleophilic Fluorination and Radiofluorination
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Abigail Doyle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry division supports the
research of Professor Abigail G. Doyle of the Department of Chemistry at
Princeton University. Professor Doyle and her students develop new reagents and
strategies for nucleophilic fluorination. Fluorine is an essential constituent
of myriad drugs, agrochemicals and materials that are crucial to public
healthcare and industry. However, the tools to selectively install fluorine into
organic molecules are either limited or in some cases nonexistent. Specifically,
current methods for nucleophilic fluorination often rely on harsh conditions
with traditional reagents resulting in low reactivity, selectivity and/or
tolerance to other functional groups. This research leads to the invention of
new latent HF sources for catalysis, the design of general strategies that
enable mild and selective C-F bond formation, and the preparation of valuable
fluorine-containing synthons for chemical synthesis. These strategies are also
adapted for the synthesis of radiolabeled small molecules for use in positron
emission tomography (PET), an important diagnostic tool for imaging the brain.
The students supported under this program receive training in research, writing,
communication skills, and mentoring. Through various programs, Professor Doyle
recruits and mentors students from groups traditionally underrepresented in the
STEM disciplines. Professor Doyle organizes the Princeton University Student
Invited Lecture Series; she and her students participate in outreach activities
to encourage early engagement in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
focus of this research is the development of new methods for nucleophilic C-F
bond formation enabled by novel strategies for in situ generation of HF from
abundant, stable fluoride reagents. These synthetic methods offer routes that
are efficient, mild, selective, and environmentally benign, utilizing either
organocatalysis or transition metal catalysis. Researchers in the Doyle group
and in the greater chemical community are able to apply these methods to
construct elusive and desirable compounds of interest to the pharmaceutical and
biomedical fields. This research program also creates opportunities for growth
and promotes the advancement of underrepresented groups in the sciences through
participation in diversity research programs, women in science events, and
outreach activities to children from underserved communities.