* 1565677
* I-Corps: New Methods in Plant-Based Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2015,03/31/2017
* Anthony Farone, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

A serious global healthcare crisis exists that is driving the search for new
treatments for drug resistant microbes, aggressive cancers, and an increasing
prevalence of autoimmune diseases. To provide these novel therapies,
pharmaceutical companies need an economical source of novel bioactive compounds
to drive their product pipelines. This I-Corps team will provide these new
compounds from endangered plant products that have remained untouched due to
their conservation status. This novel concept not only has excellent potential
for developing a broad spectrum of natural product derived therapeutics, but
sustainable plant culture methods will also advance our understanding of
effective conservation efforts to protect these endangered species. Working with
these plants in a laboratory environment allows scientists to stress the plants
to maximize the production of their defensive compounds. These immune response
chemicals of the plant may not be detectable in its natural environment, but it
is these compounds that will have the greatest potential for bioactivity.

Endangered plants, because of their risk for extinction, have rarely been
screened for bioactive compounds. Screening these novel plants will be the main
focus of the company, but the same technology will provide protocols for the
conservation and sustainable use of endangered plants. This I-Corps team has
developed and optimized screening and isolation methods through its work with
the Tennessee Center for Botanical Medicine Research to successfully test this
proof-of-concept. The conventional approach of initially screening crude
extracts could miss compounds active in trace amounts, such as signaling
molecules, but methods being developed by this team will efficiently resolve
extracts from different stressors into 5 to 10 compounds/sample. These samples
will be initially screened in a 96-well format for activity in established anti-
microbial, anti-cancer, and anti-inflammatory bioassays. Samples of interest
will be further fractionated to pure compounds and rescreened to identify active
compounds. This novel pipeline of drug leads will be very attractive for
prospective partnerships and licensing with pharmaceutical companies while the
team continues to develop high impact leads. Any lead that makes it to market
will have an enormous impact on the lives of patients and their families.