* 1565560
* Renewal of the Scholarship for Service Program: The University of Texas at San Antonio
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Philip Menard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,814,223.00

The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) proposes to add four new cohorts
of undergraduate and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R)
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity with strong background in
digital forensics. The project will have an immediate impact on the information
assurance and forensics capabilities of the federal workforce by providing
graduates with general computing and security skills. The city of San Antonio
has a strong security sector in both industry and the government, which will
offer outlets for student internships and provide support in the areas of
research, education, and training. As a Hispanic Serving Institution, UTSA is
uniquely situated to help address the shortfall of security expertise in the
ranks of traditionally underrepresented groups and this potential is a unique
aspect of this project. UTSA has a long and strong reputation in meeting the
needs of its Hispanic students and is also reaching out to students in local
Title 1 schools and local 2-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
is graduating skilled information assurance and forensics professionals with
strong leadership skills and a commitment to public service. The students will
serve as summer interns to gain practical experience and will join federal
agencies or other eligible entities upon graduation. The community has a long
history in cybersecurity including a strong cluster of computer security
industry and UTSA has developed programs to support this important industry. The
university was named the top cybersecurity program in the country in the 2014
Ponemon Institute Survey of IT Professionals. The university received its
DHS/NSA National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance
Education designation in 2002; Center of Academic Excellence in Research
designation in 2009; and the re-designation as a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense with the focus area of Digital Forensics in 2014.