* 1565741
* Proton-coupled electron-transfer in Sm(II)-proton donor reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Robert Flowers, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Robert Flowers in the Department of
Chemistry at Lehigh University. Professor Flowers and his students are examining
the mechanism for reactions of samarium (II) iodide (SmI2), a widely used
reagent in organic synthesis. The first goal of this project is designed to
examine the role of proton donors (alcohols and water) on the reactivity and
efficiency of reactions and determine whether electrons and protons are
transferred in sequential steps, or whether the process is concerted and occurs
through a formal hydrogen atom transfer. The second goal of this project is to
use the mechanistic information from studies on SmI2-proton donor systems to
develop catalytic reactions. Students at the undergraduate and graduate level
receive training in a range of scientific techniques. Outreach to elementary
students leads to sustained engagement with the local community. Finally, video
recordings of experimental protocols developed during these studies are freely
disseminated on the Flowers research group webpage to assist scientists who use
reagents based on SmI2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SmI2 is among the most widely
employed reagents that reduce substrates and reactive intermediates through
single electron transfer. Although most reactions of SmI2 require proton donors,
the mechanism of this reagent combination is not fully understood and the
current view is that reductions and reductive coupling reactions proceed through
a sequential electron-transfer, proton-transfer processes. This work tests the
hypothesis that reductions and reductive coupling reactions proceed through a
formal hydrogen atom transfer and that the coupled transfer of an electron and
proton is responsible for the unique reactivity of Sm(II)-coordinating proton
donor reductions of substrates which are typically recalcitrant to reduction
through single electron transfer. As mechanistic work on Sm(II)-proton donors
systems is performed, data obtained from these studies is used for the
development of useful and user-friendly catalytic reactions; a longstanding, but
elusive goal in this field. Integration of a range of experimental techniques
along with synthetic applications of proton-coupled, electron-transfer in
synthesis provides a dynamic intellectual environment for students at all levels
of study. The educational plan includes long-term engagement with local
elementary schools designed to nurture greater interest in science. Finally, as
research is published in peer-reviewed journals, video recordings of all
experimental protocols are made to aid scientists who want to repeat the
reaction protocols.