* 1565782
* SusChEM: Catalytic lignin degradation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Corey Stephenson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry supports the
research of Professor Corey Stephenson. Professor Stephenson is a faculty member
at the University of Michigan. The goal of the project is to develop sustainable
photocatalytic chemical methods for biomass degradation and repurposing. The
total amount of biomass currently produced by the forestry and agricultural
industries is estimated to be sufficient to replace petroleum as a carbon
feedstock for fine chemicals. The Stephenson group is developing methods to
degrade and convert lignin, the second most abundant biopolymer in the world, to
valuable commodity chemicals. Lignin's high aromatic content is converted into
useful feedstocks and complementing the aliphatic chemicals that can be derived
from cellulose. This research focus is an integral component of Professor
Stephenson's educational plans as a training opportunity for students in his
laboratory. In addition, it provides hands-on experimental modules integrated
into a series of outreach elements designed to engage high school students in
the exciting opportunities in green chemistry and molecular sciences. Graduate
and undergraduate trainees in the Stephenson group are exposed to a broad range
of interdisciplinary topics, such as catalysis, photochemistry, renewable energy
and flow chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus is on using
electron transfer-initiated transformations to promote chemoselective C-O and
C-C bond cleavage reactions of lignin chemical linkages, processes for
sustainable chemistry that are situated at the intersection of organometallic
chemistry, photochemistry and materials science. These operationally simple,
catalytic methods obviate the need for specialized photochemistry equipment,
utilizing inexpensive and energy efficient LEDs for irradiation. The challenges
of lignin degradation are addressed using a combination of oxidative and
reductive visible light-mediated radical chemistry. The proposal consists of
three specific aims: 1) development of new catalytic oxidation methods employing
both photoredox catalysis and electron shuttling agents; 2) development of novel
visible light-mediated reductive C-O and C-C cleavage methods; 3) implementation
of the strategies developed in aims 1 and 2 toward the degradation of commercial
lignin in continuous flow. The objectives advance the broader concept of
sustainable chemistry without compromising reaction efficiency and
chemoselectivity.