* 1565146
* ABI:  Development Implementing Galaxy for Community-based Phage Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ryland Young, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 533,000.00

Phages, the viruses of bacteria, are the most numerous genetic entities in the
biosphere, outnumbering bacteria by 10-100-fold, and contain most of its DNA
diversity. Phage biology is a driver in global ecology and in the global
dynamics of gene transfer. Phages, as the natural predators of bacteria, have
recognized potential as antibacterial agents, both in human health and in animal
husbandry and agriculture. Phages, because they can be restricted to specific
bacterial species or genera, represent the only currently available tool for
manipulating the diverse populations of bacteria in microbiomes, now known to be
an essential component of health and development. Despite all of these factors,
only a tiny fraction of phage biodiversity is captured by sequenced genomes; in
fact, phages are by far the most under-sequenced genetic entity. As Next
Generation Sequencing advances, the flow of phage DNA sequence is going to
increase enormously. However, phage genomes represent special problems in
genomic analysis, in part because of biological factors, including rapid
sequence divergence, the compression of gene sizes and extensive gene overlap.
Even more problematic is the general lack of expertise in phage biology, which
makes quality annotation of phage genomes inaccessible to most of the scientific
public.

The project will implement scalable infrastructure for bioinformatics analyses,
focusing on the automated structural and functional annotation of phages.
Publicly accessible infrastructure will be developed and deployed, from new and
existing components to support community re-annotation of paradigm phages into
"gold standard" curated annotation sets. Additionally the infrastructure will
develop components focused on the acquisition and annotation of new phage
genomes going forward, as the field of bacteriophage genomics rapidly expands.
Tools will be developed and released encoding expert annotation knowledge to
improve the state of the art in automated, quality, phage annotation. The entire
project will be developed as open source software under an OSI approved license,
permitting the re-implementation of the project's infrastructure in other genome
annotation communities where it will provide value. Phage Genomics Education
resources developed as part of our well-established course in Phage Genomics at
TAMU will be improved to take advantage of the new community resources being
built. As implementation progresses, the infrastructure deployed and progress
updates will be available at https://cpt.tamu.edu/phagedb/