* 1565520
* Multi-dimensional Electronic Dynamics beyond the Dipole Approximation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Walter Ermler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 539,316.00

Xiaosong Li of the University of Washington is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division and the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program
in the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to develop computational methods
and open-source software to study the dynamics of electrons driven by
electromagnetic fields. Electronic processes influenced by multiple
electromagnetic fields underlie the functionality of many technologically-
important materials. The methods developed by Li and his research group yield
new and powerful avenues to facilitate scientific discoveries of materials that
exhibit desirable optical properties. The project also provides a mechanism for
advanced interdisciplinary education and training in the areas of inorganic,
theoretical, physical, and materials chemistry. The project prepares
participating undergraduate and graduate students for future careers in science,
engineering, and education. Through a combination of high-school and community
outreach and undergraduate research mentoring, this project promotes and fosters
participation of a broad spectrum of youth in science and engineering
activities.

This project lays the theoretical groundwork for modeling time-resolved,
multidimensional electronic spectroscopy, with energies ranging from the UV to
X-ray regions of the spectrum and modulated by the delays between pulses,
completely within the first-principles framework. On the one hand, the
development is able to reveal the physical mechanisms that drive excited state
chemical processes/phenomena, which is fundamental to energy research. For
example, coherent excitonic and charge transfer dynamics is one potential
application. On the other hand, the algorithmic advances greatly broaden the
application of excited state electronic structure theory in the non-
perturbative, non-linear regime. Here the process of interest requires a
description of the system-field interaction that goes beyond the electric-dipole
approximation. This research activity is unique in that it seamlessly integrates
time-dependent quantum mechanical theories and spectral analysis software tools
with modular high-performance numerical libraries that are highly parallelized,
extensible, reusable, community-driven, and open-sourced. The research goals are
to provide a direct path to the discovery and design of molecules and materials
that demonstrate new or enhanced high-order optical, magnetic, electronic, and
plasmonic features.