* 1565638
* CDS&amp;E: Two-electron Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Chemistry and Physics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2022
* David Mazziotti, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 494,310.00

David Mazziotti of the University of Chicago funded by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program for developing new
approaches to quantum chemistry. Discovering novel molecules and materials that
are optimal for capturing energy from the sun or fighting disease in the human
body requires detailed knowledge of the distributions of their electrons.
Electrons, however, are very small particles; in fact, they are 1000 times less
massive than a single hydrogen atom. Consequently, electrons obey the laws of
quantum mechanics. Like Schr√∂dinger's famous cat, who is paradoxically both half
alive and half dead simultaneously, electrons can be found in two or more
physical states at the same time. When electrons in a molecule occupy many more
states than the number of electrons, the electrons in the molecule are described
by scientists as being strongly correlated (or entangled). Strongly correlated
electrons are present in some of the most fascinating molecules and materials
from the transition-metal catalysts in nitrogen fixation to the copper-oxide
planes in high-temperature superconductors. Despite the importance of strongly
correlated electrons, however, the computational cost of describing them by the
laws of quantum mechanics traditionally increases exponentially with the number
of electrons, dramatically limiting the number of strongly correlated systems
describable by theoretical chemistry and physics. In this project, Mazziotti and
his research group are further developing a novel approach to strongly
correlated molecules in which the energies and properties are computed as
functions of only two electrons in the "sea" of charge from the remaining
electrons. These so-called two-electron reduced density matrix (2-RDM) methods
are able to treat strongly correlated molecules efficiently and accurately with
a computational cost that does not grow exponentially when the system becomes
large. Recently, the 2-RDM method has been applied to several interesting and
very different types of chemical systems, for example to model the efficient
release of energy in firefly bioluminescence. Mazziotti and his research group
are currently working to extend the 2-RDM methods to larger molecular systems as
well as time-dependent phenomena with important implications for describing
molecules in studies ranging from materials to medicine. Mazziotti also produces
a journal for high school students named E = mc2 which publishes research by
students. The journal provides a forum for encouraging high school students to
pursue careers in the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The many-
electron wave function contains much more information than necessary to compute
the important energies and properties of molecules and materials. Because
electrons are indistinguishable with pairwise interactions, however, the wave
function as the basic variable of quantum mechanics can be replaced by the two-
electron reduced density matrix (2-RDM). With support from the NSF, Mazziotti
and his research group are building upon their recent advances in 2-RDM methods
with an emphasis on developing and improving 2-RDM methods for treating ground
and excited states as well as time-dependent quantum systems. Several
significant advances in the direct calculation of the 2-RDM for strongly
correlated systems are being pursued including: (1) a low-scaling 2-RDM method,
which can strongly correlate hundreds of orbitals, corresponding to wave
functions that are intractable by conventional methods, and (2) a steady-state
2-RDM method that can determine the conductance of a molecule or material even
in the presence of strong electron correlation. The research has important
applications to modeling and predicting the electronic energies and properties
including conductivity of a wide range of large strongly correlated molecular
systems.