* 1565500
* New Class of Anionic Cascade Reactions for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Jon Njardarson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 05/31/2019
* USD 545,745.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Jon T. Njardarson in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of Arizona. Heterocyclic compounds are one of the
more important structural scaffolds found in pharmaceuticals while also playing
key roles in numerous other material applications. Professor Njardarson and his
students develop useful new cascade reactions to make pharmaceuticals. For each
one of these new cascade reactions, two simple and readily accessible building
blocks are brought together in such a way that valuable complex chiral products
result. In addition, this project provides excellent training of undergraduate
and graduate students. Particularly noteworthy deliverables, which the students
associated with these projects are involved in, are unique freely accessible
educational/research tools such as pedagogical tools for structure elucidation,
the free mobile app/website Chemistry By Design and, novel pharmaceutical
structure analyses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new heterocyclic methods
developed in this award provide researchers in the pharmaceutical industry with
new and complementary approaches for building important structures. Through the
use of cascade reactions, the researchers make innovative contributions to the
asymmetric syntheses of valuable heterocyclic ring structures while establishing
new knowledge in the areas of a) anionic isomerizations, b) anion accelerated
rearrangements, c) ring expansion reactions, d) strain assisted rearrangements,
and e) asymmetric dipolar cycloaddition reactions. The many reactions emerging
from this research program open the door for researchers in academia and
industry to develop useful new blueprints for their target oriented synthesis
pursuits. These new classes of reactions, which employ bi-functional
nucleophiles, promise to be of broad scope and highly tunable. Particular focus
is on elucidating and understanding the reaction mechanisms so that the
resulting knowledge foundation can aid in designing new reactions and opening
new avenues of investigation. These new educational products provide students,
researchers and the public with new opportunities to learn about organic
chemistry and its importance to society.