* 1565632
* Quantum Models of Ion Solvation Thermodynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Thomas Beck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 434,999.00

Thomas Beck of the University of Cincinnati is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new computational methods to study ions in liquids. Ions
are charged atomic or molecular species that can dissolve in solvents like water
or organic liquids. Ions are important in a very broad range of natural and
technological systems. Table salt is the most common everyday example, but ions
of many kinds figure prominently in electrochemistry, colloids, surface
chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, soaps and detergents, biological membrane ion
channels, geology, and energy storage devices (batteries and supercapacitors).
Not all ions are the same; in fact, the ion identity (through its size, shape,
and chemistry) can dramatically affect the properties of a given system. The
focus of this project is to gain a deeper understanding of what causes such
large differences between ionic species. This research aids in developing more
accurate models for how the ions interact with solvents such as water or organic
liquids (such as ethylene carbonate, the solvent in the lithium (Li)-ion
batteries used in every electronic device). Towards this end, Beck and his
coworkers employ accurate models that come from the fundamental theory of
nature, quantum mechanics. Their goal is to learn about basic aspects of ion
solvation and then produce reliable models that can help understand problems
like atmospheric chemistry and the development of longer-lasting batteries. The
educational component of this project centers on continued development of a
course on sustainable energy. Professor Beck is currently the chair of the State
Users Group at the Ohio Supercomputer Center, with over 1000 active
computational science users. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental aspects of ion solvation in water and organic solvents.
Ion solvation figures prominently in surface chemistry, atmospheric chemistry,
soaps and detergents, biological membrane ion channels, geology, and energy
storage devices (batteries and supercapacitors). Beck and his coworkers aim to
establish a fundamental energy scale for single-ion solvation. This allows for a
firmer groundwork for studying specific ion effects. The research also leads to
the development of better classical models that can be applied to much larger
systems such as sea salt aerosols and improved batteries. The behavior of ions
near interfaces is an essential aspect of all of these problems. The research
has four objectives: to study ions in water, in organic solvents, and in
biological channels, and to further develop a new stochastic algorithm for
quantum simulations on parallel computers. The study of ions in water leads to
the accurate prediction of the effective surface potential of water, a long
sought quantity in condensed phase chemistry. This work employs ab initio
quantum simulations and quasi-chemical theory to obtain quantitative estimates
of the bulk and real hydration free energies. The study of ions in organic
solvents applies the same ideas to ions in ethylene carbonate, a key electrolyte
in Li-ion batteries. That research improves current models for these systems.
The study of ions in biological channels examines the interaction of protons and
chloride ions in the bacterial CLC channel protein. The development of
stochastic algorithims may lead to a new forward-looking algorithm for large-
scale quantum simulations. The method employs stochastic differential equations
to solve for the one-particle density matrix. Besides the scientific impacts,
the research broadly impacts education through development of a course on
sustainable energy and leadership of the State Users Group at the Ohio
Supercomputer Center, with over 1000 active computational science users.