* 1565930
* Donor-Acceptor Interactions and Their Relationship to Molecular Electronics and Excited State Processes.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Martin Kirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Martin L. Kirk of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at the University of New Mexico is studying how
electronically active molecules can be used in molecular electronics and other
molecule-based technologies. Prof. Kirk is studying (1) how electrons flow
through the molecules and can be controlled, (2) how the structures of the
molecules affect their absorption of light, and (3) the nature of the molecules'
excited states after light has been absorbed. The research is interdisciplinary
and positioned at the interface of organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry
and is providing enhanced opportunities for the education and training of next
generation scientists. Professor Kirk is involved in teaching, training and
mentoring student researchers, including those from underrepresented groups. He
is also participating in outreach projects in New Mexico including those
associated with the Albuquerque Explora! Museum and
NanoDays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals focus on using creatively
designed magnetic exchange coupled Donor-Bridge-Acceptor biradical systems to
explore (1) molecular quantum interference and molecular rectification, (2)
anisotropic covalency induced spin orbit coupling contributions to excited state
lifetimes, and (3) how excited state magnetic exchange interactions affect
magneto-optical activity, spin polarization, and excited state relaxation
pathways. The project utilizes a combined spectroscopic approach augmented by
theory and computations to address these problems. Regarding molecular electron
transport phenomena, Donor-Bridge-Acceptor electronic coupling in the context of
molecular conductance is studied in order to test recent theoretical hypotheses
and compare results to those that have been obtained under device conditions.
This work could directly impact the molecular electronics field. Modulation of
spin orbit coupling through anisotropic covalency impacts the ability to control
relaxation rates and pathways in photoexcited states. Work using magnetic
circular dichroism and transient spectroscopies reveals the nature of complex
multi-spin excited state magnetic exchange interactions that derive from
photoexcitation. The research contributes to a greater understanding of excited
state magnetism, exciton-polaron coupling, and solar energy conversion. The
project advances knowledge and understanding in the field of donor-acceptor
interactions and contribute substantially to the understanding of molecular
electronics, atom level control of excited state lifetimes, and spin effects on
excited state processes.