* 1565495
* RUI: Development of Computational Methods and Applications to Molecules in Microsolvation Environments.
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Thomas Sommerfeld, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2019
* USD 101,786.00

Thomas Sommerfeld of Southeastern Louisiana University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Method program in the
Chemistry Division and the NSF EPSCoR office to investigate how extra electrons
aid in breaking chemical bonds. Chemical bonds themselves are electrons shared
between atoms and can be thought of as a glue holding the atoms in a molecule
together. The electron-glue analogy, however, only goes so far, because a bond
can be weakened by both too little and too much glue, and weak bonds can be
cleaved during the permanent motion of the atoms. In other words, adding an
electron to a molecule generally weakens its bonds, and the resulting so-called
temporary anion may undergo either bond cleavage or, alternatively, reemit the
extra electron. Concrete examples where this reaction is applied or happens
naturally are: plasma chemistry and plasma etching, chemistry in the ionosphere,
damage to living tissue by ionizing radiation, cancer therapy with electron
beams, and reduction reactions with solvated electrons, the so-called Birch
reduction. This research project supports the development of computer models of
the temporary anion, the first intermediate formed in these electron-induced
reactions. This research is carried out with collaborators and with
undergraduate researchers. In order to introduce undergraduates to this
research, Dr. Sommerfeld also designs educational mini-projects, which are only
indirectly related to the current main project, but can be addressed with
standard quantum chemistry methods, so that his students can be introduced to
the research area step-by-step. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Dr.
Sommerfeld studies electronically metastable states - so called resonance states
or, simply, resonances. On the one hand, he develops ab initio methods to
characterize resonances, and on the other hand he applies the newly developed
methods in selected applications. Computing both the energy and finite lifetime
of a resonance is still a notoriously challenging task for quantum chemistry,
because it combines an electron-scattering with an electron-correlation problem.
To address the continuum aspect, Dr. Sommerfeld either uses complex-absorbing-
potentials or the analytic-continuation-in-the-coupling-constant method. To
address the correlation aspect, he uses the symmetry-adapted-cluster
configuration-interaction method, an electronic structure method closely related
to the equation-of-motion coupled-cluster method. One particular point of
emphasis is the artificial stabilizing potential added to the Hamiltonian in the
analytic-continuation-in-the-coupling-constant method. Dr. Sommerfeld aims to
identify a short-range stabilizing potential that improves the subsequent
analytic-continuation step. On the application side Dr. Sommerfeld's goals are
to examine resonance states, which differ in electronic structure from a closed-
shell neutral either by one-hole (Auger-like resonances) or by one excitation
(e.g. Penning ionization or resonant photodetachment). For these resonances,
treating electron correlation in a balanced way is particularly challenging. Dr.
Sommerfeld studies temporary anion resonances embedded in small molecule
clusters with the goal of identifying trends in the change of the resonance
parameters associated with the interaction strength (permanent dipole, higher
order multipoles, dispersion) of the embedding molecules.