* 1565207
* SusChEM: Powerful and Tunable Electron Donors for Reduction Chemistry and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dennis Lichtenberger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 529,238.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Dennis L. Lichtenberger and Jon T.
Njardarson of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of
Arizona and Professor Dennis H. Evans of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue
University are developing the chemistry of molecules with the ability to donate
electrons in non-polar solvents. Such strong electron donor molecules may unlock
many new chemical transformations and catalytic processes. The development of
more powerful and tunable electron donors has broad impacts on wide areas of
chemistry and society, from additions to the toolbox of synthetic organic
chemistry and natural products chemistry to insights into the catalytic
production of clean and sustainable fuels, which is one of the grand challenges
facing science today. The project combines the complementary expertise of
Professor Njardarson (organic synthesis), Professor Lichtenberger (inorganic
chemistry, spectroscopy, thermodynamics and mechanisms) and Professor Evans
(electrochemistry), and benefits from collaborations with other synthetic and
theoretical chemists. The project also has broad community participation.
Teachers at schools with large Native American student populations participate
in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses gas phase photoelectron
spectroscopy to study dimetal complexes with bicyclic guanidinate ligands that
are the strongest electron donors yet known. This project investigates the
structure, dynamics and mechanisms of this class of electron donors using a
range of synthetic, spectroscopic, electrochemical, and computational
techniques. Specific aims of the project are to: (1) investigate electron
transfer reactions in organic chemistry that are difficult or impossible with
current electron donors, such as the hydrodehalogenation of aryl chlorides to
detoxify polychlorinated byphenyls and other organic halides in the environment,
and (2) characterize electrocatalytic processes such as the reduction of protons
to hydrogen by strong donors. Chemical modifications within this class of
molecules are being pursued to produce a range of electron donor abilities for
selective chemical transformations of commercial interest.