* 1565616
* RUI: Dialing in on the proton: Understanding the role of the proton in photo-induced, proton-coupled electron transfer using tunable model systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Young, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,266.00

In this Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Elizabeth R. Young of the Department of Chemistry at Amherst College
is studying electron transfer in model molecular systems. These models are
inspired by biological systems, specifically proteins, which carry out reactions
necessary for life very efficiently. Results of this research could lead to the
development of more energy efficient reactions, including splitting water into
hydrogen and oxygen for energy storage, nitrogen fixation for agriculture and
carbon dioxide reduction to decrease greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Undergraduate students carry out the research, directly participating in each
phase of the research projects: experimental design, physical evaluation,
characterization, data analysis and scientific writing. Students are trained in
a broad range of scientific techniques and learn cutting-edge research.
Additionally, this project enhances the research infrastructure in the Pioneer
Valley of Massachusetts.

Proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) drives numerous critical reactions in
natural systems, including the light-harvesting reactions of photosynthesis.
This project explores several features in the mechanistic study of PCET. The
interplay between electron transfer driving force and the proton transfer
ability of acid groups in a series of donor and acceptor systems is studied, in
order to provide direct insight into how hydrogen-bonded interfaces modulate
electron transfer. Specific questions to be answered include: For which electron
transfer driving force ranges does the proton transfer ability make a
substantial difference in the observed rates? Does the ability of a proton
within the interface result in significant modulation in the electron transfer
rate between the same donor and acceptor moieties? Does the mode of
supramolecular donor-acceptor assembly have a significant impact on coupling and
electron transfer rates? These mechanistic studies of PCET provide important
insights into how light could be used to initiate chemical reactions that are
facilitated by the concerted movement of protons and electrons.