* 1565793
* RUI:  Computational Studies on Hydrocarbon Rearrangements: From Reactions of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons to Tunneling in Annulenes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Claire Castro, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2020
* USD 204,902.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism-A Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professors Claire Castro and William Karney in
the Department of Chemistry at the University of San Francisco. Professors
Castro and Karney and their students are computationally probing reactions of
hydrocarbons that occur over a wide range of temperature: from those that occur
during combustion to those that occur at ambient temperature. One goal of this
research is to elucidate feasible mechanistic pathways that explain experimental
results. The high temperature reactions are relevant to the synthesis of
materials such as carbon nanotubes; the lower temperature reactions are relevant
to understanding the quantum chemical concept of heavy-atom tunneling, a
fundamental aspect of chemical reactions. The project lies at the interface of
organic, physical, and materials chemistry. This research is well suited for the
education of undergraduate physical science students. The Castro/Karney team is
also well positioned to provide education and training for students from groups
that are underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aromatic
hydrocarbons undergo dramatic rearrangements at both high and low temperatures.
At temperatures of 800-1200 Â°C, reaction types of interest include hydrogen
transfers, Stone-Wales rearrangements, and vinylidene insertions. The
computational study attempts to place the various reactions on a common
theoretical footing to compare relative rates and generate a unified picture of
reactivity for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. The work also aims to clarify
structure-reactivity relationships, for example, by evaluating how the degree of
curvature influences the different mechanisms for Stone-Wales rearrangement. At
lower temperatures, pi-bond shifting in annulenes is known to be facile, and the
research explores the contribution of quantum mechanical tunneling. The
possibility that large numbers of carbon atoms are tunneling simultaneously are
explored by comparing classical and quantum tunneling rates. The work addresses
the scope of tunneling in organic reactions. The educational plan includes
training physical science undergraduates in computational methods and both
physical and organic chemistry principles.