* 1565945
* Grain Boundary-Activity Relationships in CO2 Electroreduction Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Matthew Kanan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Professor Matthew Kanan of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University is
supported by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry to
investigate a new design principle for catalysts that use electrical energy to
convert carbon dioxide (CO2) into useful chemicals. These catalysts are of
interest for applications in renewable energy storage and for making chemicals
from CO2 instead of petroleum. The research focuses on materials known as metal
nanoparticles (NPs), which are tiny pieces of metal with dimensions ranging from
about 1 to 100 nanometers (ca. 5-50 atoms). The aim is to investigate how a
particular type of defect in these particles, known as grain boundaries, affect
catalysis. Grain boundaries provide unusual surface structures and catalytic
properties that are often different from defect-free surfaces. The research aims
to probe these unusual structures and to elucidate how they impact CO2
catalysis. In addition, metal NPs are widely used as catalysts for many
industrially important, high-volume chemical reactions and this research may
lead to improvements in those applications. On the educational front, CO2
recycling is being incorporated into educational material to enhance student
awareness of the global carbon cycle, the formation of fossil fuels, and the
flux of CO2 into the atmosphere from fossil fuel combustion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research encompasses two synergistic objectives: i)
characterize grain boundary surface terminations on metal NPs with atomic-level
resolution to assess the possible surface sites for catalysis ii) elucidate
grain boundary-activity relationships in metal catalysts with different grain
boundary densities and geometries. The structures of grain boundaries and their
surface terminations are probed using a combination of high-resolution
transmission electron microscopy, electron diffraction, and molecular dynamics
simulations. Catalysts spanning a range of grain boundary densities and
character distributions are prepared using established synthetic methods as well
as new methods developed in this research. These properties are correlated to
the CO2 electroreduction activity to establish quantitative grain boundary-
activity relationships.