* 1565810
* New Peptidic Foldamer Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Samuel Gellman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 530,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Samuel Gellman, who is a faculty
member in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin - Madison.
Gellman's group develops new types of protein-like molecules, based on
biologically-inspired designs. Biological systems contain sequence-specific
oligomers and polymers that fold to particular shapes. Gellman's laboratory
creates unnatural oligomers, or "foldamers", that also adopt discrete shapes.
This research employs beta- and gamma-amino acids as alternative building blocks
to the natural alpha-amino acids. The protein folding process arranges key
subunits into the precise three-dimensional arrays that are necessary for
binding to other molecules and catalyzing chemical reactions. A central aim of
the Gellman group's research is to develop synthetic foldamers that display
protein-like binding and/or catalytic properties. These materials ultimately
might surpass proteins in terms of specific functions. This basic research may
lead to new types of drug molecules or new types of nanoscale manufacturing
capabilities. Conducting this research provides outstanding interdisciplinary
training to undergraduates and graduate students.

The study of foldamers is an area of chemistry research that offers
opportunities for invention in terms of basic research and practical
development. This research focuses on cutting-edge challenges in terms of
molecular design. One aim is to link understanding of small-molecule
conformational propensities to the higher-order structure preferences that
emerge in oligomers built from the smaller molecules. In particular, The Gellman
group creates secondary structures containing beta- and/or gamma-amino acid
residues that form new helical secondary structures with large internal
cavities, a feature not found among protein secondary structures. A second aim
is to leverage previously acquired knowledge of beta-peptide and alpha/beta-
peptide folding behavior to arrange pairs of reactive groups in ways that
catalyze synthetically useful reactions. A third aim focuses on quantitative
assessment of structure-stability relationships for foldamer helices,
information that has been largely unavailable to date. The research group seeks
to understand how changes in subunit structure affects the stability of foldamer
secondary structures. Progress toward each of these goals may improve
understanding of relationships between molecular structure and function.