* 1565637
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Faunal Remains As An Environmental Reconstruction Tool
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Darryl de Ruiter, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 7,759.00

Many theories of hominin behavioral and morphological evolution focus on the
environments occupied by early members of our lineage in order to provide an
adaptive context for major evolutionary events. One way in which past
environments are inferred is through the analysis of fossilized animal remains,
with mammals featuring prominently. In many studies, recovered cranial and
dental remains are analyzed in order to reconstruct past faunal communities from
which past environmental conditions are then inferred. An alternate method
involves analyses of postcranial (e.g. femora and humeri) elements within an
ecological functional framework linking skeletal morphology to locomotory
patterns and habitat use. While studies of craniodental remains from smaller
mammals, such as rodents, have contributed to understanding of the past,
analyses of their postcrania have lagged behind those of other groups, such as
African antelopes. As rodents are the most abundant and ecologically diverse
group of modern mammals, this project will address this issue and test whether
this currently underutilized source of data can be used to reconstruct past
environments. By generating an accessible comparative database, the results from
this study will be applicable to not only reconstructions of paleoenvironments
occupied by early human ancestors, but also archaeological studies and can be
adapted for modern small mammal biodiversity surveys and habitat monitoring.
This study will also provide public science outreach through presentations in
both the U.S. and Africa. These presentations will build upon current
collaborations with various institutions and contribute to undergraduate,
graduate, and public understating of the natural history of the region. Finally,
this project provides graduate training for the Co-PI and undergraduate training
through the enrollment of students in Department of Anthropology's Graduate-
Undergraduate Mentorship Program at Texas A&M University.

Utilizing several different methods, this study tests whether analyses of
African rodent postcrania can provide useful data for reconstructing past
environments. First, using both traditional linear measurements and two-
dimensional outlines from digital photographs, this study tests if modern rodent
postcrania can be used to identify what taxa (i.e. genus and species) are
present, and thus can be used in a similar manner as craniodental remains to
reconstruct rodent community composition. Second, traditional linear
measurements will also be utilized to test if modern rodent postcrania can be
used to assess locomotory patterns within an ecological functional framework to
infer habitat use. The correspondence in environmental signals obtained between
these two approaches (taxonomic and ecological functional) will then be
assessed. After compiling a modern comparative dataset, fossilized rodent
postcrania from the South African hominin-bearing sites of Sterkfontein and
Swartkrans will be subjected to a dual taxonomic and ecological functional based
analysis in order to test previously proposed paleoenvironmental signals that
have used other proxy data, including rodent craniodental remains. This study
will improve our ability to reconstruct past environments associated with early
hominin remains through analyses of a currently underutilized source of data,
rodent postcrania, and will help clarify the environmental context at two sites
important to our understanding of human evolution.