* 1565506
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role Of Road Systems In Social Definition And Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Marcos Llobera, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,072.00

The fundamental goal of this research is to explore the social implications in
the development of the urban layout by studying the road network of the ancient
city of Angamuco (250-1530 CE), located in the core-area of the Purépecha Empire
(Lake Pátzcuaro Basin), Michoacán. It will provide insight into our general
understanding of how a city emerges, develops, is inhabited and experienced by
its residents, and the roles that roads play during these processes. Under the
guidance of Dr. Marcos Llobera, Rodrigo Solinis-Casparius will integrate spatial
and image analysis with archaeological survey and excavation to: (1) identify
road segments, pathways, intersections and other associated movement technology;
(2) determine the relative temporal sequencing and configuration of roads, and;
(3) classify roads according to their morphology, construction, configuration,
and experiential properties. This will permit rigorous evaluation of: a) changes
in patterns of urbanization through thirteen centuries of habitation, and b) the
influence of the State and commoners in the creation, establishment and use of
the movement network of Angamuco. Ultimately, researchers will produce new
insights that are relevant to a wide range of disciplines interested in
community formation, material agency, and the emergence and transformation of
urban spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will suggest a conceptual
framework to explore different scales of social interaction and organization in
western Mexico by incorporating approaches used in Mesoamerica, the Middle East,
Southeast Asia and the Mediterranean to assess intra-site mobility and
urbanization processes. This research will directly contribute in two ways.
Methodologically, this study will provide techniques to better identify ancient
urban roads by their manufacture technology, morphology, connectivity and
accessibility. It will also test and develop a methodology to better understand
the chronological sequencing of roads implementing Network Analysis, ceramic
seriation and absolute dating (C14). Analytically, this project will provide a
detailed typology of urban roads, an interpretative ground to explore the social
organization and the urbanization process of Angamuco, and the impact of
Purépecha Empire's influence in the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin area. The results of
this project will be used as a basis for continuing investigation of intra-site
mobility, accessibility and interaction, as well as the relationship between
humans and their landscape in Mesoamerica and elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this project will contribute to increasing
the ways in which archaeological heritage is valued for scientists and the
importance of protecting it by developing educational and outreach activities in
communities located near the archaeological site in Mexico and in the U.S. These
actions will add to the conservation efforts of the heritage council community
center in Tzintzuntzan and include: a) generating informative materials
(including a community report in Spanish) discussing the history of the site and
the archaeological practice, b) offering guided site tours for community
members, and c) engaging in talks and presentations to educators and students in
local schools and at local events. Finally, working with the Legacies of
Resilience Project (LORE-LPB), this research will contribute to the training of
young scholars from different backgrounds and nurture international
relationships between Mexican and American institutions.