* 1565555
* Collaborative Research: Public R&amp;D and the Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Brent Goldfarb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 02/28/2021
* USD 300,287.00

The government?s role in sponsoring R&amp;D has been justified because the
private sector is likely to underinvest in R&amp;D due to the long horizons of
basic research and the difficulties in generating financial returns to basic
research outcomes. This project provides valuable insights to understand whether
the decline in Federal R&amp;D spending since 2010 hurts U.S. competitiveness.
This project leverages a new quantitative measure of long term technological
trajectories, patent influence, to determine if public funding of inventive
activity supports research that would be eschewed by the private sector. The
project investigates the long term implications of changes to federal agency
support of research on the likely impact of future scientific and technological
breakthroughs. The project?s research strategy presents a solution to the
difficult problem of measuring the long term effects of basic research funding
on invention and offers policy makers a way to better assess the types of
programs that are likely to lead to long term scientific and technological
breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The public contribution to the knowledge
embedded in a patent is measured through the patent?s citations to patents and
academic research, its funding sources, and where the invention occurred (i.e.,
university, a national lab or a private firm). These attributes are then related
to patent influence. The use of the influence measure is computationally
intensive and only recently feasible given advances in computing technology.
This research is the first to provide a comprehensive, quantitative assessment
of the long term influence of public support of research and development on
technological trajectories, as measured by patents. A pilot study of patents
granted and applied for between 2001 and 2004 suggests that while average
patents are similar, some types of government funding are more likely to lead to
the generation of breakthrough inventions than patents funded by the private
sector. The use of quantile regression analysis accommodates the skewed nature
of the returns to research and development and allows studying funding effects
on breakthrough inventions. The project will calculate both influence and
received influence measures for all digitized patents.&lt;br/&gt;