* 1565478
* NJIT Secure Computing Initiative
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Ali Mili, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 4,078,362.00

This proposal will inaugurate a CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) under the name Secure
Computing Initiative (SCI). It proposes a novel cyber-security education model
that combines four main features: (1) flexible cyber-security curricula; (2)
experiential learning; (3) research-based learning; and (4) multi-tier
mentoring. This model requires the funded students to participate in both in-
class and out-of-class learning activities. In addition, it interleaves strong
theoretical knowledge acquired in traditional courses with hands-on practical
skills acquired in project-based courses. As part of the NJIT?s Cybersecurity
Research Center, the project will establish an SFS lab to enable research-based
learning. A team of PhD students, supported by the college, will mentor the SFS-
funded MS and BS students. As part of the mentoring process, students will get
an advice from the Security Clearance Advisory Board composed of NJIT
administrative staff members who went through the clearance process during their
previous careers. The board members will help the students understand the
clearance process and also assist them when they are going through the process.
The project team will work with NJIT?s Career Development Services (CDS) to
achieve 100% placement for the SFS students. CDS has nurtured and maintained a
long term relationship with governmental agencies and achieved high rates of
placement for permanent positions as well as internships and coop
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCI program is designed to fulfill the
national needs for cyber-security experts, to enhance discovery while promoting
learning, and to increase the participation of women and under-represented
groups in cybersecurity. SCI will also produce scientific results and publicly
available software that will help the nation better protect against new cyber
threats. Many of the proposed activities involve contact with the general
public, and are prone to sensitize the society to the importance of
cybersecurity. The outreach activities also include an enrichment program for
high school students that focuses on cybersecurity education.