* 1565521
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Marc Liberatore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 4,189,336.00

This proposal will inaugurate a CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the University of Massachusetts (UMass) at Amherst, the
Commonwealth?s flagship institution of higher education. This program will
support and expand several of the University?s advanced programs that educate
and train cybersecurity researchers and professionals. It will support four
interdisciplinary cohorts of seven scholars across four nationally-recognized
colleges and departments at UMass: computer science, electrical and computer
systems engineering, mathematics and statistics, and business. The proposed
program has several key objectives. It will create the CyberCorps® community
that ensures their success through strong peer-mentoring, faculty advising, and
academic and professional support. The program intends a 100% placement in
government cybersecurity positions, leveraging the UMass faculty?s many
relationships with various federal and state labs and offices. UMass?s academic
programs in cybersecurity have and will continue to provide high-quality
education and research opportunities, with instruction from and collaboration
with leading scholars in the field. Its academic programs will address the
multifaceted nature of cybersecurity by continuing to expand and integrating
interdisciplinary material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will prepare
students for successful careers in cybersecurity, through a combination of
strong curricula, ample professional development, extensive advising,
interdisciplinary enrichment, and access to recruiting opportunities. In
addition, the program will continue and expand UMass?s existing mechanisms to
recruit and retain women and underrepresented minorities into our undergraduate
and graduate programs. This program will directly impact the cybersecurity
workforce by training 28 cybersecurity professionals. Further, this program
directly encourages interdisciplinary work between faculty. More generally, the
developments under this program, including curriculum, professional development,
broad interdisciplinary collaboration, and recruiting focused on women and
underrepresented minorities will provide a broad and sustained base to attract
more students into UMass?s cybersecurity programs into the foreseeable future.