* 1565743
* RUI:  Correlated Methods for Calculation of the Electronic Coupling Element
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Robert Cave, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2021
* USD 261,078.00

Robert Cave of Harvey Mudd College is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry division to
develop computational methods for studying electron transfer reactions. Electron
transfer reactions are the simplest chemical reactions but have central roles in
biological systems and in human-engineered devices that seek to harness solar
energy as alternative sources. The initial stages of plant photosynthesis are
exquisitely engineered to transfer electrons across large distances, wasting as
little energy as possible, in order to make high-energy molecules for later use.
The mitochondria in the cells of animals use an analogous "reverse" electron
transfer pathway to synthesize molecules that allow muscle movement from high-
energy precursors. As we seek to mimic the effectiveness of plants in harnessing
solar energy it is critical to understand electron transfer processes at a
detailed level. The rate of electron transfer depends on many quantities, but
the factor that controls the distance- and orientation-dependence of the rate is
called the "electronic coupling element", a quantity that has the potential to
yield unprecedented control of rates if we can understand it at a fundamental
level. Cave and his coworkers develop new methods for the calculation of the
electronic coupling that are more accurate than existing approaches. The new
methods and results are used to better design new synthetic solar energy
conversion devices and understand mechanisms of biological electron transfer.
The work is carried out Harvey Mudd College, an undergraduate institution. The
work provides an excellent educational opportunity for students likely to pursue
graduate work in chemistry and also supports the annual presentation of a
theoretical chemistry workshop to the Society of Women Engineers? On-Campus Day
for high school women, where 100-150 high school women are introduced to
opportunities in science, engineering and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Great strides have been made over
the past two decades in developing diabatization techniques for extracting the
electronic coupling from standard quantum chemical approaches. However, because
of the poor scaling of correlated quantum chemistry methods with system size one
is often faced with the choice between accuracy and tractability, especially for
large electron transfer systems. Given the success of these diabatization
methods, it is imperative to turn attention to developing new electronic
structure theory approaches, tailored to the electron transfer problem, which
are accurate and able to treat considerably larger systems. This work addresses
this challenge by developing a series of approximate methods that include
correlation in a balanced fashion for all of the zeroth-order states relevant to
the electron transfer process. These approaches greatly extend the size of
electron transfer systems for which the coupling can be obtained accurately and
thus provide useful guidance about the suitability of more approximate methods.
In particular a family of correlated methods is developed to calculate the
electronic coupling element based on approximations to the Equation of Motion
Coupled Cluster approach. The methods scale no worse than MP2/MBPT2, giving
access to dramatically larger systems than available to CI or CCSD. Use of PT-
based coefficients in place of CCSD coefficients in the similarity transformed
Hamiltonian, coupled with truncated excitation spaces tailored to electron
transfer systems, lead to the increased scope and speed. Tests of these new
methods include a series of model systems where high-accuracy calculations can
also be performed, application to calculate the electronic coupling in near-
degenerate donor/acceptor and bridge systems, and the study of through-solvent
electron transfer. Both of the latter two computational targets have been
studied experimentally.