* 1565355
* Collaborative Research: Production of known and novel, safe, and biodegradable pyrethrin-type insecticides in tomato
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Eran Pichersky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1565355/1565232 &lt;br/&gt;Pichersky/Last &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyrethrins are a
group of six similar natural insecticides synthesized by the flowers of the
plant Tanacetum cinerariifolium, a relative of chrysanthemum. Pyrethrins are
extremely safe to humans and to domestic and barn animals, and have been used to
fight malaria and other insect-borne diseases. They are also biodegradable and
non-persistent in the environment, preventing the appearance of pyrethrin-
resistant insects. Pyrethrins are currently obtained by growing the plants until
they bloom, collecting the flowers, and extracting the compounds from dry
petals. Because the concentration of pyrethrins in the petals is low, overall
pyrethrin yield is low, the amount available for sale is limited, and the price
is high. The researchers will employ genes from T. cinerariifolium and other
plants to reconstruct the biosynthetic pathway leading to the six natural
pyrethrins, as well as to create new variant pyrethrins, in tomato that have a
high capacity for synthesizing an early precursor of pyrethrins. Thus, this work
aims to develop tomato as a system for making high-value organic compounds in
general, and increase the available range of natural, safe, and biodegradable
insecticides. In addition, this research will provide interdisciplinary training
opportunities in genetic engineering, plant biochemistry, analytical chemistry,
and molecular biology to undergraduate and graduate students as well as post-
doctoral researchers. Furthermore, the researchers will engage in outreach
programs to young people and adults to describe the research project, its
results, and potential societal benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyrethrins are
natural insecticides synthesized by the flowers of the plant Tanacetum
cinerariifolium (Asteraceae). A pyrethrin is an ester made up of one of two
monoterpenoid acids (chrysanthemic and pyrethric acids) and one of three
alcohols derived from jasmonic acid (pyrethrolone, cinerolone, and jasmolone).
The researchers will recreate the biosynthetic pathway to chrysanthemic acid in
tomato, which by itself does not have the genes specifying the synthesis of
chrysanthemic acid but makes the early precursor dimethylallyl diphosphate
(DMAPP). Tomato was chosen as a production system because two of its organs,
fruits and trichomes, make DMAPP in large amounts. The pathway will be
streamlined by identifying and deploying genes and enzymes from T.
cinerariifolium and other plant species that efficiently convert DMAPP to
chrysanthemic acid, and by identifying and inhibiting genes and enzymes that
divert pathway intermediates to non-productive side-products. The project will
also examine if the engineered tomato lines produce esters of chrysanthemic
acid, and develop approaches to engineer tomato to make natural pyrethrin esters
as well as novel esters of chrysanthemic acid for testing possible insecticidal
properties. Finally, natural pyrethrins will be produced enzymatically and non-
enzymatically in vitro with tomato-produced chrysanthemic acid. This work will
result in the high-yield production of highly valuable natural and safe
pesticides. It will also advance the general goal of better understanding of
plant metabolism so that the production of specific compounds in plants by
genetic engineering techniques can become more predictable.&lt;br/&gt;This award
by the Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is
co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program of the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.