* 1565997
* CRII: ACI: Transforming Semiautomatic Patient-Specific Simulation Workflows into Autonomous Medical Imaging-Through-Analysis Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Dominik Schillinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 05/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

While finite element simulations are well established in medical research, their
potential for every-day use in clinical practice still lies largely idle. One of
the major reasons is the process of building patient-specific computational
models, including transfer of diagnostic imaging data to explicit surfaces,
geometry cleanup and boundary-fitted mesh generation. Although powerful software
solutions to streamline this process are available today, many simulation
workflows involving complex physiological geometries still require the
intervention of specially trained analysts. The associated cost and time
implications do not fit into many clinical processes characterized by tight
budgets and urgent decision-making. The goal of this project is to initiate
research activities that provide a pathway to a closer integration of predictive
simulation in clinical decision-making and help unlock its potential in clinical
routines. The developed concepts and methods can be applied in the context of
the timely diagnosis and management of osteoporosis and vascular disease that
constitute significant challenges for the US healthcare system. The discoveries
and clinical tools evolving from this research have the potential to transform
current healthcare protocols, thus improving the well-being of a large portion
of the elderly population in the US. Therefore, this research aligns with the
NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical viewpoint,
this project envisions seamless imaging-through-analysis procedures that enable
the full automation of predictive biomedical simulations from reading in
diagnostic imaging data to the output of clinically relevant simulation results.
To this end, it focuses on establishing the mathematical, algorithmic and
technical foundations of diffuse geometry based finite element analysis applied
to clinically relevant problems in bone mechanics and biofluids. The central
point is the extension of the phase-field concept to the description of all
interface related information, such as location or normal directions, in a
diffuse sense. In the context of fuzzy imaging data, diffuse geometric models
can be generated automatically by integrating unsupervised medical image
processing techniques with variational segmentation methods. Diffuse geometry
can enable specialized finite element methods that transfer all variational
boundary and interface integrals into volume integrals, so that any form of
explicit surface tracking is avoided. This project aims to demonstrate accuracy,
robustness, and error control in diffuse geometry based simulations, in
particular within the range of physiologically relevant flow regimes. It also
can demonstrate the potential of diffuse geometry methods in autonomous
cyberinfrastructure for osteoporosis prediction, preoperative planning for
orthopedics, and liver perfusion analysis.