* 1565487
* CRII: CPS SaTC: Securing Smart Cyberphysical Systems against Man-in-the-Middle Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Abhishek Gupta, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,994.00

Cyber-physical systems have increasingly become top targets for hackers around
the world. We are also seeing proliferation of internet-connected critical
infrastructures that allow for easy monitoring, visualization, and control. In
February 2013, US president signed an executive order "Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity" that underscores the urgent need for securing such
critical infrastructure against malicious attacks. Accordingly, this project is
developing mathematical tools and approaches to design secure communication
protocol in tandem with smart control algorithms to secure cyber-physical
systems. The PI is leveraging research in network security and optimization to
devise the algorithms, which optimize system performance and provides immunity
against a wide class of cyber-attacks. The PI and his students are also creating
a testbed on which the designed algorithms will be tested. The broader impact of
the project is to introduce novel mathematical methods for designing secure
systems and form new collaboration cutting across various disciplines. The
project is also training a graduate student and two undergraduate students, who
are working on the project. Some part of the project will be included as case
studies in future undergraduate classes. Further, the project aims at increasing
the awareness about cybersecurity of critical infrastructures among next
generation of engineers and scientists.

This is among the first projects to extensively investigate the joint design of
encryption-decryption and optimal control strategies. The key difficulties in
the analyses are: (i) the dynamics of the control system; (ii) uncertainties due
to exogenous factors; and (iii) the delays in the information transfer due to
encryption-decryption algorithms and the real-time operating systems. Using the
foundational theory of decentralized optimal control, cryptography, network
security, and game theory, the PI is designing encryption-decryption-control
strategies for large-scale infrastructures. Due to inherently dynamic nature of
the control system, the cryptographic key used for encrypting the data is
changed dynamically to reduce the possibility of leakage of information to the
adversary. Further, if a controller senses tampering of data, then it acts in a
manner that guarantees system stability and performance. These algorithms take
into account (i) errors introduced in the channel due to attacks, (ii) delays
due to encryption-decryption protocol, and (iii) real-time communication and
computational constraints imposed by real-time operating systems. The algorithms
thus designed are expected to be resilient to attacks and will be able to adapt
itself to changing system parameters.