* 1565734
* Vortex Dynamics and Suppression of Chemical Turbulence in Autocatalytic Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Oliver Steinbock, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,007.00

In this project funded by the Chemistry Division (Chemical Structure, Dynamics
and Mechanisms A), Professor Oliver Steinbock (Florida State University) is
studying how seemingly simple chemical reactions can form complex life-like
patterns. Chemical reactions in a laboratory container can produce macroscopic
patterns that include rotating spirals that appear visually as striking blue
bands on a red background. Closely related spirals exist as electrical phenomena
also in the human heart where they cause life-threatening conditions and are
among the leading causes of death in the US. Professor Steinbock and his
students will investigate the behavior of these spiral waves in thick layers
that model the heart focusing on specific questions including the effect of
height variations. They will also study the pinning of these spirals to inert
areas that correspond to anatomical features and scar tissue formed after heart
attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the autocatalytic Belousov-
Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction and numerical simulations of reaction-diffusion models
to investigate self-propagating concentration waves. In three dimensions, these
nonlinear waves can take the form of vortices that rotate around one-dimensional
phase singularities called filaments. Filament motion can generate a form of
spatio-temporal chaos that shares many dynamical similarities with ventricular
fibrillation in the human heart. The effect of non-reactive heterogeneities on
periodic and chaotic vortices will be investigated with a focus on the defect-
mediated suppression of turbulent states as well as the translational motion of
vortices along step edges. Another component is the study of vortex pinning in
higher dimensional networks. The outreach program includes the dissemination of
key results and pertinent background information to laymen and teachers using
YouTube videos and other internet-based resources.