* 1565103
* ABI Development: Enabling broad-scale ecological analysis and synthesis through PASTA Plus, a component of the Environmental Data Initiative
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Robert Waide, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,530,151.00

Global-scale environmental issues such as food security, the spread of disease,
and the availability of clean water emphasize the importance of environmental
data that can address specific problems while also providing predictions of
future conditions. The increasing availability of large volumes of different
kinds of data offers new opportunities to address these issues. This project
will provide the environmental research community with efficient and reliable
means for data management, storage, and sharing. The facilities developed will
allow researchers, policy makers, managers, and other stakeholders to bring
relevant data to bear on complex environmental questions. Modern approaches that
encourage geographically distributed collaboration will be used to increase
efficiency of data curation beyond those available for single projects. The
project will provide the training and skills needed to overcome technical and
social barriers to collaboration, thereby enhancing infrastructure to address
ecological questions over broad spatial and temporal scales.

Research in environmental sciences is often conducted by individual
investigators over limited spatial and temporal scales under funding models that
provide limited capacity for data curation or sharing. Data that are archived in
a stable, accessible repository and that are accompanied by appropriate metadata
benefit both data producers and consumers through improved discoverability and
reliability. This project builds on expertise available in the Long Term
Ecological Research (LTER) community to provide these benefits. The Provenance
Aware Synthesis Architecture repository will ensure long-term availability of
data and open data access through federations such as DataONE. This system will
be expanded in several ways to accommodate a broader community of data providers
and users. These enhancements include a scalable user identity management
system, improved data documentation procedures to simplify data submission for
non-technical users, and expand the data-quality assurance tools to accommodate
a broader range of community practices. Training activities will be developed
that range from the basics of metadata creation to the adoption of standardized
best practices for specific types of data. The development of templates for
describing a data lifecycle will accelerate the availability of data for
synthesis. The project will leverage the collective experience of the LTER
community to improve data management across a broad community through
communication and collaboration. It will facilitate shared technology to develop
more commonly usable and more efficient approaches to data curation workflows.
Participants in training workshops will be trained in developing workflow
technology, re-using existing workflows, and archiving and sharing their
developments. Through these workshops, together with community-level centers of
expertise, and individual-based skill exchanges, the project will increase the
volume of data available along with data discoverability and reuse. These
advances will accelerate scientific inquiry through data curation and
publication as well as through data discovery and integration.