* 1565653
* Mechanisms for El Nino and La Nina Evolution Asymmetry and Formation of Super El Ninos
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Tim Li, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2019
* USD 496,497.00

ABSTRACT

El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events, in which the sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) warm or cool over a large portion of the central and eastern
equatorial Pacific, affect weather and climate worldwide including substantial
impacts over the US. The underlying mechanisms of ENSO have been identified and
prediction efforts have met with some success, but fundamental questions remain.
One such question is why El Nino events (with anomalously warm SSTs in the
equatorial Pacific) terminate differently from La Nina events (with cold SSTs),
as El Ninos are often followed by La Ninas while La Ninas are more likely to
persist or redevelop. Preliminary work by the PI has identified differences in
the pattern of surface fluxes and wind stress in the central Pacific during the
mature and decaying phases of El Nino and La Nina events. Work performed here
uses a combination of ocean mixed layer heat budget analysis and model
simulations (primarily with uncoupled ocean and atmosphere models) to determine
the origins of these differences and their importance for differences in event
termination.

A second question is why a few El Ninos, termed "super El Ninos", grow rapidly
to substantially larger amplitude (over two standard deviations) than typical
events. Preliminary work has identified differences in the onset and development
phases of super and ordinary El Ninos including off-equatorial thermocline depth
anomalies in the super events, and work here examines these differences through
a combination of coupled and uncoupled ocean-atmosphere modeling experiments.

A further task of the research is an examination of changes in ENSO amplitude in
simulations of greenhouse gas-induced future climate change. A survey of
simulations from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5)
shows substantial disagreement, with roughly equal numbers of models projecting
an increase or decrease in the strength of ENSO events. Work here seeks to
identify differences in feedback mechanisms (e.g. the Bjerknes feedback) which
can account for model to model amplitude differences. Once these are identified
they will be related to changes in the model background state through a linear
decomposition of the mixed layer heat budget. One hypothesis considered is that
amplitude differences are related to changes in the meridional width of the ENSO
SST pattern, which is in turn related to the strength of the Pacific Subtropical
Cell.

The work has societal broader impacts due to the worldwide consequences of ENSO
events and the desirability of improved ENSO predictions. Predictions in 2014 of
an imminent super El Nino, which did not materialize, suggest a particular need
for better understanding of the nature of super events. Work to improve
understanding of how climate change affects ENSO events also has societal value,
and the PI intends to develop a projection of ENSO amplitude change based on
work under this award. In addition, the project provides support and training
for a graduate student, thereby promoting workforce development in this research
area.