* 1565277
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: Design Principles for a Future-Proof Internet Control Plane
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

One of the big challenges faced in the Internet today is the ever growing
complexity associated with the increasingly diverse usage models and growing
user expectations about quality of service. The core technology used in the
Internet, IPv4 and BGP, is based on technology developed in the 1970's and early
1980's, when the focus of the Internet was providing connectivity between
unsophisticated edge networks and applications. In contrast, today's users and
service providers want high Quality of Experience, e.g., smooth HD video,
responsive e-commerce stores, interactive social networks, etc. Addressing these
challenges is hard because both IP and BGP have proven to be very rigid and hard
to modify. While there has been much research on clean slate proposals for the
Internet data plane, research in the control plane has mostly focused on
specific protocols. This project fills this void by using a holistic approach to
the design of the Internet control plane that can adapt to efficiently meet the
growing demands placed on the Internet.

Based on our experience with the XIA future Internet architecture project, we
define three separate but related requirements. First, control protocols must be
evolvable so they can adapt to future emerging requirements. Second Internet
routing protocols must be resource aware. Finally, the Internet control plane
must support coordination with the control planes of increasingly sophisticated
edge networks such as content delivery networks (CDNs) and cloud infrastructure.
The project has a broad research agenda that includes research in protocol
support for evolvability and resource-awareness in the Internet, the definition
of interfaces and techniques for coordination across edge and transit domains,
and a control plane architecture that provides support for common control
protocol functions such as discovery and control communication. This research
uses several real-world drivers including traffic engineering, cloud computing
and a large-scale distributed denial of service (DDoS) defense service. Finally,
the project will includes an end-to-end experimental evaluation effort using
large-scale testbeds such CloudLab, GENI, and PEERING.

Intellectual merit: The main intellectual merit of the project is that it
addresses three fundamental challenges in for Internet control protocols
(evolvability, resource-awareness, and interfaces for coordination across
heterogeneous control planes) in an integrated fashion. The results in these
three areas will be integrated in a novel control plane architecture for the
Internet.

Broader Impact: The project will also have significant broader impact. First,
tools to run large scale networking experiments across testbeds such as
Cloudlab, GENI and PEERING will be made available to the research community.
Second, the project will engage undergrad and MS students in the project and
integrate results in courses at CMU and UW-Madison, and will organize a DIMACS
workshop to engage the community in discussion on the important topic of control
plane design for the future Internet. Finally, the holistic approach to
rethinking the network control plane can have tremendous impact on the
networking research community and industry.