* 1565657
* High-Energy Hot Electrons from Ultraviolet-Plasmonic Rhodium Nanoparticles for Plasmon-enhanced Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Jie Liu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Considering the limited supply and environmental impact caused by the
consumption of fossil fuels, harnessing abundant sunlight to produce clean
energy fuels and desirable chemicals is of great societal benefit. Recently, a
special family of metal nanoparticles has been proposed for use as
photocatalysts that can effect solar harvesting and help perform the desired
chemical reactions. These nanoparticles are characterized by strong light
absorption due to the effect of the small nanoparticle size on the metal's
electronic structure (the plasmonic effect). In this project, Dr. Jie Liu is
exploring the mechanism of plasmonic photocatalysis and the influence of the
physical and chemical properties of these nanocatalysts on their catalytic
activity and product selectivity. The research has broader impact for the design
of high-performance plasmonic photocatalysts of economically important chemical
reactions such as carbon dioxide capture. Dr. Liu is actively involved in
education and outreach activities. He organizes campus-wide social and
networking events for graduate and undergraduate students through Duke
University Network in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (Duke N3). He also involves
high school students in his research through the NC SEED program, which supports
and encourages talented, disadvantaged North Carolina high school students to
pursue graduate degrees in chemistry and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Liu
of Duke University is developing a fundamental understanding of how ultraviolet-
plasmonic rhodium (Rh) nanoparticles catalyze photocatalytic transformations and
how the properties of the plasmonic metal nanostructures determine their
photocatalytic activity and product selectivity. The charge-transfer process
between the plasmonic Rh nanoparticles and adsorbed molecules on their surface,
a critical step in activating reactants in photocatalytic reactions, is studied
by spectroscopic methods. Two photocatalytic reactions, namely ethylene
epoxidation and carbon dioxide reduction, are studied as model reactions to
obtain understanding on how hot electrons from the plasmonic photocatalysts
enable kinetically sluggish or thermodynamically unfavorable reactions. The
effects of the chemical and physical properties of Rh nanoparticles, including
size, shape and resonant energy, on their catalytic activity and selectivity is
also under investigation. In addition to the experimental investigation, density
functional theory (DFT) calculations are conducted to obtain the potential
energy landscape in elementary steps of the reactions and elucidate the
mechanism of the hot electron induced photocatalytic transformations. Dr. Liu is
also actively involved in education and outreach activities with broad impact on
his local community. He organizes campus-wide social and networking events
involving graduate students and undergraduate students with strong presence of
women scientists in these events. He also involves high school students in the
research through the NC SEED program, which supports disadvantaged North
Carolina high school students to pursue graduate degrees in chemistry and
physics.