* 1565661
* SusChEM: Electronic Structure and Reactivity of Peroxo- and Hydroxomanganese Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Timothy Jackson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 416,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Timothy Jackson of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Kansas is investigating new manganese peroxo
and hydroxo complexes with interesting chemical reactivity. The goal of this
research is to determine how the structures of these manganese complexes can be
controlled to impart a desired reaction. This knowledge could be used to reduce
the cost and environmental footprint of chemical transformations and will
advance understanding of manganese enzymes in humans, plants, and bacteria. The
project lies at the interface of inorganic, physical and biological chemistry,
and provides a training experience for graduate and undergraduate students.
Trips to national laboratories to perform X-ray absorption experiments afford
training in synchrotron radiation, including radiation safety training. This
research is disseminated to the general public via presentations at University
Orientation Days, the University Mini-College, and Science on Tap. In these
forums, a broad, general audience engages with on-going chemical research.
Spectroscopic and theoretical methods used in this research is incorporated into
graduate and undergraduate courses. This research has relevance to sustainable
chemistry because it uses less toxic and more abundant manganese complexes.

Manganese(III)-peroxo adducts are frequently proposed as intermediates in the
formation of high-valent manganese-oxo species in synthetic oxidation catalysts.
Manganese(III)-hydroxo motifs are known to participate in biologically important
proton-coupled electron-transfer reactions. However, the influence of geometric
and electronic structure on the reactivity of these compounds is not well
defined. Specific aims of the project include: 1) investigation of the O-O bond
activation pathways of a manganese(III)-peroxo adduct support by an oxidatively
robust ligand; 2) exploration of ligand effects on the reductive activation of
manganese(III)-peroxo adducts; and 3) a systematic variation of the ligand field
of manganese(III)-hydroxo complexes to develop correlations between electronic
structure perturbations and chemical reactivity. Through this work, molecular-
level insight into the activation of peroxomanganese(III) species for oxygen
(O)-O bond cleavage through chemical and electrochemical pathways are developed.
In addition, the proton-coupled electron transfer reactions of mid-valent
hydroxomanganese(III) species are explored. In an undergraduate bioinorganic
course, students will develop video modules describing relevant physical
methods. The methods used in this research are incorporated into graduate and
undergraduate courses. The results of this work are disseminated broadly through
University and community outreach activities.