* 1565539
* Collaborative Research:   Perdigao:  Multiscale Flow Interactions in Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* David Turner, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 397,851.00

Atmospheric flow through complex terrain is difficult to simulate due to the
small scales of mountains and hills and the dependence of wind on a variety of
factors, such as the temperature structure of the air near the ground. This
award will allow a group of researchers the opportunity to join a large field
campaign in Portugal and to supplement the experiment by deploying a large
number of instruments. The project should result in a data set that will be used
by numerical modelers for many years to come, with impacts on understanding
boundary layer flows important to wind energy, air pollution, aviation,
contaminant dispersion and alpine warfare. In addition, a number of students
will have the opportunity to participate in the campaign and interact with
international colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Perdigao field campaign is
part of a large European effort to improve the efficiency of wind energy
production. This award will bring a basic research component to the effort, with
a focus on studying interactions between flows of different scales, effects of
topographic and diurnal thermal forcing, valley/slope boundary layers and
turbine wakes. Instrumentation provided by this project will include multiple
Lidars, a Tethered Lifting System, ceilometer, radiosonde system, anemometers,
and the OU CLAMPS integrated mobile profiling system.