* 1565099
* COSMIC: Change Opportunity - Start Masters in Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Gary Krenz, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 996,352.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Marquette University in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin will recruit, retain, graduate, and enable career change
for academically talented low-income students, with a focus on students who are
new to the field of computer science. The program provides an accelerated Master
of Science (MS) degree for individuals who do not have an undergraduate degree
in computing, but who wish to cross over into the field. The program is based on
a highly-focused summer program combined with an innovative curriculum that
allows people without computer science degrees to merge quickly and efficiently
into this professional MS in Computing degree program. Recruiting will focus on
unemployed and under-employed individuals seeking a career change into computing
and areas of high demand by employers. The project will provide the computing
profession with a model for attracting and training students that seek to cross
over from non-computer science degrees to work in computing. The project is
based on a successful pilot program and will help to meet the need for highly
skilled individuals in a fast-growing area of technology that has excellent
employment prospects. Scholarships and support for low-income and academically
talented students, who may not otherwise be able to obtain computer science
degrees, will help to produce a well-trained workforce that will contribute to
the economic well being of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines
a summer program with a variety of student support activities including a cohort
experience, mentoring by faculty, peer mentoring, opportunities for internships,
and career advising and professional development. A customized curriculum
pathway provides a rapid transition into graduate studies for people who have no
undergraduate degree in computing. Building on the results of a pilot program,
the project will examine the effectiveness of the summer bridge program and
other activities that are aimed at significantly reducing the time spent earning
a career-changing graduate degree in computing. Areas of study will include
scholars' perceptions about their ability to be successful in graduate studies,
their beliefs whether their preparation is sufficient to support graduate study
in computing, their beliefs about their own persistence to complete graduate
study in computing, and their beliefs about their academic prospects.
Controlling for prior computing study, the project will analyze the academic
performance of students who participated in the summer bridge program and the
accelerated MS curriculum and compare this to students following more
traditional paths into the MS in computing degree program. The findings from the
program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education community.