* 1565962
* CRII: SCH: Brain-Body Sensor Fusion: Merging Neuroimaging With Full-Body Motion Capture
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Kunal Mankodiya, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 174,999.00

Title: CRII: SCH: Brain-Body Sensor Fusion: Merging Neuroimaging With Full-Body
Motion Capture&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kunal Mankodiya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
is to establish a cyber infrastructure to detect and visualize the brain's
activities while the human body is in motion, performing various limb movements.
Any disturbance in the brain-body functional coupling affects one's ability to
move efficiently, causing various movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease
that is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder, affecting 4 million
worldwide. Acquiring deepened understanding of such movement disorders demands
to study brain activity and body movements simultaneously. Due to technical
constraints, traditional brain scanners such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) require the body to remain horizontal and motionless during
scanning periods. Moreover, fMRI is bulky and immobile, providing one image per
second, while the brain's activity occurs at a much faster rate. Hence, there is
a limited knowledge of brain dynamics that are coupled tightly to body's
mobility behaviors. In recent years, "functional near infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS)" is emerging as a portable, optical neuroimaging device that provide
greater benefits compared to the bulky counterparts such as fMRI. The PI takes
the fNIRS technology one step further by integrating it with the maturing
technology of body sensor networks (BSN) to quantify brain-body connectivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to establish a medical cyber-physical
system (mCPS) delivering the system integration of fNIRS and BSN. Specifically,
the project mainly explores the following directions: System Integration: The
mCPS is a system integration aggregating two complex subsystems (20-channel
fNIRS system and 17-sensor body motion suit) to produce a unique interface
delivering the overarching functionality of motion-tagged neuroimaging.
Challenges in this project emerge from the heterogeneity of system components
and interactions among them. In this work, system integration takes place into
three forms: 1) "hardware integration" for centralizing the multimodal sensor
data, 2) "data integration/fusion" for conditioning and fusing multi-dimensional
task-level signals, and 3) "presentation integration" for combined visualization
of brain and body behaviors. Motion-Tolerant Neuroimaging: It is expected that
fNIRS neuroimaging data will face challenges of motion artifacts. Brain activity
data would largely be superimposed by the mechanical vibrations traversed to the
scalp due to the body movements. The PI explores harmonic sum models to rectify
motion-affected brain activities to extract the more accurate hemodynamic
response of the brain in mobile settings. A Clinical Screening Interface for
Neurologists: The PI collaborates with a neurologist specialized in treating
Parkinson's disease. The end result will be a clinical tool for physicians to
screen the motor exams of patient with Parkinson's disease. The clinical tool is
aimed at providing quantified data of motion and brain's cortical activities
displayed side-by-side for the improved diagnostic screening of Parkinson's
disease.