* 1565948
* SusChEM: Time Resolved In Situ Infrared Spectroscopy of Intermediates in the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Matthias Waegele, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2019
* USD 375,000.00

Professor Matthias Waegele of Boston College is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to develop a better understanding
of how carbon dioxide is converted to hydrocarbons using readily-available
copper as a catalyst. The primary considerations that motivate this research
are: the reduction of carbon dioxide could potentially serve as a sustainable
source of hydrocarbon-based fuels, and the process may additionally provide a
sustainable chemical route to ethylene and other essential chemicals. A novel,
time-resolved, infrared spectroscopic method is developed to detect
intermediates of this complex multi-step chemical conversion process. The new
insight gained from conducting the research leads to a better understanding of
the molecular origins that control the catalytic activity and selectivity of
copper. A better understanding on the molecular level informs the design and
development of industrially-viable catalysts for the conversion of carbon
dioxide to fuel and building block chemicals. In addition to the technical
broader impacts of the project, societal benefits are realized in the training
of graduate and undergraduate students in advanced chemical research methods.
This research is under the SusChEM initiative as it uses a non-precious metal,
copper, as the catalyst.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of this
research is to reveal the underlying molecular mechanism responsible for the
unique catalytic ability of copper to reduce carbon dioxide to methane and
ethylene in an aqueous electrochemical environment. Specifically, this research
aims to delineate the mechanistic origins of the high over-potentials necessary
to drive the reduction and the elementary steps which control the selectivity
for one hydrocarbon product over the other. While the electrochemical reduction
of carbon dioxide has been an active area of research for over three decades,
this project develops and employs a fundamentally different technique uniquely
suited to address these key aims. Specifically, an electrochemical cell is
coupled to a time-resolved infrared spectrometer. The potential of the
electrochemical cell is rapidly jumped on a sub-microsecond timescale, providing
a fast electrical trigger for the electro-reduction reaction. The transient
intermediates of the triggered reaction are monitored by the time-resolved
infrared spectrometer. The approach provides new thermodynamic, kinetic, and
structural information essential for guiding the design of more efficient
catalysts for this reaction.