* 1565795
* Site-Specific Time-Resolved Multidimensional Spectroscopy of Electron Transfer Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Kevin Kubarych, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure and Dynamics Program A of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Kevin Kubarych of the University of Michigan and
his graduate students are developing de novo ("from scratch") proteins to study
the fundamental motion of electrons. Electron transfer processes are essential
to life, and they underlie many of the most pressing challenges in developing
new methods to harvest energy and convert it into useful forms. The project
promotes research opportunities arising from spectroscopic tools such as used in
the research via a series of workshops and
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Kubarych's research group uses advanced
ultrafast laser spectroscopy methods to visualize electron transfer in real time
using designed de novo metalloenzyme scaffolds. The combined synthetic and
spectroscopic approach offers the flexibility to change the location of the
electron donor and acceptor, and to add accelerating bridging side chains.
Complementing this macromolecular design strategy is a spectroscopic toolset
based on multidimensional spectroscopy that has been developed in the Kubarych
lab. The project also uses a collaborative NSF-funded facility, the Laboratory
for Ultrafast Multidimensional Optical Spectroscopy (LUMOS). LUMOS is being
developed to track electron transfer and other phototriggered reactions from
femtoseconds to seconds at wavelengths ranging from the UV and visible to the
infrared. This extremely broad temporal and frequency range is essential to
monitor changes in structure and dynamics as the charge moves through the
engineered protein.