* 1565964
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Rational design of non-precious metal catalysts for a future biorefining industry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Andreas Heyden, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The use of biomass such as waste wood products and corn stalks is attractive as
a potential source of fuel and chemical feedstocks. Heterogeneous catalysts are
often used in the transformation of biomass to useful chemicals, but the most
effective known catalysts are composed of rare and expensive platinum group
metals. Dr. Heyden of the University of South Carolina and Dr. Chen of Columbia
University are collaborating to develop a cheap and abundant material,
molybdenum carbide (Mo2C) as a replacement for platinum. They are studying how
the catalytic properties of Mo2C can be enhanced by the addition of iron,
copper, cobalt and nickel for sustainable chemistry of biomass transformation.
The team is elucidating the underlying science needed for the development of
highly selective, non-precious metal catalysts for upgrading a specific chemical
derived from biomass called glycerol (C3H8O3). Glycerol has been identified as
one of the top twelve building block chemicals that can be derived from sugar
and converted to high-value bio-based chemicals and materials. Also, glycerol is
a major by-product of the biodiesel production by transesterification of
vegetable oils and the diversification of products derived from glycerol has
been identified as a key issue for biodiesel production. A major focus of their
research lies in evaluating the degree of the surface oxidation due to the
presence of oxygen in the glycerol and in water, and in developing the
understanding of how oxygen modification of the catalyst affects the reaction.
Research activities also form broader impacts through the establishment of
summer research internships for undergraduate students in the laboratories of
Drs. Chen and Heyden, who mentor students to encourage them to pursue graduate
studies and careers in renewable energy and chemical production. Drs. Chen and
Heyden are also actively engaged in integrating research results into the
undergraduate and graduate chemical engineering curriculum at Columbia
University and the University of South Carolina.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Chen of Columbia University and Dr. Heyden of the University of South Carolina
are developing highly selective, non-precious metal catalysts for the
hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of biomass-derived polyols. Current HDO catalysts are
primarily based on platinum-group metal catalysts, but their high costs and
limited abundance are potential concerns for the production of cost-effective,
biomass-based fuels and chemicals. In particular, molybdenum carbide (Mo2C) is
highly selective for C-O/C=O bond cleavage (C = carbon and O = oxygen) and can
furthermore be modified by non-precious 3d-metals (iron, cobalt, nickel, and
copper) to enhance the catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability for
targeted HDO reactions. To identify the active sites in Mo2C and 3d-metal
modified Mo2C and the reaction mechanism of the HDO of biomass-derived polyols
on these active sites, Drs. Chen and Heyden apply a combined computational and
experimental research approach that is based on density function theory (DFT)
calculations on single crystal model surfaces. They also use ultrahigh vacuum
(UHV) experiments on single crystal model surfaces to validate DFT-predicted
trends, reactor evaluations over the corresponding powder catalysts,
microkinetic reactor modeling under various experimental reaction conditions,
and systematic correlation of experimental data with computational models.
Knowledge from the proposed research provides guidelines for designing non-
precious metal catalysts for the selective transformation of glycerol in
particular and of biomass-derived molecules in general. Broader impacts in
education are included by integrating research findings into undergraduate and
graduate electives in the core chemical engineering curriculum at Columbia
University and the University of South Carolina.