* 1565692
* Spin and Dipole Ordering at Molecular Film Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 442,944.00

In this project jointly funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division and the Electronic and Photonic
Materials program of Materials Research division, Professor Peter A. Dowben at
the University of Nebraska and Professor Ruihua Cheng at Indiana University
Purdue University Indianapolis are combining molecules with large magnetic
moments with molecules with large electric dipoles to create new materials with
interesting spintronic properties. The goal is to achieve a molecular system
where the magnetic properties can be altered by an applied electric field. If
successful, the research will enable lightweight, high-speed, low-power
electronic devices for a broad range of applications. This research brings
together chemists, physicists, and material scientists to make and characterize
the new materials. Student training includes international experiences in
science for both undergraduate and graduate students, involvement in cutting
edge research at the interface of chemistry and physics, and outreach activities
where the students learn to communicate cutting edge research to a nontechnical
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, a molecular
magnetoelectric system is achieved by combinations of metal-organic compounds
that demonstrate ligand control of the central metal spin state (spin crossover
complexes) with ferroelectric polymers or zwitterionic, strongly dipolar
molecules. One specific objective is to construct a thin-film molecular magneto-
electric system where the magnetic properties of the molecular overlayer are
altered by an applied electric field in either the ground state or the excited
state. The starting point is the combination of an iron spin-crossover complex
with the highly dipolar p-benzoquinonemonoimine zwitterion. The research project
grows to include other spin crossover complexes in combination with a wide range
of strongly dipolar molecules. Another objective includes the construction of a
co-crystal heteromolecular structure in order to isothermally control switching
between magnetic low-spin and high-spin states of selected molecules. The
ultimate goal is to achieve voltage-controlled, magnetic moment-based devices of
very small dimensions while delivering low-power, gigahertz, nonvolatile, local
magneto-electric logic or memory operations with diminish latency time and much
reduced power consumption. This project brings together investigations of
fundamental interface chemistry, dipole coupling at hetero-molecular interfaces,
the modeling of frontier orbitals, the fabrication of defined high-quality
organic multilayers, and the characterization of magnetic induction with an
applied electric field.