* 1565033
* Preparing Engineering Graduate Students for the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Kara Moloney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Through its project entitled "Preparing Engineering Graduates Students for the
21st Century (PEGS 21)," the University of California at Davis (UC Davis) will
provide a coordinated program of recruitment, retention and workforce
development strategies to increase the number and diversity of engineers
entering the workforce with the highest level of expertise. The program will
provide fifteen scholarships for four years to attract low-income academically-
talented applicants to engineering graduate programs at UC Davis. Efforts to
recruit students from underrepresented groups, namely first-generation college
students and underrepresented minorities, lend to the potential broader impacts
of this project. PEGS 21 will have five components that include curricular and
co-curricular elements: targeted recruitment of students from California
institutions, many of which have large Hispanic student populations, through
career fairs; multi-level mentoring at the pre- and post-enrollment stages;
cohort development and academic skills training; workforce readiness guidance;
and reduced time commitment for Teaching Assistant or Graduate Student Research
appointments made possible by the S-STEM scholarship funds. PEGS 21 is expected
to increase the number of low-income, academically talented, first generation
engineering graduate students enrolling, graduating, and ultimately entering the
workforce by at least sixty students over four years. Their enrollment will
provide the opportunity to systematically determine if extant curricular and co-
curricular strategies are effective in overcoming noted barriers to flow-income,
first-generation students' graduate degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives are to: (1) increase the number of students applying to engineering
graduate programs with an emphasis on low income academically talented first
generation (LIATFG) students, (2) increase the admission rate of LIATFG students
by improving the quality of submitted graduate applications, (3) increase the
number of LIATFG students completing engineering graduate programs, (4)
strengthen workforce skills of LIATFG engineering graduates, and (5) contribute
to the body of knowledge about successful strategies to recruit, graduate and
prepare LIATFG students for the 21st century workforce. Building on the
literature regarding graduate degree attainment for first generation college
students, PEGS 21 will implement and investigate the impact of a set of
strategies for overcoming barriers to the pursuit and/or completion of graduate
degrees in engineering, thereby contributing to the knowledge base of efforts to
broaden the participation of LIATFG students in advanced engineering degree
programs.