* 1565755
* Charge-Remote Mass Spectrometry: A Tool for the Physical Organic Studies of Reactive Intermediates and Gas-Phase Biological Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Paul Wenthold, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 440,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Paul Wenthold in the Department of
Chemistry at Purdue University. Professor Wenthold and his students use mass
spectrometry for fundamental studies of chemical reactivity and structure in
reactive molecules. This knowledge is used to develop new reagents that can be
used effectively in chemical synthesis in the areas of organic, inorganic and
organometallic chemistry. A second focus involves the development of new
techniques for the investigation of decomposition processes of organic
molecules. Organic molecule fragmentation is used for the synthesis of reactive
molecules, and for the investigation of the decomposition of important organic
molecules, including those related to biofuels and energetic materials.
Professor Wenthold's research also contributes to a broader component of society
in both the significance of the research area and through contributions to
education. The fragmentation studies contribute to the development of bio-fuels
through fast-pyrolysis of biomass by determining the products of the reactions
in model systems. The work contributes to education through the collection of
on-line resources that can be used by undergraduates for the study of organic
chemistry, serving, effectively, as an "index to the internet" on organic
chemistry topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work carried out in this
project involves the use of mass spectrometry for fundamental studies of
chemical reactivity and structure. Investigations of the electronic structures
of nitrenes are carried out to determine the mechanisms by which unpaired
electrons in molecules can interact, and how those interactions are affected by
molecular structure. This knowledge is used to develop nitrene reagents that can
be used effectively in chemical synthesis. A second focus of the project is in
developing the use of "charge remote fragmentation" as an alternative to
pyrolysis for the investigation of decomposition processes of organic molecules.
By using mass spectrometry with electrospray ionization, it is possible to
examine the decomposition of large, non-volatile molecules, not typically
amenable to gas-phase pyrolysis, including those related to biofuels and
energetic materials. The project contributes to the broader component of society
in both the significance of the research area (biofuels) and through
contributions to education. Specifically, involves the continued development of
a collection of links to on-line resources that can be used by undergraduates
for the study of organic chemistry, serving, effectively, as an "index to the
internet" on organic chemistry topics.