* 1565654
* Ligand and Catalyst Designs for Stereocontrolled Ring Expansion Polymerization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Adam S. Veige of the University of Florida is supported by the
Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry to develop catalysts for
the synthesis of cyclic polymers, a class of polymers which is growing in
fundamental and industrial interest due to the unique properties resulting from
their cyclic, rather than linear, structure. The focus of this project is on the
development of catalysts based on abundant transition metals and specially
designed ligands. The objective is to develop optimized catalysts that not only
produce cyclic polymers efficiently and selectively, but also execute the
polymerization in a very regular fashion. Cyclic polymers which are free from
linear impurities are highly desirable for special industrial applications, such
as components of shock-mitigating composite materials and motor and jet engine
oils. During the course of conducting this research, students develop cross-
disciplinary skills in inorganic, organometallic, polymer and material chemistry
to meet the demands of an increasingly specialized technological workplace. The
project continues the educational outreach program that culminates in an annual
Center for Catalysis-Chemistry Day at the Oaks Mall. The event is intended to
raise public awareness of research in and the importance of catalysis and to
inspire the next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalysts based
on complexes of abundant transition metals with tri- and tetra-anionic pincer
ligands are developed. Unique approaches to preparing cyclic polymers with these
catalysts are explored. Alkylidyne and tethered alkylidene catalysts are
developed for the stereospecific ring expansion metathesis polymerization (REMP)
of cyclic alkenes and for the polymerization of alkynes to produce macrocyclic
polyalkynes. The design of ligands and catalysts is based on fundamental
electronic/structure property relationships. Control of the molecular weight of
the polymers is accomplished by tuning ligand properties to create rapidly
initiating species. The products, cyclic polymers which are free from linear
impurities, are highly desirable for a variety of applications, such as
components of shock-mitigating composite materials and motor and jet engine
oils.