* 1565985
* Molecular dynamics with nuclear quantum effects: bridging classical and quantum regimes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Sophya Garashchuk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2020
* USD 435,692.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sophya Garashchuk, at the
University of South Carolina, Columbia, is developing new theoretical methods to
analyze the dynamics of molecular motion. This method combines the microscopic
behavior of electrons in molecules, treated by quantum mechanics with the motion
of the nuclei of the atoms treated by classical mechanics, following that of
Isaac Newton. The quantum-mechanical treatment of electrons is important and
crucial to understand chemical reactivity, optical, magnetic and other
properties of molecules. More importantly these new methods will allow
researchers to investigate larger systems such as nanomaterials. Potential
applications include photovoltaic materials that convert light to electricity,
movement of atoms and molecules through membranes, and isotopic separation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal is to develop a practical methodology
for systems of 10-200 atoms, which incorporates Nuclear Quantum Effects (NQEs)
for certain nuclei or modes of motion (quantized vibrations, rotations), while
they fully interact with the remaining classically-described nuclei. Drawing on
the ideas from the quantum trajectory formulation of the Schrodinger equation,
we will develop a trajectory-based theoretical framework of including NQEs
selectively within a larger molecular environment, transform the concepts into
computer codes and through simulations advance our understanding of molecular
systems, such as those mentioned above, known to exhibit isotope and other NQEs.
Broader educational goals are to train junior researchers in theoretical,
computational chemistry, and high performance computing, to facilitate use of
computational chemistry tools by experimental colleagues through formal teaching
and collaborative projects, and to provide access and training in computational
chemistry tools for undergraduate institutions in South Carolina.