* 1565235
* AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Algebraic Proof Systems, Convexity, and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Pablo Parrilo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2022
* USD 2,135,000.00

This project tackles some of the central questions in algorithms, optimization,
and the theory of machine learning, through the lens of the "Sum of Squares"
algorithmic framework. In particular, it will allow us to understand what
classes of functions can be efficiently minimized, and what computational
resources are needed to do so. If successful, this will significantly advance
our understanding in all these key areas, produce new practical algorithmic
methodologies, as well as build new connections with other fields, including
quantum information theory, statistical physics, extremal graph theory and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative grant will foster new interactions
between intellectual communities that have had relatively little interaction so
far, and the PIs will organize workshops, courses, and other events that bring
these communities together. The students and postdocs trained will gain a
uniquely broad view of the landscape of these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs propose a unified approach to the development and analysis of convex proof
systems that include and generalize the "Sum of Squares" (SoS) method. Despite
considerable recent progress, understanding SoS?s performance seems to be out-
of-reach for most current techniques. Significant progress in this area requires
the synthesis of ideas and techniques from different domains, including
theoretical computer science, optimization, algebraic geometry, quantum
information theory and machine learning. The research plans include both theory-
building and problem-solving aspects, with the ultimate goal of obtaining a
complete understanding of the SoS method and related proof systems, as well as
their algorithmic implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts will be
directed along several thrusts: Unique Games and related problems (Small Set
Expansion, Max Cut, Sparsest Cut), analysis of average-case problems (e.g.,
Planted Clique), applications to Machine Learning (sparse PCA, dictionary
learning), algorithmic speedups of SoS, and connections to math and physics
(e.g., quantum entanglement, p-spin glasses, extremal graph theory and algebraic
geometry). While the main focus is on theoretical aspects, this project is also
concerned with effective computational methods, and the outcomes may yield novel
practical techniques for machine learning and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Other key features of this proposal include
its strong integration with curriculum development, undergraduate research
projects, and training the next wave of graduate students and postdocs and
equipping them with the necessary tools to work across these areas.