* 1565714
* First-Principles Simulation of Electronic Excitation Dynamics in Water and DNA under Proton Irradiation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Yosuke Kanai, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 09/30/2020
* USD 372,654.00

Yosuke Kanai of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is supported by
an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program for
computational work related to proton beam cancer therapy. Proton beam cancer
therapies work by targeting cancer cells with high-energy protons. These protons
damage the cancer cells by breaking the double strands of their DNA. In recent
years, other particles, such as alpha-particles and carbon-ions, have been
considered as alternatives to protons for cancer therapies. The energetic
protons or other particles transfer their energy to the water and DNA by
exciting their electrons. There is a strong need for a better understanding of
the energy transfer process and electronic excitation process. Using massively
parallel computers, Kanai and his research group develop and apply computational
methods for simulating the energy transfer and electronic excitation process.
Both graduate students and undergraduate students participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new large-scale, real-time, time-dependent
density functional theory (TDDFT) method is employed to study electronic
excitation dynamics in liquid water and solvated DNA under proton, alpha-
particle and carbon-ion irradiation. The energy transfer from the high-energy
ions depends significantly on the particle velocity. The perturbing electric
field from the energetic ion is highly heterogeneous at the molecular scale.
Using the real-time TDDFT method, the excitation process is investigated in
detail as a function of the ion velocity and type (protons, alpha-particles, and
carbon-ions). The energy transfer rate from the ions to electronic excitations
in liquid water is determined from non-equilibrium simulations, and a
microscopic understanding of the excitation dynamics in liquid water and
solvated DNA is developed. Improving scalability of real-time TDDFT code on
massively parallel computers and the exchange-correlation approximation for
describing the dynamical energy transfer process are two important aspects of
this investigation. Dr. Kanai also develops novel teaching computational tools
for teaching time-dependent quantum mechanics in advanced chemistry courses.