* 1565032
* Creating technical leaders from early collegians of exceptional promise: a comprehensive program for demolishing barriers to persistence.
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Michael Wolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,199,985.00

This significant project will fund thirteen additional participants to the
successful Rice Emerging Scholars Program (RESP) for STEM majors at Rice
University. The program is designed to meet the needs of talented students whose
preparation leaves them at risk of attrition. The program is comprehensive in
its attack on the barriers to persistence with activities that focus on academic
preparation for college and navigational skills in college. It provides students
with a challenging and immersive bridge experience focusing on the most
difficult topics a student will face within their first semesters, followed by
mentoring and at least two years of intensive advising.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;All thirteen participants will have high potential, substantial
financial need, and the vast majority will be from under-represented groups.
This funding will greatly increase the chance that these students will major in
STEM disciplines and then later graduate into leadership in the sciences and
engineering. Spillover effects to the broader URM and first-generation collegian
population include the creation of a visible supportive community of engaged
young STEM scholars. The investigators will study the effectiveness of this non-
remedial comprehensive program and its elements in overcoming obstructions to
persistence by comparing RESP students to a non-RESP control group. The study
will examine academic outcomes such as course grades, STEM attrition, and study
skills and attitudinal outcomes such as STEM self-efficacy and career interest.
The research planned comprises qualitative interviews about the college
experience, quantitative longitudinal assessment of academic achievement, and
quantitative longitudinal assessment of STEM attitudes and study skills using
survey methodology. Research results will be disseminated broadly to the
academic community in STEM education and learning sciences. The results will be
scalable and exportable to inform the development of interventions at other
universities in which underprepared high potential students attempt the
difficult transition from high school to college.