* 1565969
* RUI:   Electronic Spectroscopy of Gold and Silver Monosulfides and Other Transition Metal-Containing Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Thomas Varberg, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2020
* USD 223,682.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Thomas D. Varberg and his
undergraduate student researchers at Macalester College are using visible and
near-infrared spectroscopy to study the structure and bonding of gaseous
molecules that contain a transition metal atom. One molecule under study is
diatomic gold sulfide (AuS), which serves as a model for gold-sulfur bonding in
more complex systems central to nanoscience and molecular self-assembly. The
analysis of the experimental spectra are aided by complementary computer
calculations on the targeted molecules are carried out in collaboration with
Professor Keith Kuwata and his students. Transition metal chemistry and bonding
is important to other areas of modern science, such as chemical catalysis,
organometallic chemistry, nanoscience, and astronomy. Research on metal-
containing diatomic molecules can serve as a useful model for bonding in more
complicated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the molecules
gold sulfide, silver sulfide, tantalum hydride and tantalum oxide. Electronic
spectra in the visible and near-infrared are recorded with a high-resolution
continuous-wave laser capable of resolving the vibrational, rotational and
hyperfine structures. Analysis of the spectra leads to a detailed
characterization of the electronic states and the chemical bonding, as well as
providing accurate transition frequencies useful to other scientists. The
supporting computational work utilizes equation-of-motion coupled-cluster
methodology and provides accurate estimates of state energies, bond lengths and
vibrational frequencies. A substantial broader impact of this work is to prepare
Macalester students for graduate work in physical chemistry and chemical
physics, including students from underrepresented groups. Furthermore, the
targeted molecules exhibit simplified metal bonding that is relevant to more
complex nanoparticle structures and to transition-metal catalysis of organic
reactions.