* 1565406
* Conference: Insect Effects on Ecosystem Services; Orlando, Floriday - September 25-30, 2016
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Timothy Schowalter, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,980.00

This proposal requests partial support for an international symposium on Insect
Effects on Ecosystem Services, to be held in conjunction with the International
Congress of Entomology in Orlando, FL, September 25-30, 2016. Most (82%) of the
support requested here would be used to recruit and support the participation of
graduate students and early career scientists from under-represented groups at
U.S. institutions, with a small amount of funds also requested for immediate
follow-up activities. All of the participants in this symposium would also be
able to attend the larger Congress. The balance of anticipated support for the
symposium is being sought from other sources. The topic of the symposium is of
major societal interest and has broad potential for impacting land management
decisions. This award will ensure that graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and/or other early career scientists can attend and/or give talks or present
posters at the meeting. Specific attention will be placed on the recruitment of
individuals from underrepresented groups in science in the U.S. Funds may also
be used to support travel for a speaker from an underdeveloped country that
would also enhance diversity. The co-organizer is from Germany, although no
support is sought here for his participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
symposium is designed to allow for intensive interaction among participants and
to facilitate new interdisciplinary interactions and collaborations. The topics
chosen are especially ripe for such collaborations and also represent topics of
much current interest. The organizing committee and selected speakers include an
early career female from the U.S. and other U.S. participants some supported on
other related projects by NSF, along with a suitably wide range of international
scientists.