* 1565117
* Washington Forestry Training Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Todd Bates, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2022
* USD 998,773.00

The Washington Forestry Training Initiative (WFTI) is responding to needs in the
Natural Resources industry. It focuses upon students pursuing an applied
baccalaureate STEM degree offered jointly by two Washington State public
community colleges, Green River College and Grays Harbor College. The three
objectives of the project are to (1) increase the enrollment and diversity of
eligible students, to (2) implement and study the effectiveness of applied STEM
learning practices to improve students' academic and career outcomes, and to (3)
implement and sustain effective cohort-based activities for these students. The
project is awarding 92 annual scholarships of up to $7,500. It is working to
increase the retention rate of scholarship recipients (S-STEM Scholars) and
increase their graduation rate. S-STEM Scholars will be mainly recruited from
incumbent and displaced workers. S-STEM Scholars will be supported to achieve
their goals of career placement or university transfer, through faculty advising
and mentoring, academic tutoring, cohort-based activities, student support
services, and professional development and networking
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WFTI project will study the impact of applied
learning, often cited as a distinguishing feature of applied baccalaureate
degrees, upon student outcomes. This can inform colleges' implementation and
expansion of applied baccalaureate degrees, which are a potentially
transformative tool to broaden access to STEM careers, especially within low-
income and under-represented communities. The project management team is led by
STEM faculty and includes educational researchers and STEM administrators.
External evaluation will assess the quality of the project study's design,
implementation, analyses, and interpretation as well as the the implementation
of the project's activities and outcomes. All measurement tools will either: (1)
be previously developed and tested; then, revised and enhanced for this project;
or (2) are nationally validated instruments, such as the Strengths Self-Efficacy
Scale. Statistical analyses will include t-test, ANOVA or other methods as
appropriate to ascertain significant differences across time or among student
sub-populations. Data, reports, and successful practices generated by this
project will be nationally disseminated to improve STEM education and to inform
higher education policymaking.