* 1565902
* Nonequilibrium Molecular Dynamics: Theory, Simulations and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Rigoberto Hernandez, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 11/30/2016
* USD 145,000.00

Rigoberto Hernandez of Georgia Institute of Technology is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Chemistry Division to develop theoretical and simulation approaches that advance
our fundamental understanding of suspensions of colloidal particles. A colloid
is a solution containing particles ranging between one to one thousand
nanometers, evenly distributed throughout the solution. Some examples from
everyday life are blood, mayonnaise, soaps and gels. These particles interact at
the coarser scale of colloid particle-colloid particle interactions and at the
finer scale of molecular interactions. These interactions remain poorly
understood with respect to their movement. The computational methods being
developed through this work provide a new set of design tools for materials with
desired colloidal properties. The research combines the development of
appropriate models and theories to provide insight on the behavior of moving
colloidal particle and the direct application of these models and theories to
several interesting and important experimental systems. Professor Hernandez is
involved in efforts to broaden the use of theoretical and computational tools in
chemical dynamics beyond its practitioners, and to increase the learning and
appreciation of chemistry in the education of undergraduate students and
graduate students both in and out of the classroom. He also engages the general
public, and helps diversify the chemical work force. His research findings are
disseminated widely through peer-reviewed publications, blog posts on
EveryWhereChem, and scientific and public lectures.

This research integrates computational and theoretical tools to characterize the
generic dynamics of chemical events in nonequilibrium environments far from
equilibrium, and investigates the dynamics of complex nonequilibrium chemical
systems. The research group studies specific chemical systems (Janus and striped
colloids with spherical and ellipsoidal geometries and soft materials) whose
nonequilibrium dynamics can be directly tested and predicted by experiment.
Models and the computational tools are developed that are capable of
characterizing the nonequilibrium behavior of many different systems under
external driving conditions. Professor Hernandez is engaged in public outreach
activities for science, in advancing participation through service to scientific
societies, and in programs for the recruitment and mentoring of students from
under-represented minority groups into science.