* 1565704
* Excitation Dynamics in Nanoscale Systems: Atomistic Time-Domain Theory and Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 11/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials
Theory program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Oleg Prezhdo of
the University of Southern California is developing new chemical theory and
computer simulations of ultrafast dynamics in nanomaterials. These simulations
of the electronic and optical properties of nanoscale materials will help to
generate a theoretical basis for the development of novel devices for solar
energy conversion, electronics and imaging. Professor Prezhdo is applying these
methods to study two classes of materials. The first are hybrid perovskites that
show record solar cell efficiencies, and the second are two-dimensional
materials, such as graphene, which may be used in ultrathin electronic devices.
The project also involves aspects of curriculum development, including the
design of novel teaching tools for large audiences, and student involvement in
energy sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Prezhdo is studying the
development and testing of new simulation approaches and algorithms with the
focus on the quantum properties of condensed phases (such as decoherence), many-
particle and super-exchange processes, and non-adiabatic transitions. This
research is providing more rigorous treatments of ultrafast non-equilibrium
phenomena. He is also working on the implementation and testing of the non-
adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) approaches within time-domain density
functional theory (TDDFT) with the goal of extending the applicability of NAMD
to new problems and larger systems whose electronic structure can be described
by ab initio and tight binding DFT. These systems include new types of processes
(Auger-assisted electron transfer and related many-particle phenomena) and
nanoscale materials. Finally, Professor Preszhdo is using these methods to study
the excitation dynamics in perovskites and two-dimensional materials.