* 1565950
* GP IMPACT: INTEGRATING RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION TO IMPROVE UNDERGRADUATE GEOSCIENCE PATHWAYS
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Barbara Bruno, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 393,813.00

This project aims to fundamentally transform the undergraduate geoscience
experience at the University of Hawai'i (UH) School of Ocean and Earth Science
and Technology (SOEST) and Kapi'olani Community College (KCC), both in and out
of the classroom, using evidence-based practices. The expected outcome is to
contribute to the development of a diverse geoscience workforce equipped to
tackle today's environmental challenges and the development of a national model
for institutional transformation. The objectives of the project are to increase
enrollment of newly declared SOEST undergraduate majors among Associate of
Science in Natural Science (ASNS) degree holders, to increase retention of newly
declared SOEST undergraduate majors during their first year at SOEST, and to
increase underrepresented minority enrollment among SOEST undergraduate majors
(with at least half of the increase among Native Hawaiians, Pacific Islanders,
and Filipinos). These objectives will be accomplished through the implementation
of four components. First, courses at SOEST will be transformed to incorporate
student-centered strategies (e.g. active-learning, targeted interventions to
stimulate student learning and success) and innovative assessment tools. The
second component is professional development opportunities for the students
through participation in a mentoring network, workshops, and outreach
activities. Another important component will be the establishment of the
Geoscience Learning Center at SOEST modeled after the KCC STEM center. The
Center will have dedicated staff and space to promote STEM learning, networking,
collaborations, and shared sense of purpose. The last component is support for
KCC ocean science program by developing an introductory oceanography laboratory
course and offering fieldtrips to the KCC students. Through a key cross-cutting
strategic partnership, KCC students will be supported before, during, and after
they transfer to SOEST.