* 1565813
* Cascade Cyclizations for Small Molecule Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Alison Frontier, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2019
* USD 495,391.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Alison Frontier in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Rochester. Professor Frontier and her students are developing
highly efficient cyclization reactions which are capable of creating compact
polycyclic molecules that are difficult to prepare using other synthetic
strategies. These chemical methods enable rapid synthesis of complex natural and
non-natural bioactive molecules, especially small molecules with properties
demonstrated to be valuable in drug discovery efforts. With respect to
educational activities, development continues for an educational website ("Not
Voodoo"), which is designed as a resource for students beginning independent
research in an organic chemistry laboratory. Professor Frontier enriches the
site with new resources, and also enhance the experience of visitors by
expanding functionality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program involves the
study of novel cationic reactivity and the development of efficient and green
synthetic methods. The projects focus on multistep reaction cascades that merge
nucleophilic reactivity with cationic electrocyclic reactions, and allow the
execution of highly stereocontrolled cyclizations. This research is leading to a
richer understanding of redox cyclizations which are initiated by hydride shift,
cyclizations coupled to pyridine and furan dearomatization, and the execution of
higher-order electrocyclizations, which are virtually unknown reactions. New
strategies for achieving enantioselective electrocyclization are also being
evaluated. The proposed research is directed toward both exploring new
reactivity and the development of efficient, diastereo- and enantioselective
methods that rapidly transform acyclic systems into bridged, fused, or
spirocyclic small molecules. The synthetic strategies are efficient and modular,
typically carried out in an environmentally friendly fashion. Small molecule
targets of this research have desirable physicochemical properties and occupy
unique chemical space; these features often correlate to bioactivity and meet
stated needs for improving the quality of compound collections for use in drug
discovery programs. Efforts are also focused on further development of the Not
Voodoo website, a resource that serves hundreds of organic experimental chemists
each day.