* 1565249
* Tensor hypercontraction for electronic structure and first principles molecular dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Todd Martinez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Todd Martinez of Stanford University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Chemistry Division to
develop efficient and accurate methods for studying the electronic properties of
large molecules. To describe the quantum mechanical behavior of molecules, it is
necessary to solve the electronic Schrodinger equation. Unfortunately, this
equation is very difficult to solve, even with modern computers. The main
problem is that computational effort for the most accurate methods grows with
the sixth power of molecular size. Martinez and coworkers design methods that
reduce that scaling considerably. Such methods are needed to reach the goal of
designing molecules with tailored properties, such as drugs that bind
effectively to proteins and molecules with favorable fluorescent properties for
use in biological imaging. If this work is successful, the size of molecules
whose properties can be accurately predicted will be greatly enlarged compared
to present approaches. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
development of the tensor hypercontraction method for electronic structure and
ab initio molecular dynamics. Tensor hypercontraction casts the electron
repulsion integrals and wave function amplitudes in a factorizable form, leading
to scaling reductions by as much as two powers of the molecular size for wave
function-based electronic structure methods like perturbation theory and coupled
cluster. The Martinez group is developing new grids for least-squares variants
of hypercontraction and extending the hypercontraction methodology to include
analytic gradients of the energy that are needed in first principle molecular
dynamics. They are exploring the application of hypercontraction to self-
consistent field methods like Hartree-Fock and density functional theory.
Hypercontraction emphasizes rank sparsity in the associated quantities. This is
a powerful approach, but it is also useful to simultaneously exploit spatial
locality (element sparsity). New approaches which can exploit both rank and
element sparsity simultaneously, i.e. a local form of tensor hypercontraction,
are being considered. These new and improved hypercontraction methods are used
to predict fluorescence energies and lifetimes for fluorescent proteins that may
be used in bioimaging applications.