* 1565461
* EAGER: Advancing the future of U.S. seagoing oceanographic research through a Chief Scientist training cruise
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 12/31/2016
* USD 106,005.00

The study of oceanography requires seagoing research for collection of data and
at sea experimentation. However, for first time researchers the planning,
organizing, logistics and paper work involved in a major research cruise,
especially one that involves work in foreign waters (EEZs) can be daunting.
Additionally, at sea research involves substantial additional grant costs
attributable to the ship operation. As a consequence, beginning in 2011 the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) began a program of
Chief Scientist training cruises to introduce prospective early career
scientists to the process of planning, acquiring, effectively utilizing, and
reporting on time at sea for multi-disciplinary research and education. To date
there have been 5 successful Chief Scientist training cruises, with a sixth
cruise, focused on Robotic Platforms, scheduled to take place this November.
This proposal would fund a sixth Chief Scientist Training Cruise training cruise
to be conducted aboard the R/V Thomas G Thompson. The training program is
modeled on the proven successful one that have already occurred. This would be
the first training cruise conducted using a Global Class research vessel,

With this proposal funds will be used to conduct a general Chief Scientist
Training Cruise in 2016. The training cruise will follow the proven model of
previous successful ones and provide a forum for early career marine scientists
to learn how to plan, acquire utilize and report on at sea research for
multidisciplinary research and education. The cruise will utilize the R/V T.G.
Thompson, and it will be the first Chief Scientist training cruise on one of
UNOLS? Global Class research vessels. As such, the ship will be able to
accommodate up to 20 trainees. In addition to instruction on duties and
responsibilities of a Chief Scientist, the cruise will offer new investigators
opportunities to test compelling research areas that could be used for the basis
of future proposals. Given the declining number of vessels in the UNOLS fleet
and the tight operations budget, the need to teach early career scientists how
to use our limited infrastructure resources effectively and collaboratively is
more important than ever.