* 1565669
* Computational Prediction of Enantioselectivity in Metal-Catalyzed Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Paul Helquist, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/29/2020
* USD 515,214.00

The Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry is funding the
project "Computational Prediction of Enantioselectivity in Metal-Catalyzed
Reactions" in the groups of Olaf Wiest and Paul Helquist at the University of
Notre Dame. The project develops, validates, and applies computational methods
for the prediction of stereoselectivity (preferential formation of one
arrangement of atoms in space over other possibilities in a molecule) and
regioselectivity (preferential formation of new bonds at specific positions of a
molecule over other possible positions). The ability to correctly predict
reaction selectivity in transition metal catalysis has a broad impact in the
pharmaceutical and fine chemicals industry. Highly selective reactions are
needed to produce safer, more effective, and lower cost drugs. The project
provides multi-disciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students
that emphasizes the close connection between computational and experimental
approaches and their application to practical problems.

The prediction method involves five steps: (i) calculation of the pertinent
transition structures for the targeted reactions using electronic structure
methods, (ii) parameterization and validation of ground- and transition state
force fields (TSFF) using quantum-guided molecular mechanics (Q2MM), (iii)
calculation of the free energy difference of the relevant diastereomeric
transition structures using full Monte Carlo conformational sampling at the
transition state with the TSFF, (iv) use of the force fields for rapid
prediction of enantioselectivities for virtual ligand libraries, and (v)
selection and experimental evaluation of top ligand candidates for validation.
The methods are used for a variety of reactions of importance in synthetic
organic chemistry, including: (i) Mukaiyama aldol condensations, (ii) Heck
arylations, (iii) 1,4-addition of organoboron compounds to unsaturated
carbonyls, and (iv) imine reductions. The TSFFs and the Q2MM code is available
to the scientific community via Github.