* 1565427
* Collaborative Research: Infra-red Control of Electron Transfer Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Russell Schmehl, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 439,898.00

In this collaborative project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors David N. Beratan and
Peng Zhang of the Department of Chemistry at Duke University and Professors Igor
V. Rubtsov and Russell H. Schmehl of the Department of Chemistry at Tulane
University are developing novel ways to control the flow of electrical charge
through molecules. Electron transfer at the molecular scale is essential in
naturally occurring reactions and in devices of technological significance. The
ability to dial in the rate of electronic motion and to control the
directionality of these reactions on the molecular scale is a significant
challenge that could open up new strategies for solar energy conversion, for
understanding of biological energy conversion schemes, and for developing new
strategies for devices of technological significance. The project includes
intensive collaborations among chemical synthesis, ultrafast spectroscopy, and
theory to establish a very rich interdisciplinary training environment for
students. The team is promoting science and education by providing summer
research opportunities to economically-disadvantaged and historically
underrepresented groups. In addition, novel curriculum developments involve
multi-university, multi-faculty teaching of courses that address the chemical
and physical principles underpinning the research.

The overall aim of the project is to understand the chemical and physical
approaches that use infrared perturbations to control charge flow at the
molecular scale. The research also includes the design of novel molecular
structures where the charge flow is strongly influenced by the infra-red
radiation. The project combines the power of theoretical and experimental
approaches to manipulate charge flow in molecules. The researchers use ultrafast
multi-pulse spectroscopic methods in the laboratory to drive and to perturb the
reaction dynamics of donor-bridge-acceptor compounds. Several classes of donor-
bridge-acceptor molecular systems are prepared and studied, including
transition-metal complexes, bimetallic complexes, hydrogen-bonded systems, and
systems with bi-stable bridges. Using newly developed methods of non-equilibrium
molecular dynamics, the same molecular systems examined in the experimental
laboratory are simulated, targeting the development of understanding vibrational
excitation that may perturb both reaction coordinate motion and donor-acceptor
electronic coupling interactions.