* 1565971
* SusChEM: Metal-Free Catalysts for Oxygen Evolution and Oxygen Reduction Reactions: From Molecular Models to Graphene-Based Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Ksenija Glusac, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2017
* USD 560,000.00

The sun delivers a large amount of energy to our planet in the form of sunlight.
A very small fraction of this solar energy is sufficient to satisfy our energy
demands. However, to use the sun's energy efficiently, ways to "bottle" the
energy from the sun into a chemical form of solar fuel need to be developed. One
approach to creating solar fuels is to split water into gaseous hydrogen and
oxygen molecules. This water splitting process needs "helper" molecules, or
catalysts, to occur rapidly and efficiently. When energy is needed, the hydrogen
and oxygen can then be recombined in a device known as a fuel cell to produce
electricity on demand. Unfortunately, the current chemical reactions that
converts water into oxygen (the oxygen-evolving reaction, or OER) and oxygen
back into water (the oxygen reduction reaction, or ORR) are too slow and
inefficient to be a competitive replacement for fossil fuels. Chemists have yet
to discover practical catalysts that can accelerate these processes. In this
award, Dr. Ksenjia Glusac of Bowling Green State University is investigating
catalysts that not only accelerate OER and ORR, but also are inexpensive and
non-toxic. Her model catalysts are made of earth-abundant elements, such as
carbon and nitrogen, and utilize the high conductivity of graphene, a building
block material of graphite found in pencils. The project also includes outreach
activities that aim at introducing energy-related topics into K-12, college and
general public education. Raising public energy literacy is a necessary step
towards allowing informed decision-making on energy-related behaviors and
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxygen evolving reaction (OER) and the oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) are key processes occurring in solar water splitting
devices, fuel cells and metal-air batteries. The high conductivity of graphene,
coupled with the catalytic performance of nitrogen sites makes N-doped graphenic
materials excellent candidates for metal-free OER/ORR catalysis. However, the
mechanistic understanding of catalysis by N-doped materials is limited,
inhibiting the development of a new generation of materials with improved
performance. In this project, Dr. Ksenjia Glusac of Bowling Green State
University is supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program to investigate
molecular model catalysts of N-doped carbon materials, with the goal of
pinpointing the ideal structural motifs that lead to efficient OER and ORR
catalysis. Particular emphasis is placed on structures that lead to reversible
(bifunctional) OER/ORR catalysis because the electrocatalytic reversibility is
directly linked to the decrease in the overpotential of the catalyzed reaction,
resulting in greater catalytic efficiency. Dr. Glusac's research results allow
her to obtain mechanistic insights into electrocatalytic OER/ORR by N-doped
structures and develop a chemical methodology for implementing effective
molecular motifs into graphenic materials. Furthermore, broader societal impacts
result from activities in the Glusac laboratory that focus on implementing
energy-related topics into K-12, college and public education. Raising public
energy literacy is a necessary step towards allowing informed decision-making on
energy-related behaviors and policies by the general public.