* 1565776
* Expanding Reductive Chemistry and Oxidation State Diversity with the Synthetic Chemistry of the Rare Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 05/31/2019
* USD 652,182.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor William J. Evans of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California, Irvine, to investigate chemical compounds that contain the rare
earth metals, i.e. scandium, yttrium, and the lanthanides. Molecules and
materials that contain these metals are important for technologies such as
energy efficient lighting and magnetic devices, and they have been designated
strategic materials by the U.S. Government. Professor Evans is using the special
properties of the rare earth metals to discover new methods to accomplish one of
the most fundamental types of chemical reaction, reduction chemistry. He is also
trying to improve the performance of the world's smallest (i.e., molecular)
magnets. This project simultaneously involves training the next generation of
scientists to study these critically important metals and involves personnel
from groups commonly underrepresented in science. The myriad uses of the rare
earth elements in everyday technologies are providing an excellent basis for
outreach programs at all educational levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Evans is building upon the recent discovery of new oxidation states for seven
rare earth elements in the first molecular complexes of Y2+, Ho2+, Er2+, Tb2+,
Pr2+, Gd2+, and Lu2+. The electronic structure of these ions with mixed
principal quantum number 4fn5d1 electron configurations is being modeled using
computational methods. The generality of obtaining new oxidation states with
coordination environments that allow higher-lying orbitals to be populated is
being explored synthetically. Because new oxidation states expand opportunities
to do redox chemistry, Professor Evans is examining the reaction chemistry and
photochemistry of these complexes. The mixed electron configuration of these
compounds may lead to an unusual combination of transition metal and rare earth
chemistry. The influence of the mixed configuration on physical properties of
the compounds is also being studied, because the Ho2+ complex has the highest
magnetic susceptibility, 11.4 mu-B, ever observed for a monometallic complex. In
general the researchers are using synthetic approaches to explore fundamental
aspects of reductive reactivity, oxidation state diversity, and magnetism from
new perspectives. Students from diverse backgrounds are currently involved in
the project, and the participants are spending time in outreach activities
directed towards broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
fields.