* 1565540
* Exploring the Connections between the Nonlinear Spectroscopy and the Potential Energy Landscapes of Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Richard Stratt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Ermler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

In a project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Richard Stratt of Brown University
is developing new ways of understanding the complex and seemingly erratic
patterns of motion exhibited by molecules in liquids. The immediate goal is to
gain insights into the behavior of glass-forming liquids, and liquid crystals.
Both of these materials are of enormous technological significance because of
their relevance to the manufacture of amorphous materials and to practical
display devices. In addition, these methods have potential applications to span
an even broader range of chemical problems in solutions. The basic idea is to
take advantage of recent progress in using high-performance computation to map
out the most favorable molecular pathways. In combination with analysis methods
being devised by Professor Stratt and his research group, other scientific
groups using ultrafast laser techniques can look for these desired patterns of
motion.

The engine driving this effort is that it is now possible to find the geodesic
(most efficient) routes through realistic potential energy landscapes of such
complex systems as supercooled and mesogenic liquids. But, with the discovery
that these routes can be computationally interrogated to discern molecular
mechanisms comes the possibility of designing multidimensional spectroscopy
experiments to ascertain those mechanisms. The Stratt group will be
investigating the specific nonlinear spectroscopic signatures of various kinds
of geodesic-defined molecular mechanisms to see if properly chosen spectra can
help resolve some of the current mysteries surrounding the dynamics of
supercooled fragile liquids and liquid crystals. An integral part of this effort
(and part of its broader impact) will be the use of this project as a vehicle
for exposing college undergraduates to issues faced in frontline
computationally-oriented research. It is hard to overestimate the importance of
the United States having an educated citizenry with an appreciation of how such
21st-century scientific methods as computer simulation can be used to approach
challenging problems. By focusing on carefully selected portions of the project,
undergraduates from a wide variety of different background will be able to gain
an appreciation of the challenges and possibilities provided by scientific
research.