* 1565774
* CRII: NeTS: High-Performance Scheduling Algorithms for Resource Management in Cloud Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Javad Ghaderi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,893.00

Cloud computing has gained enormous momentum recently. By using cloud, clients
no longer require to install and maintain their own infrastructure and can
instead procure Virtual Machines (VMs) with specific configurations of CPU,
memory, disk, and networking in the cloud. With the recent rise in demand for
cloud services, it has become imperative to use the cloud resources efficiently
to not only meet the demand, but also ensure scalability and cost efficiency.
For instance, VMs can be potentially concentrated onto a smaller number of
servers, and many of the unused servers can be turned off (to save energy) or
utilized to increase the number of VMs that could be simultaneously supported by
the system (to maximize throughput and reduce delay). A similar issue arises for
assigning data flows between the servers to available paths in the network where
the available bandwidth could be optimally utilized in order to improve
congestion, delay, or energy saving.

This project pursues three main objectives:

(1) VM Scheduling: This project develops efficient low-complexity algorithms for
VM packing, without explicit knowledge of the demand and without VM migrations,
targeted for the dynamic setting in the cloud (i.e., VMs arrive/depart
dynamically over time as opposed to being an static list). The technical
approach is to extend packing to both space and time which is necessary for this
dynamic setting.

(2) Flow Scheduling: The applications hosted in the cloud have certain bandwidth
requirements. Providing the bandwidth guarantees requires careful placement of
data flows on available paths within the architecture. This project will study
high-performance low-complexity algorithms for flow scheduling to balance the
load and minimize the cost (e.g., delay, congestion, energy), without splitting
and without re-routing the flows in the network.

(3) Empirical Evaluation: To demonstrate the gains over the current datacenter
heuristics, this project will test the algorithms on both synthesized and real
cloud traffic traces, on various datacenter architectures, and under a wide
range of workloads. The project will also use CloudLab both as a source for
traces and as a platform for hosting experimental prototypes.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the project for the research community
naturally arise from the wide prevalence of cloud and datacenters in modern
Internet services. In particular, the PI envisions his algorithms and
understanding of resource management in the cloud to further the state of the
art in this field. This project has the potential to impact the IT industry by
improving the scalability and cost efficiency of the cloud network architecture
and to impact the society by reducing the energy usage of data centers and
improving the user?s quality of experience. Industry impact and tech-transfer
will happen through the industrial affiliates program of Data Science Institute
at Columbia University. The PI encourages and actively seeks diversity within
his research group. The inclusion of research ideas into classes and mentoring
undergraduate/graduate students will ensure long-term percolation of the ideas
into industry and academia.