* 1565644
* RUI: Exploration of [5+2] Cycloadditions toward Novel Heterocyclic Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* T. Andrew Mitchell, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2020
* USD 210,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
project by Professor Andy Mitchell in the Department of Chemistry at Illinois
State University. Professor Mitchell and his students are developing new
chemical reactions that form molecules comprised of rings of atoms. These new
reactions are important in organic chemistry because they enable efficient and
selective transformation of simple molecules to three-dimensional molecules of
greater complexity. Many biologically active molecules and pharmaceuticals have
three-dimensional structures similar to those constructed by these reactions.
More generally, developments in organic chemistry advance the fields of biology,
medicine, and materials, as well as promoting economic development and
environmental sustainability. Undergraduate student research training performs
an indispensable role in the growth of students into scientists. Through hands-
on mentorship and exposure to state-of-the-art instrumentation, Professor
Mitchell prepares undergraduates to continue their training at excellent
graduate school programs or to enter the workforce as productive chemists. The
Mitchell group pursues synthetic challenges with potential for enduring and
broad impact, yet with manageable goals suitable for novice researchers. In
addition, Professor Mitchell partners with the Illinois Summer Research Academy
to mentor high school students, often from underrepresented groups. This
intensive one-week research experience can provide the spark necessary to excite
these young students with the wonders of organic synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the proposed research is to expand
the chemical space that is accessible by cycloaddition reactions in order to
construct novel and otherwise inaccessible heterocyclic scaffolds. Specifically,
the Mitchell group is investigating the scope and reaction pathway of various
oxidopyrylium-based [5+2] processes. Utilizing the Feist-BÃ©nary furan synthesis,
they are working toward the synthesis of toxicodenane A and developing a
diastereoselective [5+2] three-carbon component. In a new direction, they are
establishing activation parameters toward oxidopyrylium intermediates. They use
this information to develop reactions that address current selectivity
limitations. As part of broader impacts, next generation scientists are trained
to ask important questions in the context of biologically relevant molecules.
The educational plan includes outreach to local high schools to introduce
students to the historical and current significance of organic synthesis. High
school students are mentored in a research lab through the Illinois Summer
Research Academy. These outreach activities are well integrated with the
research program.