* 1565664
* Transition Metal Clusters as Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2020
* USD 425,693.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor George Christou of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Florida is seeking new molecular compounds
that can function as nanoscale magnetic materials with properties relevant to
new 21st century technologies such as quantum computers and spintronics.
Molecular chemistry brings advantages such as solubility and crystallinity to
this goal. It also provides methods for optimizing molecules for particular
studies, such as characterizing the quantum physics properties important to
these potential applications. The project's scope is broad spanning chemistry
and physics. The project also provides new knowledge at the nanoscale that is
not often available from traditional magnetic nanoparticles. The multi-
disciplinary nature of the research also provides broad, high-level education
and training for students, including underrepresented minorities. In addition, a
number of outreach, education and international activities are carried out,
including state and international conference organization and an annual
Chemistry Day in the local community targeted at K-12 students.

This research consists of two main objectives. The first one is to synthesize
covalently-linked aggregates of two or more single-molecule magnets (SMMs)
linked by dioximate or dicarboxylate bridges and to study their magnetic and
quantum physics properties. Weak interactions between the SMMs leads to quantum
superposition/entanglement states. These nebulous and fragile effects are
detected and studied with techniques such as high-frequency electron
paramagnetic (HFEPR) spectroscopy in the solid state. Extension of the HFEPR
studies to frozen solutions is crucial to determine if structures and quantum
effects remain unchanged on dissolution, providing a second phase for their
study. The second objective is the preparation of molecules with a Mnx/O (x =
8-12) cage-like structures containing a heterometal M' of a different type (M' =
Ca, La, Ln, Bi, Pb, etc.) at their center. The goal is to mimic in molecular
compounds the repeating unit of certain mixed-metal oxides with the perovskite
structure, particularly BiMnO3 and LnMnO3 (Ln = lanthanide) that are
multiferroics, and thus to prepare molecules that function as 'molecular
multiferroics', exhibiting both SMM and switchable electric polarization.