* 1565904
* Additive Nonsmoothing, the Kakeya Problem, and Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Nets Katz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2019
* USD 387,859.00

The equations of fluid mechanics have been studied since the eighteenth century.
Nevertheless, the problem of their regularity has not yet been fully understood.
Can a three-dimensional, incompressible, unforced viscous flow that starts
smoothly develop a singularity in finite time? This question, one of the Clay
Millennial Problems, is as mysterious as its solution would be important. In
other parts of harmonic analysis, similar questions arise. One of the most
famous problems along these lines is the Kakeya problem: Can a set in some
Euclidean space contain a unit line segment in every direction but be of lower
dimension than the ambient space? This question is connected to important
questions in several areas of mathematics, and an example of such a set could
provide insight into singularities of solutions to wave equations and
Schrodinger equations. The Kakeya problem also shares many features with other
problems in the field of additive combinatorics, the field whose central
question is whether a set of numbers giving rise to many additive equations is
always an indication of some additive structure in the set or can occur as a
sort of malevolent coincidence. This project aims to classify and explain the
kind of coincidences that can occur in all these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes aim at three specific
problems. First, the principal investigator will study whether the quasi-
geostrophic equation in the plane develops singularities. He hopes to do this by
studying simplified model problems in which all of the action takes place in a
finite-dimensional Lie group, one of the jet groups of the class of volume-
preserving diffeomorphisms. Second, he would like to show that a Kakeya set in
three dimensions has a Hausdorff dimension that is strictly greater than two and
a half. He hopes to do this by exploiting as few structural properties of the
set as possible. Earlier work used structural properties heavily to obtain good
Minkowski-dimension bounds; it is anticipated that a lighter approach will be
effective for the problem of Hausdorff dimension. Finally, the principal
investigator seeks to develop a good theory for finding structured parts of
additively nonsmoothing sets. He will attempt to extend earlier work on the size
of capsets with implications for the polynomial Freiman-Ruzsa conjecture.