* 1565070
* I-Corps: Redox and pH responsive MRI contrast agents based on iron and cobalt
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2015,05/31/2016
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a clinically important diagnostic procedure,
with about half of MRI scans using contrast agents in order to better image
differences in tissue. This project will involve the development and initial
steps towards commercialization of contrast agents based on iron and cobalt as
inexpensive and earth abundant elements. These new contrast agents are unique in
that they are designed to switch on in tissue which has characteristics of a
disease state. The responsive properties of these contrast agents could be
extremely useful for improved diagnostics and treatment. This project will
explore the potential of these agents for use in different diseases including
cancer and brain injury. The team of three (academic PI, entrepreneurial lead
and business mentor) will interview radiologists, medical doctors, insurance
company representatives, MRI scanner manufacturers and MRI technicians to
determine the factors that go into the development and marketing of new contrast
agents.

With support from the I-CORPS program, a team has been assembled to investigate
the potential commercialization of magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents
based on iron(II)/iron(III) and cobalt(II). The contrast agents are paramagnetic
metal ion complexes that produce signal through chemical exchange saturation
transfer (paraCEST). The proposed paraCEST agents are coordination complexes
that can be tuned for redox potential and spin state. Furthermore, paraCEST
agents generally produce contrast which is pH and temperature responsive. The
proposed project will explore the possibility of commercializing these new
contrast agents for 1) diagnosis of extent of tumor hypoxia as well as
extracellular pH and 2) mapping traumatic brain injury which is thought to
involve the production of reactive oxygen species and to affect redox status of
tissue. The team will study the factors that go into making decisions on the
commercialization of contrast agents and new diagnostic procedures by
interviewing medical doctors, radiologists, MRI company representatives, and
insurance company representatives. Potential outcomes include a refined focus on
the development of contrast agents for new diagnostic procedures, a business
plan for proceeding with the commercialization of the agents, as well as new
collaborations and networks. Commercialization of these contrast agents may
create new jobs towards meeting the long term goal of substituting current
technologies that use rare earth elements of limited supply.