* 1565947
* New Approaches to Reversible Homogeneous Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 555,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Robert Waymouth of Stanford University is developing new
experimental approaches for the electrocatalytic conversion of alcohols into
ketones. The conversion of chemical compounds such as alcohols into ketones can
form the basis of fuel cells, which are alternatives to conventional power
sources. While the alcohol/ketone fuel cells are very attractive, the chemical
reaction is difficult. In this project, new catalysts that facilitate such
difficult reactions are being developed. This research provides new means for
the energy-efficient conversion of chemical fuels into useful forms of energy.
Collaborative investigations with Professors Richard Zare and Christopher
Chidsey at Stanford University enhance the experimental and educational
infrastructure for energy science and provide faculty, postdoctoral, graduate,
and undergraduate students with rich opportunities for education and
collaborative research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
homogeneous catalysts bearing proton and redox-active ligands. It is guided by
the hypothesis that mechanistic concepts that have been developed for chemical
transfer hydrogenation catalysis, such as metal-ligand bifunctional activation
of substrates, can be applied to the behavior of proton- and redox-active
ligands that are effective in mediating multi-electron and proton transfers. The
experimental approach utilizes homogeneous coordination complexes and seeks to
determine the key features of the metal/ligand coordination environments that
mediate the hydrogen atom, proton and electron transfer steps in efficient
electrocatalytic processes. The development and application of high resolution
mass spectrometry techniques, interfaced to electrochemical cells is an
innovative aspect of the experimental plan. These provide new mechanistic
insights on the intermediates generated during electrocatalytic reactions.
Broader impacts of this work include new approaches for the energy-efficient
conversion of chemical fuels into useful forms of energy.