* 1565941
* Amino Acid and Peptide Asssembly: Mechanisms and Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael T. Bowers at the University
of California at Santa Barbara are investigating the mechanism of peptide
assembly. Peptide and protein assemblies can contribute to many devastating
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease because of amyloid formation. This is an
active area of research both for its fundamental importance and its potential
impacts on health. Through the studies on model amino acids and peptides,
factors that control larger peptide and protein assembly can be learned, which
can help the development of new therapeutic agents. The project is well suited
for the education of scientists at all levels, including those underrepresented
in science. Outreach activities to high school students in the Ventura and Santa
Barbara areas are also part of the funded project. A free website that allows
the accurate and rapid calculation of cross sections of model structures is also
supported by this grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this grant is
focused on the assembly of amino acids and small peptides. In these studies, Ion
Mobility based Mass Spectrometry (IMS-MS) is used as the main tool. In
collaboration with the group of Gert von Helden at the Fritz Haber Institute in
Berlin, IMS-MS is coupled with the Fritz Haber free electron laser to do
spectroscopy on size and shape selected oligomers of both amino acids and small
peptides. The overarching goal is to understand the molecular mechanism of the
amyloid cascade that is often observed for peptides and proteins in systems
related to many devastating diseases. The amyloid hypothesis states that
peptides natively fold and isotropically assemble until at a system dependent
size they rearrange to beta sheet and rapidly add monomers to form fibrils. The
group, in past NSF support periods, observed this process for specific peptide
systems. The current project seeks to understand these observations and to
develop an algorithm that can accurately predict the predilection of a peptide
or protein to form amyloid knowing only the primary structure.