* 1565131
* Preparing Engineers and Computer Scientists (PECS)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Wilkistar Otieno, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 994,414.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee will provide scholarships for talented, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need pursuing bachelor's degrees in engineering and
computer science. In addition to scholarships, the program will provide academic
and other support to increase the persistence of academically talented, low-
income students. The project aims to provide a seamless graduation pathway for
academically talented yet economically disadvantaged students. In recognition of
the varied types of support needed by individual students, the program will
utilize a holistic framework of evidence-based effective practices to ensure
that the challenges particular to each scholar are addressed. Scholarships and
support for academically strong students, who may not otherwise be able to
afford college, will help to produce a well-trained workforce that will
contribute to the economic vitality of the greater Milwaukee region and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program organization is informed by research
indicating that significant reasons for STEM attrition include poor classroom
experiences of students, lack of faculty mentoring, and an unsupportive campus
atmosphere. The proposal will test the idea that strong faculty mentoring and
advising, community-oriented activities, undergraduate research opportunities,
and selective participation in student organizations and professional societies
will reduce isolation, increase connectedness, and improve STEM career
commitment for talented low-income students whose initial connection to the
university may be limited. The holistic framework established in this project
builds on a variety of existing student support activities including pre-
orientation and summer bridge programs, tutoring, a living-learning community,
internship and undergraduate research opportunities, and participation in
student organizations and professional societies. Scholars will have mentors who
are experienced engineering and computer science faculty. An active cohort of
scholars engaged in career development and community-oriented activities will
help establish a supportive climate. The project will utilize the resources
available in the industries located in the Milwaukee region. In addition to the
opportunity for industrial internships, scholars will have industrial mentors.
These mentors from industry will help students learn about the nature of the
opportunities available in their prospective careers in engineering and computer
science. The project has identified commitment to career goals as an important
element in student persistence and anticipates that industrial mentoring
combined with faculty and other career advising will improve student
understanding of the prospects of their intended majors. The findings from the
program will be disseminated widely to the STEM education community and help
increase understanding of the attributes and practices of successful student
scholarship and support programs.