* 1565233
* EAGER: Using Search Engines to Track Impact of Unsung Heroes of Big Data Revolution, Data Creators
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2019
* Adam Godzik, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Efficient mechanisms of data exchange are increasingly central to science (and
society) in the midst of the deluge of complex data. The pace of data production
and its complexity mean that a large amount of data is often not adequately
analyzed by the data producers, and thanks to its rapid dissemination, the broad
community is participating in its analysis. This model, however, carries a risk
of neglecting the input of the original data creators, as attention shifts to
data integrators and analyzers. The current paradigm of information
dissemination and assigning credit in science, based on peer-reviewed
publications and formal acknowledgment of third-party contributions in the form
of citations, is biased toward high-profile, well-known scientists and research
centers who participate in the latter stages of knowledge creation and
dissemination. We propose to use unbiased internet searches to identify
uncredited use of datasets and resources in research literature, allowing data
creators and researchers participating in early stages of data creation to claim
credit for their work. Using machine-learning and text-mining techniques, the PI
seeks to extract relevant information from noisy results of general-purpose
search engines and develop easy-to-use interfaces for public use of such
resources to supplement official bibliometric
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acceptance and citation biases have a
significant impact on careers of researchers outside the central foci of funding
and publications, which are also typically places with more-diverse research
forces. First, the probability of rejection in peer review is significantly
biased against less-famous scientists and those at less-research-intensive
institutions. These biases are less likely to affect data creation as databases
typically accept data without peer review and the value of data can be measured
by its use. The same biases affect number of citations, where people tend to
cite more-famous, established scientists, or cite reviews that are often invited
and only leading scientists would have been invited to write the review. As a
result, both publications and citations are heavily biased toward already-
recognized scientists that represent less-diverse populations, both in personal
terms and in terms of the institutions where they work, as compared to the
general population of scientists. Such biases affect careers and ability to
obtaining grant funding for young scientist operating outside of the tight
collaboration networks at best research institutions and creates a classical
rich getting richer and poor getting poorer loop. The new internet-based
information exchange paradigm has already had a profound effect on researchers?
ability to getting their results in prominent, public view. This proposal aims
at approaches that would further alleviate publication and citation bias, not by
addressing it directly, but by developing more openways of evaluating
contributions to science.