* 1565678
* CSEDI Collaborative Research:  Experimental and Theoretical Investigations on the Elastic and Viscoelastic Properties of Fe-Ni-C Liquids
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Jianwei Wang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 207,294.00

The Earth's core, the most remote and dynamic part of our planet, is composed of
liquid iron alloys solidified at its center. The nature and dynamics of the core
are closely related to manifold geophysical problems such as the driving force
of mantle convection, the geodynamo, and planetary evolution. The core is
predominantly iron (Fe) alloyed with 5-10% nickel (Ni) and some lighter
elements, such as sulfur (S), silicon (Si), carbon (C), oxygen (O), and hydrogen
(H). The knowledge of the properties of Fe-rich alloys and liquids under
relevant core conditions is a prerequisite for understanding the composition,
thermal state and dynamics of the core. In comparison to crystalline iron alloys
for the inner core, there exists a remarkable lack of data on liquid properties
of iron-rich alloys due to experimental challenges, which have been investigated
at conditions far below those expected for the outer core. The lack of data on
liquid properties and great challenges facing experimental investigations under
relevant core conditions are expected to continue in the foreseeable future.
This prompts the team to adopt a synergistic approach by integrating experiments
at experimentally-achievable pressures with computations up to core conditions.
The focus of this collaborative research will be on the elastic and viscoelastic
properties of Fe-Ni-C liquids under high pressures through the synergy between
experiment and theory. This approach for investigating liquid properties
represents a potential methodology for studying liquid properties under extreme
conditions, so as to speculate on the suitability of such combined efforts for
similar high-pressure liquid state physics research. The proposed research
offers a unique opportunity to engage graduate and undergraduate students to
utilize state-of-the-art experimental techniques and computational tools at
multi-scale facilities (departmental, university, and national laboratory) for
solving fundamental problems in an active research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elastic and viscoelastic properties of Fe-Ni-C
liquids will be investigated at high pressures by experimental techniques such
as X-ray absorption, ultrasonic interferometry, X-ray diffraction, and X-ray
viscometry, in combination with computational techniques, to establish a
comprehensive mineral physics database on the density, sound velocity,
viscosity, and structure of the liquids in a previously uncharted pressure-
temperature-composition sector. The laboratory data will provide an important
foundation on which the interpretation of ultrahigh pressure laboratory data and
theoretical data will be based. The low-pressure data will be used to benchmark
and validate results from theoretical calculations at low-pressure, and the
higher-pressure calculation results will be used to estimate and predict liquid
properties under core conditions. Such a methodology largely eliminates errors
often induced in long extrapolations from low-pressure to core pressures, and
identifies prospective biases in theoretical calculations. High pressure-
temperature behaviors of the iron-rich liquids by the synergistic efforts from
laboratory experiments and theoretical calculations will help improve our
understanding of the physics and chemistry of the core. Stringent tests of
carbon-rich core composition models for the outer core will be performed based
on the liquid properties determined from this research. The outcome of the
proposed projects, i.e., structure, density, sound velocity, and viscosity of
core materials, will become essential parts of the study on carbon reservoirs
and deep carbon cycle in the Earth and planetary interiors. The new experimental
data could also be readily used in the discussion of planetary cores, such as
the lunar core. The team is committed to disseminating the results through peer-
reviewed journal publications and to publicizing their work to their local and
greater communities through news releases, public lectures, and their research
websites.