* 1565522
* The Essential Dynamics of Tropical Rain Belts: Monsoons and Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in a Multi-model Ensemble of Idealized Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Michela Biasutti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 711,360.00

Knowing where, when, and how much rainfall falls over oceans and continents
across the tropics matters directly to the people who live there and is also a
key piece of information to understand the atmospheric circulation over the
entire globe. This is because -as moisture is evaporated from the ocean,
transported by winds, and finally rained out - energy is moved with it across a
planetary heat engine that affects climate everywhere. This project aims at
elucidating how tropical rainfall changes in response to changes in the way
energy enters the tropical atmosphere, be they the results of the alternating of
seasons, the wobble of the earth's orbit, or the man-made changes in atmospheric
composition. The goal of this research is to address the essential similarities
and differences in their dynamics between the oceanic rain belt and the regional
monsoons; its approach is to analyze a hierarchy of simulations performed with
an ensemble of computer models of the global atmosphere, to compare the climates
produced in idealized model setups, and to identify those mechanisms that are
robust across a range of simplifications.

This research effort will have major impacts in two realms: our understanding of
tropical dynamics and our design of model hierarchies. Progress on both fronts
is necessary if we want to better our models and improve our prediction of
future climate change in the tropics and globally. The effort will support
continuous and focused leadership of a community effort to spur innovative
research on the dynamics of monsoons and oceanic rain belts. The design and
coordination of the ensemble simulations at the base of this project will
continue through the organization of sessions and informal meetings at
international conferences in which participants to this Grand Challenge can
exchange results and plan additional research activities. One post-doctoral
scientist, one graduate student and three undergraduates will be trained by this
project and benefit from the interactions with the larger community that has
gathered around these themes. Knowledge gained from this project will be
incorporated in lectures and outreach activities, including the Lamont Open
House and adult education at the American Natural History Museum. Results will
also be reported via the State of the Planet Blog of the Earth Institute of
Columbia University.