* 1565396
* TWC: Large: Collaborative: Verifiable Hardware: Chips that Prove their Own Correctness
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2023
* Siddharth Garg, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2023
* USD 540,000.00

This project addresses how semiconductor designers can verify the correctness of
ICs that they source from possibly untrusted fabricators. Existing solutions to
this problem are either based on legal and contractual obligations, or use post-
fabrication IC testing, both of which are unsatisfactory or unsound. As a sound
alternative, this project designs and fabricates verifiable hardware: ICs that
provide proofs of their correctness for every input-output computation they
perform in the field. These proofs must be efficiently verifiable in less time
and energy than it takes to re-execute the computation
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon exciting recent theoretical and
practical advances in verifiable outsourced computation for the cloud, this
project develops new techniques that exploit the unique constraints and
adversary models that relate to the verifiable hardware problem. In addition,
the project also develops new practical approaches to the problem of general
verifiable computation. As a broader impact, computing systems security is one
of the greatest technological problems faced by society today. Verifiable
hardware is an essential foundation for building future computing systems that
are reliable and free from catastrophic security failures. The ultimate goal of
this project is to make verifiable hardware practical and accessible for use in
cryptographic and mission-critical hardware applications through open-source
tools. The PIs are strongly committed to education and public outreach by
producing widely-used course materials and taking active roles in outreach at
minority-serving universities, community colleges, student organizations and
high schools.