* 1565811
* CRII: III: RI: Empowering Multi-Conceptual Spatial Reasoning with a Repository of Qualitative and Quantitative Spatial Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Torsten Hahmann, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,978.00

People have manifold ways to express and process spatial information. As needed,
they employ conceptualizations of space, so-called cognitive maps, that differ
in granularity, scope, and precision. Based on the context, people use different
implicit assumptions to interpret a spatial relation such as "A is contained in
B." The assumptions made or implied by different conceptualizations often even
contradict another (e.g., in "the lake contains a bay" the bay is a subregion of
the lake while in "the lake contains an island" the island is surrounded by the
lake). This is not an issue for people: we are able to quickly and reliably
decide which conceptualization is most suitable in a specific situation, often
choosing the simplest applicable conceptualization. For instance, people can
quickly make navigation decisions ("Do I need to travel north or south on the
Interstate?") or answer simple spatial queries ("Is the ocean east or west from
here?"). Similar capabilities for flexibly utilizing multiple conceptualizations
would make computational tools for recording and processing spatial information
much more powerful and user-friendly. Towards this goal, the proposed research
will investigate a formalism and basic procedures for automatically choosing a
spatial representation best suited to solve a specific task, such as finding
data with certain qualitative characteristics, answering a spatial query, or
testing a spatial hypothesis. The research will contribute to a theoretical
foundation for collecting, accessing, and manipulating spatial information in
more natural ways without impeding its efficient processing in information
systems. It will lower the barrier of entry for interacting with and analyzing
spatial information and promotes technologies to cut time and costs typically
spent on transforming diverse spatial data sets into a coherent
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the different spatial
conceptualizations will be encoded as machine-interpretable spatial ontologies
and placed in a structured ontology repository that leverages relationships from
mathematical logic. The formal foundation for comparing the expressivity of
ontologies using the mathematical notion of definability will be developed and
used to organize the repository by differences in ontological assumptions and
expressivity. This structure will be exploited by procedures for automatically
selecting an ontology that best fits a specific spatial task. In addition,
formal encodings of the knowledge necessary to convert spatial information from
one ontology to another will be investigated, accompanied by procedures that
utilize this information for automatically identifying and converting pieces of
geometric background knowledge relevant to a specific spatial task. The research
in this project will contribute to a better understanding of how logical
relationships can be utilized to formally compare the expressiveness of two
spatial ontologies, and how a spatial ontology repository can be supplemented by
information that allows automated conversion of knowledge based on different
ontologies. For further information see the project web page:
http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~torsten/projects/QQSOR.shtml