* 1565269
* CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Smart earpiece for supporting healthy eating behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* David Kotz, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,098,976.00

Obesity is one of the most pressing health challenges faced by our country, and
has been the target of much attention in the mobile health (mHealth) community.
While the science of obesity indicates that diet is a major factor in behavioral
change to encourage healthy weight management, we are still not able to
effectively, quickly and easily measure eating and drinking behavior. This
project's goal is to develop a digital earpiece ­­ small and comfortable enough
to wear behind the ear ­­ that can sense and detect actions such as eating and
drinking. The project's long­term vision is to enable behavioral­health
researchers to better understand health­related behaviors and, subsequently, to
support the development of effective behavioral­health interventions that
promote healthy diet and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, a better understanding
of eating­related behaviors, and better design of effective interventions
regarding eating behavior, will have profound impact on personal and public
health as well as the national economy. The project's hardware and software
prototypes will be shared widely in the research community to enable
experimentation around the sensing and interaction opportunities possible in an
earpiece device. Furthermore, the project directly involves undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary research, and outreach to middle­school
students, expanding the supply of scientists educated in this important emerging
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to develop a
digital earpiece ­­ small and comfortable enough to wear behind the ear ­­ that
can sense and detect actions such as eating, drinking, smoking, and speaking,
and measure physiological stress. The project's long­term vision is that
computational jewelry like this earpiece will enable behavioral­health
researchers to better understand health­related behaviors and, subsequently, to
support the validation and deployment of effective behavioral­health
interventions that promote healthy diet and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The project's
approach is to build a prototype wireless earpiece, small enough to wear behind
the ear, with low­power (microwatt­scale) electronics and software sufficient to
allow for the battery to last a full waking day; to develop efficient algorithms
for detecting and distinguishing health­related behaviors (eating, drinking,
smoking, speaking, and stress); and to develop easy and effective means for the
wearer to interact with the earpiece and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Contributions: The team expects to answer scientific
questions important to achieving the above goals. Specifically, they seek to
advance scientific knowledge through the design and development of a wireless
earpiece capable of sensing behavior and interacting with its wearer; develop
novel low­power analog electronics and distributed software algorithms for
inferring relevant behaviors from sensor data; develop novel interaction
modalities involving bone­conduction audio between the earpiece and its wearer,
complemented by tactile interfaces on the earpiece, on the skin, or on auxiliary
devices like a wristband or smartphone; and validate these approaches through
user studies and experiments inside and outside the lab.