* 1565987
* RUI: Synthesis of Isomeric Carbolines by Tandem Palladium Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Seann Mulcahy, Providence College
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2020
* USD 191,371.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Seann Mulcahy in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Providence College. Professor Mulcahy and his undergraduate
students are developing a new methodology for the synthesis of a class of
organic compounds called isomeric carbolines. These molecules are known to have
attractive biological properties, which range from neurochemical effects to
antibacterial and anticancer activity. One major goal of this project is to use
compounds containing the element, palladium, as a catalyst that will stitch
together these molecules in a single vessel from simpler precursors. Such an
efficient chemical process would reduce the time, energy, and resources needed
for the synthesis of carbolines. The project further is serving as a training
tool for undergraduate students at Providence College, including those students
from disadvantaged backgrounds. The project's breadth reaches beyond the
research laboratory and is being incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum,
a summer bridge program, and outreach activities in Providence public schools.
All of the students involved in this work are gaining problem solving and
critical thinking skills that are needed for success in chemistry at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the development of catalytic, one-
pot procedures for the synthesis of isomeric alpha, beta, gamma and delta-
carboline heterocycles that have important biochemical function including
neuropharmacological activity. Specific targets of this research have potential
as molecular probes for studying diseases of the brain. The overarching strategy
in this work is the use of a single palladium precursor that will catalyze two
mechanistically unique transformations. The first objective is to complete the
synthesis of beta-carbolines which have an additional ring attached. By
performing a tandem Sonogashira/[2+2+2] cyclization in the same flask, these
molecules are created in an atom-economical way using a "multitasking" palladium
catalyst. The second objective is to devise similar strategies for the more
electron-rich alpha-carboline isomers. The final scientific objective is to
synthesize precursor alkynylnitrile and functionalized iodoaniline molecules
leading to the gamma- and delta-isomers. The substrate scope, catalytic
efficiency, and ligand/solvent effects are optimized for each isomeric class.
Equally important in this work is the training of undergraduate students to
become better scientists. Through their involvement in original research,
undergraduates explore new areas of chemical synthesis and catalysis. The
project also seeks to recruit underrepresented groups to study chemistry, both
through a "summer bridge" research experience for incoming students or the
Catalysts for Chemistry outreach program in Providence public schools.