* 1565109
* The Science of Success: An Integrative Approach of Experiential Learning and Career Readiness Across STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2022
* William Shay, North Dakota State College of Science
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2022
* USD 648,463.00

The Science of Success Program at the North Dakota State College of Science
(NDSCS) will offer STEM students a comprehensive infrastructure of financial,
academic and professional support by utilizing existing NDSCS Student Success
resources and by creating a STEM Scholars Scholarship Program, Academic Support
Network and Career Success Network. The overall goal of the project is to
increase the number of skilled, well-educated, and professional STEM graduates
for the statewide and regional in-demand workforce by providing support for 60
STEM students who demonstrate academic talent and financial need. The program
aims to unify students enrolled in career and technical STEM programs and
liberal arts STEM transfer programs by incorporating experiential learning and
integrating career-success skills throughout each student's plan of study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the Science of Success Program are to:
(1) recruit academically talented STEM students with demonstrated financial
need, (2) retain 100% of STEM Scholars from their first to second year of study
and graduate 90% of STEM Scholars within two years, and (3) integrate career-
success skills throughout their plan of study. Retention and graduation rates
will be addressed by providing a support network of faculty and peer mentors,
early intervention, academic tutoring, and by emphasizing experiential learning
within and outside of the classroom. A Career Success Seminar Series will be
designed using the 360 Career Success Skills learning modules to provide a
platform for students to acquire career-ready skills and to network with
industry professionals. The research component of the project will determine the
relationship of each intervention (retention, graduation, engagement, career
readiness) to student achievement and professional skill development. The
overall impact will be the natural formation of a community of practice that
includes industry and four-year institution stakeholders, mentors, support team,
alumni, and current students seeking to implement best practices to improve
career success.