* 1565230
* EAGER: Risk Objects in Public Health Crisis: An Exploratory Investigation of Stigma, Role-Triage, and Cautionary measures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2019
* James Kendra, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 95,436.00

The recent Ebola crisis in the United States showed a need for improvements in
the management of complex public health emergencies, especially those that are
new or surprising. Public anxiety about this disease intersected with lingering
ambiguities about modes of transmission to create substantial leadership
challenges for health administrators, clinicians, other healthcare workers, and
public officials. This research will study the response of the New York City
public health system to the Ebola crisis in order to develop decision support
tools that can be utilized by health officials, physicians and other
practitioners during future communicable disease outbreaks. Although based upon
a case study of one event, the results will be relevant to other large, public
health emergencies and epidemics in other settings. Agencies disseminated
contradictory information that, rather than reassure the public, created further
anxieties. Meanwhile the infection of two nurses from Dallas suggested that the
public health system was faltering. In this environment of uncertainty and
doubt, people and places were stigmatized by the public as well as by as
officials asserting they were acting "out of an abundance of caution." Teachers
were put on leave; a nurse was quarantined in New Jersey; schoolchildren were
not allowed to register for classes; and some hospital workers reported
difficulties at work or at second jobs. The need for institutions to function
during ambiguous crises suggests the need to better understand how people and
places become defined as risk objects. In other words, how people treat people
and how people defend themselves against perceived unfair treatment - including
stigma-driven policies - may lead them to take steps that undercut or challenge
public health needs or other important public services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to engage in new research on ideas
about stigma and how people defend against stigma. Focus groups, interviews, and
review of documents will show how people were stigmatized and resisted stigma.
Although focused on a particular health crisis in a particular city, the
findings from this research will be important elsewhere. In particular, it was
noted that stigmatization created substantial individual and social disruption
and had potential, with a slightly different set of events, to affect the
delivery of health care or other services. This project will explore who is
involved in creating stigma, the consequences, and how people promote, resist,
or manage those labels. This research will be important in learning, in an
environment of scientific uncertainty and multijurisdictional conflict and
contradiction, about countering stigmatization and mitigating the creation of
risk objects.