* 1565886
* SusChEM: Mechanism and Discovery of Metal-Catalyzed Fluoroalkylation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2020
* John Hartwig, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2020
* USD 680,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor John F. Hartwig in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California, Berkeley. In this program, Professor Hartwig is developing a
mechanistic understanding of catalytic reactions that use transition metal
complexes bonded to fluorine-containing alkyl groups. These studies answer a
series of questions about the impact of fluorine atoms on the metal-bound carbon
atom. The studies also assess several approaches to control the reactivity of
these fluoroalkyl complexes of transition metals. By developing methods to
control the reactivity of fluoroalkyl complexes, this research enables the
development of new catalytic reactions that add fluoroalkyl groups into organic
molecules. Organic molecules containing fluorine are vital to materials,
agricultural, and medicinal sciences. For example, over 20% of new
pharmaceuticals and 25% of licensed herbicides contain fluorine. The project is
well suited for providing a broad education to Ph.D. scientists and
undergraduates, including those of underrepresented groups. A series of outreach
activities for K-12 students, the general public, and the general scientific
community are part of Professor Hartwig's efforts resulting from the research
program.

Although a large fraction of pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals contain fluorine,
fluorinated structures are largely limited to those derived from simple
fluoroarenes, trifluoromethylarenes or trifluoroacetates. Many of the potential
methods to synthesize more diverse structures containing fluoroalkyl groups
require new approaches to induce and control the reactivity of fluoroalkyl
transition-metal complexes in catalytic reactions. This research creates these
capabilities by demonstrating, by a combination of kinetic analysis of catalytic
reactions and synthesis of catalytic intermediates, how to induce productive
reactivity in fluoroalkyl complexes of palladium. This project also creates new
catalytic reactions that couple partially fluorinated alkyl groups to aromatic
and heteroaromatic molecules to form products that are difficult to access by
current synthetic methods. With this information, fluoroalkylation reactions
that are currently stoichiometric are being made catalytic. Additionally, new
reactions of aryl halides that form fluoroalkylarenes with novel structures that
are difficult to prepare by alternative methods are being created. This research
enables the preparation of new classes of fluorinated molecules for materials
science, medicinal chemistry, and agroscience. As part of the educational plan,
Professor Hartwig teaches short-courses for those lacking formal training in
organometallic catalysis, co-authors a sophomore organic text that includes
content on catalysis in medicinal and green organic chemistry, and delivers
lectures to general audiences, predominantly in forums in which he reaches
potential scientists from underrepresented groups.