* 1565837
* SusCHEM: Development of New Reductive Transformations Utilizing First-Row Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2021
* John Montgomery, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2021
* USD 720,107.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the research
by Professor John Montgomery. Professor Montgomery is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan. The goal of this project
is to develop new processes for synthetic organic chemistry that are catalyzed
by the earth-abundant metals nickel and copper. The new processes offer improved
stability and reactivity, lower cost, and ease of access compared with existing
alternatives. The new catalysts are being used to discover new organic
transformations of readily available substrates. These efforts create versatile
and efficient new catalysts and synthetic procedures that enable the creation of
high-value products. The products are prepared from simple and widely available
feedstocks in an environmentally sustainable manner. Students engaged in the
work are trained in the discovery of new reactions, synthetic methods
development, organometallic chemistry, and mechanistic chemistry. A substantial
emphasis is placed on the career development of graduate students. Graduate
students interested in employment at undergraduate institutions have they
opportunity to work in that environment. Through a collaboration with a highly
successful laboratory at an undergraduate institution, the graduate student
gains experience conducting research and mentoring undergraduates. Other
students have the opportunity to conduct collaborative research in international
research labs.Professor Montgomery and his research team also are involved in
outreach activities that provide engaging exposure to science for young students
from the Detroit metropolitan area. These activities impact the academic
experiences of many young students including underrepresented minorities while
sharing with them the excitement of chemistry
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared with precious metal counterparts, nickel
and copper catalysts offer unique reactivity and orthogonal capabilities. A
primary focus of the research is to capitalize on the characteristic reactivity
of nickel and copper to discover and develop synthetic processes that are
unknown with other metals and that provide rapid access to high-value products.
In particular, silyloxyarenes, which are an underutilized but widely available
and inexpensive class of organic substrates, are employed in a wide array of
carbon-hydrogen, carbon-silicon, and carbon-carbon bond-forming processes. In
efforts involving copper catalysis, novel cascade processes that derivatize
substrates possessing two or more unsaturated structural units are devised
through processes that simultaneously incorporate multiple boron and cyano
functional groups. The education plans involve innovative practices to provide
career development training and international research opportunities to graduate
students at the University of Michigan.