* 1565717
* Skilled Women Get STEM Jobs: Recruiting and Engaging Female Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Brian Kochan, Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 230,991.00

Skilled worker shortages and lack of gender diversity in technician level
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields are state,
national, and international problems. Having more women in the STEM workforce
will help narrow the male-female wage gap and help reduce workforce shortages.
This project at Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology entitled Skilled Women
Get STEM Jobs is designed to enable female students to prepare for careers in
high demand, typically male-dominated science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. This project will contribute to the body of evidence
about effective ways for high schools, community colleges, and industries to
develop STEM pipelines that encourage young women to enter typically male-
dominated technical careers. The project will have an impact not only on the
large area served by the college, but also nationally, by disseminating
information about successful recruiting and retention activities to encourage
similar initiatives at other colleges and in industry groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on three college technician
programs that are vital to the region and the nation: (a) Machine Tool &amp;
Computer Aided Manufacturing that educates technicians for jobs as machinists,
tool and die makers, and computer numerically controlled operators and
programmers; (b) Electrical Technology that educates technicians for the
construction industry as electricians, the manufacturing industry as industrial
electricians, and the utility industry as power generation and distribution
technicians; and (c) Water &amp; Environmental Technology Program that educates
technicians for water and wastewater treatment at municipal and private
facilities, and for food processing, paper production, waste-to-energy, and
environmental companies. The project will have an especially strong impact on
water technology outreach initiatives as the college offers the only
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) approved associate
degree program. The program will communicate directly and regularly with the PA
DEP training section and the Pennsylvania Water Environment Association.
National dissemination will be through the Water Environment Federation. To
strengthen the three aforementioned technician programs, the project will build
a high school to college pipeline to (a) encourage female high school students
to enroll in college programs that offer solid job prospects, (b) engage the
enrolled students through an informal group mentoring program and internship
opportunities, and (c) facilitate their entry into the workforce by ensuring
their familiarity with industries and job opportunities. Recruitment activities
target females at 11 high schools through industry tours, college tours, and
hands on cross disciplinary immersion workshops that develop a product designed
by the participants to solve a local environmental problem. While research
indicates that one-on-one mentoring using female role models works, this
strategy will not bring results in industries or college programs that are
virtually devoid of women. The project will test a novel approach to see if
contact with female technicians, industry tours, and hands-on cross-disciplinary
workshops are promising practices for attracting female high school students
into three targeted STEM fields. It will also develop and test a replicable
model for such workshops and a comprehensive evaluation will help determine the
most effective strategies. Within three years, female enrollment will increase
from 6% college-wide to 20% in the three targeted programs, and female students
in those programs will be retained at the same high rate as males.