* 1565702
* Photo-Uncaging and Delivery of Bioactive Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2021
* USD 511,729.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Peter C. Ford of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Barbara is
developing systems that can release bioactive small molecules when signaled by
light. Small molecules such as nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO) play
important roles in regulating functions such as blood pressure and inflammation.
The ability to control the release of these small molecules in the body may also
have therapeutic values in cancer treatment and wound healing. In this research,
very small, metal containing particles are designed to bring NO, CO and other
small molecules to specific sites in the body. Once at the site, the particles
are exposed to light and release their "cargo". This targeted delivery of small
molecules may eventually reduce the side effects of chemotherapy by lowering the
dosage amount of certain drugs. The project involves aspects of synthetic
inorganic and nanomaterial chemistry, mechanistic photochemistry and
photophysics, as well as chemical biology. The graduate and undergraduate
student researchers involved have the opportunity to make fundamental
contributions to these fields and to broaden their scientific experience to be
better positioned for contributing to a changing technical world. The
researchers are also active in various outreach activities, including regular
visitations to science classes at regional high schools to put a human face on
the word "scientist" for an economically and ethnically diverse group of high
school students.

This project has three themes: (1) designing metal complexes conjugated to
antennas that utilize deep tissue penetrating near-infrared (NIR) light as the
excitation source; (2) developing carriers for these conjugates that target
desired sites; and (3) mechanistic studies of the reactions of carbon disulfide
(CS2) with various nucleophiles under biologically-relevant conditions and the
design and photoreactions of potential CS2 precursors. The antennas include
semi-conductor quantum dots and lanthanide doped upconverting nanoparticles that
can be activated by multi-photon excitation at near infrared (NIR) wavelengths.
Polymer-based nano- and micron-sized devices are as carriers with the above
conjugates. Biological mechanisms such as targeting proteins and immune cells
are recruited to deliver these conjugates to sites where NIR excitation leads to
targeted release. The third theme is motivated by the possibilities that CS2 is
an unrecognized regulator and/or that directed release has potential therapeutic
value.