* 1565706
* CAPTIVATE:  Collaboratory Achievement Project To Impact the Value of Architecture &amp; Engineering Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Elizabeth Cheung, Los Angeles Pierce College
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,811.00

Los Angeles Pierce College Engineering Graphics &amp; Design Technology
(EG&amp;DT) and Architecture Technology (AT) programs are bridging the
disconnect between learning and perceived relevance by providing students with
opportunities to develop and implement solutions to problems in their community.
The project replicates professional experiences while providing direct benefits
to society as students design and implement solutions to existing problems in a
multidisciplinary, collaborative environment. The Collaboratory Achievement
Project To Impact the Value of Architecture &amp; Engineering Technology
Education (CAPTIVATE) develops a program where students engage with effective
role models, have culturally responsive experiences, and recognize the EG&amp;DT
and AT programs as a pathway to professions with social impact. This approach
benefits students, campus, employers, and the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Los Angeles Pierce College is working to engage
EG&amp;DT and AT students in an experiential learning environment that fosters
students' intrinsic motivation in order to advance them toward a credential and
strengthen their 21st century skills, particularly problem-solving and
collaboration. CAPTIVATE coordinates curricular and extracurricular projects
consisting of six key components: project-based learning, multidisciplinary
collaboration, real-world connection, community partnerships, tangible impact,
and environmental sustainability. Los Angeles Pierce College will strengthen its
partnerships with area businesses by aligning curriculum with workforce needs,
and providing a conduit for meaningful engagement across the sector. Los Angeles
Pierce College is developing a replicable framework that includes generalized
and project specific outcomes. Models developed through this project will be
shared with other institutions and faculty that are looking to make meaningful
change in their programs.