* 1565634
* Accurate Nonadiabatic Dynamics at Conical Intersections in Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Benjamin Levine, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2020
* USD 405,001.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods
program, Professor Benjamin G. Levine of Michigan State University is developing
new computational methods to model non-radiative recombination in semiconductor
nanomaterials. Non-radiative recombination is a fundamental process that
converts electronic energy to heat, thus limiting the efficiencies of devices
for solar energy conversion, light emission, and other applications. The methods
being developed provide an atom-by-atom, electron-by-electron mechanistic
picture of this process, thus informing the design of future materials.
Specifically, the Levine group is applying these new theoretical models to
elucidate the dynamics of electronically excited silicon nanoparticles, which
show promise as light emitters for solid state displays, biological imaging, and
solid state lasers. The Levine group is also working with local high school
teachers to develop the High School Computational Chemistry Server (HiSoCCS),
which freely serves research-grade computational chemistry capability via a
user-friendly web-based interface. HiSoCCS and associated curricular materials
are made available for free to Michigan high schools.

The Levine group's approach is based on the hypothesis that conical
intersections, points of degeneracy between electronic states, are introduced by
defects in the material, and that these intersections provide efficient pathways
for non-radiative recombination. A new fully quantum mechanical method for
modeling dynamics near conical intersections, the diabatized Gaussians on
adiabatic surfaces (DGAS) approximation, is being developed. The DGAS wave
function ansatz is designed to handle singularities in the first- and second-
derivative nonadiabatic couplings that occur at conical intersections. The DGAS
method is being implemented for high performance parallel computers, and the
resulting software will be made freely available to other scientists. The
broader impacts of this work include: a) the development of a new nonadiabatic
molecular dynamics method capable of accurately modeling a wide range non-
radiative processes, b) new open source software for modeling dynamics near
conical intersections, c) a deeper understanding of non-radiative recombination
in silicon nanomaterials, and d) new tools and materials that incorporate
research grade calculations into the high school science curriculum.