* 1565826
* Banach Space and Metric Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* William Johnson, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 359,304.00

Metric spaces, especially those so-called Banach spaces, form the conceptual
framework in which mathematicians, scientists, and engineers work when
investigating problems that involve estimation or approximation. Discrete metric
geometry, including dimension reduction that has been established by the PI and
a collaborator, is important in the design of algorithms and in compressed
sensing. Work on the classification of operators that are commuters was
originally motivated by the uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics (which,
from a mathematical point of view, arises because multiplication of operators,
unlike multiplication of numbers, is not commutative). Nonlinear phenomenon
often occurs in nature but is difficult to deal with. This makes it important to
understand when non linearity actually conceals underlying linear structure, and
this is central to the nonlinear study of Banach spaces. Parts of this research
project are coordinated with the Workshop in Analysis and Probability Theory at
Texas A&M University, of which the PI is Associate Director. The Workshop
encourages interactions among researchers and apprentices in different
mathematical fields by bringing together graduate students and junior and senior
postdoctoral participants in several areas of analysis. Activities of the
Workshop include seminars, Concentration Weeks, introductory lectures, and an
annual conference. The efforts of the principal investigators and other
participants in the Workshop are helping to break down barriers between
different areas of mathematics and also promote the outreach of pure mathematics
to other sciences, especially to computer science.

The problems in Banach space and metric geometry to be considered fall into
several subcategories: commutators of operators on Banach spaces, approximation
properties of Banach spaces, the structure of finite and infinite dimensional
spaces of p-integrable functions, the nonlinear classification of Banach spaces,
discrete metric geometry, quantitative linear algebra, and cluster value
problems in an infinite dimensional setting. These topics are at the heart of
the geometries of Banach spaces and of metric spaces and make contact with many
other areas within mathematics, including operator theory, group theory,
geometric analysis, and linear algebra, as well as with other areas of science,
including the design of algorithms and compressed sensing.