* 1565581
* AF:  Small:  Approximation Techniques for Combinatorial Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2015,07/31/2016
* Moses Charikar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2016
* USD 130,617.00

Approximation techniques are valuable in the design of algorithms for
combinatorial optimization problems. Mathematical programming relaxations
provide tractable versions of hard optimization problems that are useful in the
design of good algorithms -- in some cases, these relaxations and their duals
serve as a guide for the design of algorithms and lower bound proofs. Such
approximation techniques are useful not just in traditional optimization
problems, but also for problems in online algorithms and other areas. This
project proposes to study a variety of problems where approximation techniques
play a crucial role -- many of these questions are about basic problems in
approximation algorithms, but many are about questions where insights from
mathematical relaxations and other approximation techniques play an important
role. The broad goals of this project include (a) Obtaining a better
understanding of the use of lift-and-project relaxations for optimization
problems like coloring and the closely related question of developing
algorithmic techniques for graphs of low threshold rank, (b) Attempting to close
gaps in our understanding of classical optimization problems like the traveling
salesman problem and bin packing, and (c) Shedding light on newer problems like
online versions of weighted matching and new flow
formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization problems are ubiquitous and for
many such problems of interest, we have strong evidence that it is impossible to
obtain exact efficient solutions. To circumvent this intractability, we design
efficient heuristics that may not find the best solution necessarily, but have
guarantees that the solution they produce is not far from the optimal (i.e. is
approximately optimal). Mathematical programming is a very important tool in
designing such approximation algorithms. Successfully achieving the project
goals will require advances in our knowledge of this area, and especially new
insights into the powerful and versatile mathematical programming toolkit. As
part of this project, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained by
involving them in these research activities. Course materials for graduate and
undergraduate courses will be developed distilling research results of this
project, as well as new developments in the field.