* 1565832
* Innovative Model to Augment Technician Education for Manufacturing in the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jennifer Martin, Thomas Nelson Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,039.00

To be successful in the economy of today, industry requires multi-skilled
technicians who possess both technical and non-technical skills. To address this
need, this project at Thomas Nelson Community College (TNCC) in Virginia is
designed to develop an innovative model to augment technician education with
competencies that blend essential technical and non-technical skills and expand
awareness of 21st century manufacturing. The model is in alignment with an
advanced manufacturing competency model available through the U.S. Department of
Labor that documents the skills and competencies required for workplace success
in advanced manufacturing industries. The blended model for technician education
will be utilized in the new Associate of Applied Science degree program in
Advanced Integrated Manufacturing Technology (AIMT) at the college that was
developed with industry partners to address an industry defined need for multi-
skilled technicians in advanced manufacturing as well as in other technician
education programs at the college and will result in students entering the
workforce with 21st century skills. Expanding awareness of 21st century
manufacturing will ensure that new talent is attracted to manufacturing to
address the critical need for multi-skilled technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through collaboration with regional manufacturers and
community partners, the goal of the project will be achieved through: 1)
development of courses and modules that integrate non-technical competencies
with technical content and 2) expansion of awareness of technical advancements
and career opportunities in manufacturing through outreach activities to groups
of potential students who may not have considered manufacturing as a career
including high schools and veterans groups. With support of a planning grant
provided in 2013 by the Virginia General Assembly, and several other regional
studies conducted between 2011 and 2013, the college documented employer hiring
needs for advanced manufacturing within the region. The AIMT program contains
essential elements modeled after the ATE and NASA SpaceTEC program (DUE 1303935)
that organizes students into cohorts that enter and progress through the program
together and integrates academic instruction with rotating co-op/internship at
multiple job sites under the supervision of subject matter experts (SMEs). An
extensive evaluation is planned to determine the impact on worker performance of
incorporating instruction on specific non-technical workplace competencies such
as team building and diversity into the technician education program. The
knowledge and application of non-technical competencies of students will be
evaluated by comparing the non-technical competency and job performance of
students in a cohort that did not receive the non-technical instruction with
those of students in cohorts that receive that instruction. Activities can be
replicated and integrated into advanced manufacturing degree programs and other
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) technician education
programs offered at community colleges throughout the country. Materials
highlighting the technical advancements of 21st century manufacturing and career
opportunities will be developed and shared widely with secondary and post-
secondary institutions and other stakeholders through the college website and
social media outlets. The new model of technician education and promotional
materials will be showcased through ATE Central, TeachingTechnicians.org,
presentations at professional meetings, and web based communications.