* 1565451
* The Center for Turbulence Research Summer Program
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Parviz Moin, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 35,000.00

PI: Moin, Parviz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1565451&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Stanford University &lt;br/&gt;Title: The Center for Turbulence Research Summer
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to
partially cover travel and organizing expenses related to the workshop entitled
?The Center for Turbulence Research Summer Program?, to be held at Stanford
University during June 26-July 22, 2016. This would be the 16th time that this
biennial program is organized by the Center for Turbulence Research (CTR).
&lt;br/&gt;The CTR summer school program is an immersive, hands-on meeting that
focuses on developing of new models and testing hypotheses proposed by the
participants, utilizing large turbulent flow databases. The meeting covers many
important areas of turbulent flow research, such as instabilities and
transition, large eddy simulation, Reynolds averaged modeling, multiphase
turbulent flows, combustion, and turbulent transport of mass and heat. New
calculations to generate new databases are often performed during the Summer
Program. The participants, who are competitively selected based on proposals for
research, are divided into focus groups based on their proposals. The meeting
will be attended by both prominent and young scientists in fluid dynamics from
around the world, who will be discussing future directions of research and
research challenges in these research areas. The meeting will also address
modeling challenges involved in advancing the field for the next two to five
years.&lt;br/&gt;One of the main goals of the conference is to frame the
challenges in turbulence modeling for the next few years. The findings of the
program will be collected and published as a comprehensive technical report. It
is expected that the report will consist of forty to fifty technical papers
(about 500 pages), which will be delivered to NSF and to other sponsors of the
program, in addition to worldwide dissemination at the end of the calendar year.
The report, like the reports from the prior workshops, will be available on the
worldwide web for downloads, (http://www.stanford.edu/group/ctr/). Many of the
papers in the report will be eventually published in high quality technical
journals.