* 1565648
* RUI:  Reactivity of compounds containing1,1'-bis(phosphino)metallocenediyl or 1,1'-bis(phosphino)metallocene ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Chip Nataro, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 153,899.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Chip Nataro. Professor Nataro is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at Lafayette College. He is developing new compounds containing
phosphine ligands having a metallocene backbone that have interesting catalytic
properties. These ligands have received considerable attention in catalytic
applications, which are important in the pharmaceutical industry. The goal of
this research is to examine how subtle alterations to these ligands impacts the
reactivity of compounds containing the ligands. Of particular interest is the
metal atom at the center of the metallocene backbone. This metal atom can be
altered in a variety of ways that are anticipated to increase the reactivity of
the compound. The project is well suited for the education of scientists at the
undergraduate level. Professor Nataro's group has been successful at producing
high-quality scientific papers and many of these students go on to obtain
advanced degrees in the fields of chemistry and biochemistry.

Bis(phosphino)metallocenes are ligands that are commonly employed in a variety
of catalytic reactions. Compounds of these ligands often behave as significantly
superior catalysts and this has been attributed to both the ability of the
metallocene backbone to undergo redox reactions and the unique steric
constraints imposed upon the ligand by the metallocene backbone. In this
project, making changes to both of these aspects of these ligands are being
examined further. Oxidation of the metal in the backbone is one method of
altering bis(phosphino)metallocene ligands. By removing an electron from the
metal of the backbone, the ligand become less electron-donating to a second
metal center. In addition, oxidation also causes the distance between the metal
of the backbone and the C¬5¬ rings to increase, which causes the steric bulk of
the ligand to increase. The impact of the changes caused by oxidation of the
ligands on the reactivity of compounds containing these ligands is being
examined. A second method of altering bis(phosphino)metallocene ligands is to
force the metal of the backbone to interact with a second metal center. This
interaction is very weak, which should greatly enhance the reactivity of the
second metal center. In addition, the interaction greatly distorts the
bis(phosphino)metallocene ligand, which increasse the steric needs of the
ligand. This project is ideal for training undergraduate students in scientific
practices and procedures, which benefit the students in preparing for chemical
industry the pursuit of advanced degrees in chemistry.