* 1565670
* Midwest Women in Mathematics Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2016
* Elena Fuchs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation in the fourth Midwest Women in Mathematics
Symposium (WIMS), held April 2, 2016 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. The symposium aims to: (1) recognize and advocate collective
achievements by female mathematicians in the Midwest, and (2) stimulate
collaborations, networking, and mentoring relations. The meeting builds upon the
success of previous symposia to establish the WIMS as an annual event rotating
among colleges and universities in the Midwest. The symposium will attract
female mathematicians in the Midwest at all stages of their careers; it is
expected to draw about 100 participants, in particular, graduate students,
early-career researchers, and faculty at small institutions who have limited
access to resources enabling them to attend conferences.

The symposium will feature two plenary lectures by distinguished senior
researchers and eight shorter ones by promising junior researchers. The speakers
are chosen to reflect the variety of institutions in the Midwest. Collectively,
they will discuss a broad spectrum of cutting edge research. Lectures will be
accompanied by open problem sessions, where the participants will work in small
groups to discuss field-specific problems and develop new collaborations.
Students and recent PhDs will contribute to the intellectual activity of the
symposium by making poster presentations. This workshop is jointly funded by
eight programs within the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences: Algebra &
Number Theory, Analysis, Applied Math, Infrastructure, Mathematical Biology,
Topology & Geometric Analysis, Foundations, and Probability. More information
about the conference can be found at http://www.math.illinois.edu/wims/.