* 1565725
* CRII: III: Evaluating Provenance Visualizations for the Presentation and Communication of Investigative Data Analysis Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Eric Ragan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,927.00

Many types of data analysis involve complex investigations with large data sets,
open-ended explorations, and iterative hypothesis testing. The high complexity
and potential variability in human analytic processing can make it difficult to
remember the steps and rationale that led to the formation of hypotheses, the
generation of specific data views, and the realization of conclusions. There is
an established need for reviewing analytic processes, and many tools provide
visualizations to do so; however, it is not well known how helpful the tools are
for practical purposes. In particular, little visualization research has
evaluated the effectiveness of visual representations for the purposes of
communication and presentation of analysis history. The project will explore new
designs for visually representing the history of data analysis and evaluating
the effectiveness of different designs. The outcomes of the visualization
designs and empirical evaluations will yield direct benefits to professional
analysts and scientists by improving the ability to review and communicate
analysis records. Effective presentation and communication of analytic processes
is essential for understanding the underlying arguments behind decisions, and
visual presentation will facilitate review of analysis processes by making it
possible to understand analytics strategies and their effectiveness. Reviewing
analysis approaches and strategies will allow analysts to identify problems with
existing methods, improve those methods, and better train new analysts and
scientists.

This project will provide the foundation for an extensive effort of the design
and evaluation of visualizations for the presentation and communication of the
history of an analysis process, which is also known as analytic provenance.
Through the development of new evaluation methodology, the project will enable
the assessment of how well specific visual elements of provenance visualizations
contribute to successful presentation of different types of provenance
information. The effort will include detailed collection and coding of samples
of provenance data that will be used as a basis for evaluating visualizations.
The research will explore novel visualization designs for presenting different
types of captured information. In addition, the effort will investigate methods
to automatically generate provenance visualization, and it will study the
effectiveness of different forms of automated presentations.