* 1565063
* Achieve Career Success in Science through Excellence (ACSScellence)
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jeffrey Olimpo, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2021
* USD 999,614.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at the University of Texas at El
Paso (UTEP) will provide scholarships for low-income, talented students with
demonstrated financial need pursuing bachelor's degrees in science and
mathematics. The Achieve Career Success in Science through Excellence
(ACSScellence) program will provide scholarships for low-income undergraduate
students and engage them in a program designed for the type of challenges low-
income students will face while in college and after attaining their degree.
Participants will be students who are enrolling as freshmen in UTEP or who are
transferring. The program will improve student success and persistence to degree
completion and will prepare scholars to become innovative STEM professionals. In
addition to financial support, the program implements a multi-level mentoring
system that includes internal and external mentors and student engagement in
multiple curricular and co-curricular activities. Scholarships and support for
academically strong students, who may not otherwise be able to afford college,
will help to produce a well-trained workforce that will contribute to the
economic vitality of the Texas and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will include a study of the impact that specific program activities will have on
student success. The unique demographics of UTEP's undergraduate student
population (82.5% Hispanic) offers an opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness
of interventions on low-income minorities currently underrepresented in STEM,
and thus contribute to the design of effective strategies to narrow the
underrepresentation gap. Student support activities include faculty mentoring
and monthly mentoring meetings with STEM professionals external to the
institution. Students will be enrolled in research-intensive courses and in a
course to foster innovative thinking. Career development support includes
participation in professional skills development workshops, external
internships, and engagement in a research project through a capstone course.
These activities will help the low-income students to successfully complete a
STEM degree in a timely manner while developing the professional competencies
and mindset required for successful careers in the 21st century science and
technology workforce. The findings from the program will be disseminated widely
to the STEM education community and help to increase understanding of the
attributes and practices of successful student scholarship and support programs.