* 1565760
* Structure and Bonding in Double Rydberg Anions and Related Species
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Joseph Ortiz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

J. V. (Vince) Ortiz of Auburn University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational program in the Chemistry division to
develop and apply computational approaches based on quantum mechanics to study
an unusual type of molecular ion, known as double Rydberg anions (DRAS). At an
early stage in their education, students of chemistry learn the importance of
pairs of negatively charged electrons in understanding chemical bonding. In two
familiar types of electron pairs, those involved in chemical bonding between
atoms and those that are confined in a non-bonding fashion to a single atom, the
electron pairs are called "valence electrons" because they can be found
relatively close to the atomic nucleus. In quantum mechanics, these electrons
are described by interference between atomic-orbital waves. Recent experiments
and calculations have shown that positively charged molecular ions are capable
of binding two electrons with diffuse orbital waves in species known as double
Rydberg anions (DRAs). A new kind of electron pair in which the electrons may be
found further from the atomic nucleus occurs in DRAs, for example, NH4-, a
positively charged ammonium cation with two diffuse weakly bound electrons.
Ortiz and his research group develop and use sophisticated theoretical and
computational methods to predict the existence of new DRAs and related species
and to understand the interactions between electrons which permit DRAs to exist.
Educational activities that are coordinated with this research are directed
toward students and scientists with a variety of cultural experiences and
academic backgrounds. New, fundamental concepts in chemical bonding will be
integrated immediately into educational and outreach activities and will enable
students and scientists to predict and understand a greater variety of chemical
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain a better understanding of
the electron correlation between two diffuse electrons that is essential for the
formation of double Rydberg anions, transition amplitudes that connect states of
these anions to those of uncharged radicals or closed-shell cations are
analyzed. These amplitudes, known as Dyson orbitals and Dyson geminals, are
generated in electron propagator and two-electron propagator calculations of
electron binding energies. The effects of hydrogen bonds and of chemical
substitutions on the structure and stability of the double Rydberg anions are
explored and the photoelectron spectra of larger double Rydberg anions are being
assigned. Correlation states in these photoelectron spectra which correspond to
excited states of uncharged, Rydberg radicals also are also being assigned and
predicted. Potential generalizations of the double Rydberg concept to anions
with atoms of the fourth through sixth periods are based on closed-shell
configurations of united-atom limits and isoelectronic relationships.
Experimentalists who synthesize, isolate and characterize molecular anions in
the gas phase are or will be provided reliable predictions on the stability and
spectral properties of species with unprecedented patterns of electronic
structure. Deeper insight into chemical bonding in double Rydberg anions will
follow from an analysis of Dyson orbitals and geminals that connect these ions
to Rydberg radicals and their cationic cores. Novel theoretical and
computational techniques that are adapted to the search for such species will be
published for the benefit of those who develop ab initio methodology. Ortiz
continues his many efforts to recruit, educate and promote female and minority
scientists. Among these activities are the training of graduate students,
seminars and short courses, lectures to student and professional groups,
popularizations for secondary-school students, scientific conferences, exchange
programs, and organizational efforts for minority students and professionals.
Students and young professionals are exposed to highly novel patterns of
chemical bonding that alter the paradigms encountered in basic chemistry
courses.