* 1565695
* (RUI) From Complex Environments to Underlying Mechanisms: A Network Approach to Multi-trait Tradeoffs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2015,05/31/2020
* Zachary Stahlschmidt, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2020
* USD 402,304.00

To survive and persist, an organism must acquire food, be able to reproduce,
avoid being eaten, and prevent infection. However, each of these important
traits is costly to maintain, which can lead to tradeoffs among the traits. That
is, investment into one trait comes at a cost to another. The researchers
propose an experimental approach examining simultaneous tradeoffs among three
important biological traits (e.g., immunity, reproduction, and body movement)
that will provide insight into the role of multi-trait tradeoffs in shaping how
animals survive. Given that trait tradeoffs are influenced by the environment,
these studies will occur in a range of manipulated environments that simulate
the dynamics of environmental change in North America. Under stressful
conditions, investment into one trait can take precedence over investment into
another trait. However, if individuals encounter favorable environments (e.g.,
unlimited access to food), two traits, such as reproduction and immunity, may be
maintained, suggesting that tradeoffs may be dependent upon food availability.
The effects of food availability are often influenced by other environmental
factors that may accompany reduced food availability (e.g., heat waves), and
interactions between food availability and temperature may profoundly influence
tradeoffs. This research will be the first to characterize the interplay between
environmental variability and animal life history strategies using a network
analysis approach. This approach has proven to be a powerful tool for studying
diverse phenomena, such as social interactions, the structure of the Internet,
and for optimizing solutions to engineering problems. Much of this research will
be performed by students from under-represented minority groups, and it will be
complemented by a science outreach program designed to educate community members
(particularly K-8 students) on the importance of insect
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will use a manipulative
approach in a wing-dimorphic field cricket to examine tradeoffs among investment
into three life history traits of widespread importance: reproduction, immune
function, and locomotion. Resultant empirical data will be used for a network
analysis approach to characterize dynamic relationships among these traits
through the determination of several network metrics (e.g., connectivity,
betweenness, and modularity). They will also examine linkages between the life
history networks and a network of underlying physiological traits (e.g.,
antioxidant defense and metabolic rate). Further, they will use a network
approach to determine the independent and interactive role of two universal
environmental constraints (food availability and temperature) in multi-trait
tradeoffs and trait-trait interactions. Thus, the proposed study will use an
integrative approach to better understand how complex trait systems develop and
are maintained. It will have impact on multiple biological disciplines,
including ecological immunology, ecological physiology, network analyses, and
life history evolution. The researchers will provide extensive research training
to students, many of whom come from under-served minority groups representative
of both the region and the student body at Georgia Southern University (GSU). To
complement their research goals, they will develop an outreach program designed
to educate young people about insects, an important taxonomic group. They will
create a website and an accompanying outreach exhibition at the GSU Museum that
provides information about local insects. They will also construct and
disseminate an educational module designed to meet the State of Georgia's
Department of Education performance standards; this will contain structured
activities, informational handouts, and live crickets that K-8 students can use
to develop scientific literacy.