* 1565748
* EAGER: Implementing Practical Provably Secure Authenticated Key Exchange for the Post-Quantum World
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2015,11/30/2018
* Jintai Ding, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2018
* USD 142,026.00

Cyber security is considered one of the most important aspects of our
information technology based society. Key Exchange(KE) is a fundamental
cryptographic primitive, and authenticated KE (AKE) is one of the most used
cryptographic tools in secure communication protocols (e.g. SSL/TLS, IPSec, SSH)
over the Internet. In light of the threat that quantum computers pose to
cryptosystems such as RSA and ECC, this project is devoted to the development of
secure and efficient AKE alternatives for the post-quantum computer world, which
is now considered of a high priority by the US government. This project will
help develop new AKEs that have the great potential in cyber security for our
society. The success of the project will not only have very significant
practical values, but also will have a broad impact on theoretical mathematics
and computation. This project will have a significant impact on the
collaboration we are developing with the Post-Quantum cryptography group at the
National Institute of Standard of Technology, where a significant amount of
efforts is devoted to the study of quantum resistant AKEs. The PI will teach and
work with undergraduate and graduate students, and recruit students from under
represented groups in science.

This project intends to develop AKE schemes but based on problems resistant to
quantum computer attacks, in particular, we would like to develop efficient and
secure implementations of AKE based on the learning with errors problems (LWE)
and ring-LWE (RLWE) problems, as well as the selection of concrete parameters
for applications with the goal developing secure and efficient systems for the
post-quantum world. Such a system should enjoy the potential benefits of
lattice-based constructions such as asymptotic efficiency, conceptual
simplicity, worst-case hardness assumptions, and provable security, which makes
it perfect for the post-quantum world. This key component of the project is
based on several promising innovative ideas coming from preliminary experiments
and theoretical results we have established, and this project also includes
fundamental new ideas in addressing a diverse set of challenges in the design of
AKEs. The results will lead to a better understanding of the fundamentals of the
AKEs based on LWE and to methods on how to design more secure and efficient AKEs
for practical applications. Our research approach is a synergistic combination
of new mathematical ideas and systematic computer experiments.