* 1565434
* Understanding the Structure and Dynamics of Solvated Electrons Using Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Mixed Quantum/Classical Molecular Dynamics Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 413,688.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program A of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Benjamin J. Schwartz of UCLA is using
a combination of experimental and theoretical techniques to unravel the
structure and behavior of solvated electrons. The ability to combine experiment
and theory in this way provides outstanding educational opportunities not only
to undergraduate and graduate students, but also to Los Angeles area high school
students via an outreach program for science teachers. The broader impacts of
this work include a better understanding of solvated electrons, which play
central roles in radiation chemistry (it is reactions with solvated electrons
that makes ionizing radiation dangerous to living organisms) and electron
transfer reactions (such as those in both biology and batteries).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental focus of the project is based on using
ultrafast spectroscopy to study the properties of solvated electrons. Ultrafast
spectroscopy takes advantages of pulses of light that are extremely short (~100
fs), providing a means to "stop action" of the electrons on the time scale with
which molecules move in room temperature liquids. The theoretical focus of the
project is based on mixed quantum/classical simulations. Here, quantum mechanics
is used to describe the properties of the solvated electrons, but the solvent
molecules are treated classically. The simulations can be used to calculate the
results of the ultrafast spectroscopy experiments, so that together, the
combination of experiments and simulations can provide new insights into the
structure and reactivity of this interesting and important chemical species.