* 1565665
* Synchronization, Collective Behavior and Spatiotemporal Dynamics in Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mark Tinsley, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 530,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program (CSDM-A) of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kenneth Showalter and his
students are studying complex dynamical behavior in chemical systems to gain
insights into new types of dynamical behavior in man-made and living systems.
Developing an understanding of such behavior in experimental studies facilitates
the development of mathematical model descriptions that are relevant to the
behavior of certain living organisms as well as synthetic dynamical systems such
as computer networks. Research on new states of synchronization and collective
behavior will provide insights into basic dynamical behaviors pervasive in
living systems. Research on propagating waves in precipitation systems will
offer new mechanisms for chemical waves that rely on structural features of the
medium, much like wave behavior found in many biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Networks of coupled chemical
oscillators will be investigated in laboratory experiments and computational
simulations. The recently discovered chimera state, in which populations of
synchronized and unsynchronized oscillators coexist, will be further
investigated, with the focus on the spiral chimera state in two-dimensional
arrays of coupled oscillators. Further experimental investigations of phase-lag
synchronization in networks of coupled chemical oscillators will also be carried
out with two-dimensional oscillator arrays, which will allow a wide variety of
network topologies and coupling schemes. Theoretically predicted echo phenomena
will be investigated in populations of coupled chemical oscillators. Two-
dimensional arrays of chemical oscillators will permit sufficiently large
populations to allow the detection and characterization of echo behavior. New
configurations and examples of propagating precipitation waves will be
investigated. Open-reactor configurations will be developed for studies of
propagating waves in redissolution precipitation bands based on the amphoteric
sodium hydroxide-aluminum chloride system. Unstable spiral wave behavior leading
to turbulence-like dynamics will be investigated as well as wave stacking, where
waves collide with the waves ahead of them. Further development of a general
three-dimensional computational model for propagating precipitation waves will
be carried out as well as extending the model to describe wave behavior in open
reactor configurations