* 1565631
* Van der Waals Approach to Systematic Coarse-Graining
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* William Noid, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 03/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

William Noid of the Pennsylvania State University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Chemistry
Division to develop theoretical methods and computational tools for simulating
the thermodynamic and interfacial properties of liquids and polymers. Computer
simulations provide powerful insight for addressing technological challenges and
for guiding the design of novel materials with desired properties. While
simulations with atomically detailed models are often very accurate, they do not
provide the necessary efficiency for addressing the long length and time scales
that are relevant for materials design. In contrast, lower resolution coarse-
grained models provide superior efficiency, but currently provide limited
accuracy and often require extensive parameterization for each new system and
environment. Professor Noid and his coworkers develop theoretical methods for
improving the accuracy of coarse-grained models, as well as for extending their
range of applicability. Additionally, Professor Noid organizes an
intergenerational science club that promotes life-long scientific education
within the broader community, while integrating students of all ages into the
scientific enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops and validates
a van der Waals (vdW) approach for improving both the transferability and also
the thermodynamic properties of bottom-up multiscale methods. Motivated by an
exact decomposition of the many-body potential of mean force, which is the
correct potential for a coarse-grained (CG) model. This model perfectly
reproduces both the structural and thermodynamic properties of an underlying
atomistic model. The vdW approach: (1) adopts leading variational methods to
determine effective potentials that accurately describe structural properties
and (2) develops new variational methods to accurately model thermodynamic
properties. In particular, the work extends a pressure-matching variational
principle for modeling density fluctuations in inhomogeneous and interfacial
systems. The comparison of potentials obtained from different variational
approaches provides insight into their entropic components and allow for
predictive estimates of their transferability. Ultimately, this work may develop
predictive CG models for exceedingly accurate and efficient simulation studies
of mesoscale self-assembly at aqueous interfaces and conduction in polymer-based
batteries.