* 1565759
* Correlating Electronic and Atomic Motions in Photoinduced Electron-Proton Transfer Reactions with Two-Dimensional Electronic-Vibrational and X-ray Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Munira Khalil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 485,171.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure and Dynamics-A program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Munira Khalil of the University of Washington is
developing a microscopic description of how a hydrogen atoms move from a donor
to an acceptor following the absorption of light. To meet this experimental
challenge, new spectroscopic methods capable of directly measuring the coupling
of electronic and atomic motions are developed spanning the electromagnetic
spectrum from the infrared (IR) to X-rays. An outreach program developed by
Professor Khalil includes a hands-on optics module for middle school girls from
STEM-disadvantaged backgrounds in a unique "Girls on Science" program run
through the University of Washington's Burke Museum. The broader impacts of this
work include training the next generation of scientists in state-of-the-art
ultrafast techniques in the laboratory and at synchrotrons and free electron
laser sources, creating new femtosecond technologies, and an increased
understanding of the photo-induced electron-proton transfer process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two main objectives with a two-pronged
experimental approach. The first is to develop the use of novel two-dimensional
femtosecond electronic and infrared spectroscopy (2D EV) using a train of two
ultraviolet (UV) pulses followed by a broadband mid IR pulse. This will enable
the group to directly measure the coupled electronic charge density and the
movement of the hydrogen atom in photo-induced coupled electron-proton transfer
in model intra and inter-molecular hydrogen bonded complexes. The second thrust
is using ultrafast X-ray absorption and Resonant Inelastic X-ray scattering
(RIXS) spectroscopy to directly monitor the charge distribution around the
hydrogen bond donor and acceptor atoms. The equilibrium X-ray experiments are
being conducted at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) and the ultrafast RIXS
experiments are conducted at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS). Photo-
induced electron-proton transfer is a central reaction in several natural and
artificial energy conversion processes. Possible future impacts include the
development of new molecules, materials and devices for alternative energy
production.