* 1565570
* CyberCorps: New Scholarships for Service (SFS) Program at the University of Kansas - Jayhawk SFS
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2024
* Bo Luo, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 3,800,349.00

This proposal will inaugurate a CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the University of Kansas under the name of Jayhawk SFS. The goals of
the proposed Jayhawk SFS program are: establish an active, well-managed,
student-centered SFS program; recruit outstanding students who are dedicated to
cyber-security profession and government service; provide them with superior
education and professional training, achieve 100% student retention and
placement; and expand research and education capacities at the host institution.
The Jayhawk SFS program will be evaluated internally and externally to ensure
the quality and continuous development of the program. Promotion, recruitment,
education, research, professional development, outreach, placement and
evaluation plans are carefully crafted to identify well-qualified and highly-
motivated students, provide them with outstanding education and training
experience, and in-turn expand the education and research capacities at the host
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will produce well-trained
security professionals to serve the needs of government agencies. The program
will closely work with the 1st Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kansas National
Guard, U.S. Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER), and the Graduate Military Program at
KU to recruit transitioning soldiers and veterans. In addition, the Project Team
will extensively collaborate with University TRIO programs, such as the McNair
Scholars Program, to recruit underrepresented and underserved students (e.g.,
African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, indigenous students, and first-generation
college students). The proposed program will also increase the representation of
minorities in cybersecurity education through a variety of enrichment
activities. Through outreach and community-service activities, the Jayhawk SFS
program will highlight cybersecurity issues to the community, introduce
educational opportunities, and stimulate public awareness with the long-term
goal of changing people?s security and privacy perceptions and improving their
security behaviors in daily life.