* 1565338
* CRII: ACI: Accelerating In-Situ Scientific Data Analysis Using Software-Defined Storage Resource Enclaves
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Xuechen Zhang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 189,999.00

Data intensive knowledge discovery requires scientific applications to run
concurrently with analytics and visualization codes, executing in situ for
timely output inspection and knowledge extraction. Consequently, the
Input/Output (I/O) pipelines for large scientific data analysis can be long and
complex because they comprise many "stages" of analytics across different layers
of the I/O stack of high-performance computing systems. Performance limitations
at any I/O layer can cause an I/O bottleneck resulting in longer than expected
end-to-end I/O latency. In this project, PI aims to implement a novel data
management infrastructure called Software-defined Storage Resource Enclaves
(SIREN) at system levels to enforce end-to-end policies that dictate an I/O
pipeline's performance. The cross-cutting nature of the technologies developed
in the project can help large scientific data analytics leverage the full
capability of memory and storage devices on supercomputers. The project will
facilitate the development of a graduate level data-intensive computing course
at Washington State University Vancouver, and contribute to the education of
undergraduate, female, and under-representative students. Therefore, this
research aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance the national prosperity and welfare.

The technical objectives of the project are three-fold. First, SIREN aims to
allow administrators to set allocations for enclaves to manage a group of
applications that belong to the same I/O pipeline. Second, it intends to enforce
I/O policies (e.g., proportional sharing) at more than one layer of I/O stacks
simultaneously considering characteristics of storage devices (e.g., disparity
of read/write capacity for SSDs and performance sensitivity to data locality for
disks) to achieve optimal performance. Third, PI aims to solve storage-specific
implementation issues, including design of user-friendly interfaces, enclave
naming and resolution, metadata management, failure handling, and admission
control. The introduction of SIREN can fundamentally change the execution model
of data staging services widely used on supercomputers. It will also contribute
to the understanding of performance characteristics of I/O pipelines under
external I/O interference during data staging.