* 1565215
* Renewal: Cybercorps: Scholarship for Service at FS
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,599,546.00

The Florida State University (FSU) proposes to add four new cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students to their existing CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program in cybersecurity with strong integration of education
and research. The project will have an immediate impact on the information
assurance and forensics capabilities of the federal workforce by providing
graduates with general computing and security skills. The program components are
designed to have a broad and lasting impact. Existing efforts to engage members
of underrepresented groups and non-traditional students will be intensified.
CyberCorps(R) students will collaborate on real-world projects to gain practical
experience and enhance internship and job placement prospects. The proposed
project addresses the current personnel gap in cybersecurity for the national
information infrastructure. Through a formal relationship with Florida A&amp;M
University, the project is making a focused effort to recruit students from
underrepresented groups into the program and has academic support programs to
foster their success. The cybersecurity program is the most popular graduate
program in FSU's computer science department and the prospect of a potential
employment within the Federal Government has a significant impact on the number
of applying students, including minority and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is graduating skilled information
assurance and forensics professionals with strong leadership skills and a
commitment to public service. The program integrates rigorous, hands-on learning
with research, professional development and outreach activities. The students
will serve as summer interns to gain practical experience and will join federal
agencies or other eligible entities upon graduation. The program has a well-
established infrastructure for retention and mentoring. It includes a flexible
selection procedure, offering admission by exception and choices of alternative
degree programs, for strong cybersecurity candidates who otherwise do not meet
the minimum computer science degree requirements. It is intended to broaden the
scope of the cybersecurity program and attract minority and female applicants.
FSU has received the DHS/NSA designation as the National Center of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance and Cyber Defense. The project includes an
assessment and evaluation plan coordinated by an independent evaluator to ensure
that the project achieves its objectives. The project's results are being
disseminated through conference and professional presentations.