* 1565658
* SusChEM: Advancing Organoelement Synthesis through alpha Elimination and Hydrophosphination Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Rory Waterman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2019
* USD 419,996.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Rory Waterman. Professor Waterman is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Vermont. The objective of this
proposal is to discover and understand catalytic reactions that form phosphorus-
carbon and silicon-carbon bonds. Central to meeting that objective is utilizing
abundant metals as catalysts to afford divergent chemical reactivity of
phosphorus-hydrogen and silicon-hydrogen bonds with a variety of reagents. Two
specific reactions will be explored: alpha elimination and hydrophosphination.
Alpha elimination is a rare and relatively new reaction with the potential to
facilitate the synthesis of complex molecular structures. These structures have
applications in materials science, catalysis, and biomedicine.
Hydrophosphination is a well-established transformation, but questions and
limitations remain. Overcoming these challenges makes this reaction available
for broader use in the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, for example. Improved
understanding in both reactions would advance the multi-billion dollar field of
catalysis. Professor Waterman has been able to successfully recruit students
underrepresented in the sciences, provide research experiences for high school
students, and engage in educational outreach with K-12 students, practices to be
continued in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal explores two
unique kinds of catalysis to understand and improve the catalytic preparation of
E- carbon (C) (E = phosphorus or silicon) bonds, recognizing that abundant and
inexpensive metals can be enlisted to produce divergent reactivity upon
E-hydrogen (H) bond activation in the presence of unsaturated substrates.
Through a series of testable hypotheses, a validated set of design features for
alpha elimination catalysis is sought. This reaction may result in the efficient
synthesis of phosphorus- and silicon-containing molecules via catalytic E-C bond
formation is a key driver. Prior discoveries in this group demonstrate that such
new reactivity is possible, and efforts in this area seek to improve
understanding of M-E bonding and reaction chemistry. Efforts to discover new and
highly efficient syntheses of chiral-at-phosphorus ligands though
hydrophosphination provide a platform to address those fundamental issues and
broaden the understanding and utility of this key P-C bond forming reaction.
Beyond the benefit of these reactions to fields such as materials science,
energy, and biomedicine, the outreach program includes direct research
experiences for high school students in support of project goals.