* 1566450
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Ultra-High-Resolution Investigation of High Andean Snow and Ice Chemistry to Improve Paleoclimatic Reconstruction and Enhance Climate Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Lester Perry, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2020
* USD 348,814.00

This collaborative proposal aims to combine advances in ice core sampling
technology, knowledge of Andean storm event meteorology, cyberinfrastructure,
and climate modeling and analysis to fresh snow, snowpits and ice core data to
be recovered from ice caps in Peru and Bolivia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of the project are to investigate South American atmospheric
circulation features (e.g. El Niño/La Niña (ENSO), South American Low-level Jet,
Southern Hemisphere trades and westerlies), tropical-mid-latitude-polar
teleconnections, and the significance of key global-scale forcing functions that
control atmospheric circulation (e.g. solar variability, volcanic activity,
dusts, and greenhouse gases) and have significant relevance to moisture and heat
transport over South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regional retreat of
alpine glaciers coupled with increased population, industry, and agriculture
activities are generating future demands on water resources. Declines in water
resources may magnify the regional impacts of ENSO. Instrumental records of
climate and environmental variability over the region are sparse yet ice cores
from Central Andean glaciers provide a source of high resolution records of past
climate dynamics and chemistry of the atmosphere extending back centuries to
millennia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate reconstructions from ice cores could
provide added temporal and spatial context to existing multi-proxy
reconstructions in order to assess the impact of natural and human-induced
physical and chemical climate change at the storm-scales that impact day to day
and season to season events, and in the process, develop analogs for predicting
future change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the researchers'
recent W.M. Keck Foundation and NSF-supported transformative laser sampling of
ice cores and the newly released, NSF-supported cyberinfrastructure and climate
analysis tools. It also involves supporting an early career post-doctoral
scholar, development and testing of new analytical tools, and strong
collaboration with South American scientists.