* 1566356
* CRII: AF: On Designing Approximation Algorithms Based on Round-or-Cut Paradigm
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Shi Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,990.00

Numerous discrete optimization problems arising in practice are intractable; the
approximation algorithms framework provides efficient algorithms for these
optimization problems with provable guarantees on the quality of solutions.
Among many others, the linear programming (LP) technique has played a central
role in the area of approximation algorithms. This project seeks to understand
the power of this technique, by exploiting a very flexible paradigm in designing
LP-based algorithms, called the "round-or-cut" paradigm. The PI aims to use this
paradigm to tackle many combinatorial optimizations problems that seem hard to
tackle in other ways. Successful completion of the project will not only yield
improved approximation algorithms for these problems, but also lead to a better
understanding of the power of linear programming technique. As a part of the
project, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained and involved in the
research activities. The course materials resulting from this research project
will be made freely accessible online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the round-
or-cut paradigm has led to many improved approximation algorithms. This paradigm
differs from the traditional "relax-and-round" paradigm in that the LP
relaxation used to approximate the problem does not need to be efficiently
solvable. As a result, the round-or-cut paradigm has the flexibility that the
rounding algorithm can adaptively choose the set of linear constraints to
require the fractional solution to satisfy. The major goal of this project is to
leverage this flexibility to tackle problems that seem hard to tackle using the
traditional relax-and-round paradigm, including the capacitated k-median
problem, the machine minimization problem on identical machines, and the
unsplittable flow problem on paths. The second goal is to understand the gap
between the round-or-cut paradigm and the traditional relax-and-round paradigm.
So far, the relax-and-round paradigm is far more popular than the round-or-cut
paradigm in designing LP-based approximation algorithms. For a few problems
only, algorithms require the stronger round-or-cut paradigm. The PI will
investigate whether the relax-and-round paradigm is sufficient for these
problems.