* 1566386
* CRII: III: Discovering Complex Change Footprint Patterns on Spatio-Temporal Big Data for Urban Sustainability
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xun Zhou, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 155,767.00

Modern urban systems are facing increasingly significant challenges in
sustainable development due to environmental and societal changes such as
deforestation, urban sprawl, and rapid population/traffic growth. To respond to
the challenges, an essential task is to identify the footprints (i.e., where and
when) of these change processes. In the meantime, many spatio-temporal big
datasets (STBD) such as fine-grained environmental and climate observations and
detailed public transportation records are being made available to the public.
Analyzing these data for urban change footprints (CHAF) helps city planners
foresee and understand potential sustainability issues. However, such analyses
pose significant challenges due to the non-monotonic nature of most change
processes, the large cardinality of candidate patterns in STBD, and the non-
trivial tradeoff between computational efficiency and pattern quality. This
project will investigate automated, efficient, and effective data mining
techniques for the discovery of complex CHAF patterns in urban STBD. The
research outcomes are expected to enhance the ability of current STBD analytics
tools to analyze change-related patterns. The computational framework proposed
can be applied to solve a broad range of other problems such as pattern
discovery in video and image processing. Also, the research results will be
applied to real-world datasets to discover useful urban change patterns to
improve the society's understanding of sustainability. Beyond research, this
project will facilitate the development of a graduate level spatio-temporal data
mining course at the University of Iowa, and contribute to the training of
future professionals in spatial computing. The project will also integrate
activities to involve undergraduate students and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing STBD analytical techniques only focus on
detecting relatively simple CHAF patterns (e.g., regularly-shaped, monotonic
changes), and typically report only a small number of CHAFs (e.g., the most or
top-k likely changes). The research in this project will focus on the discovery
of CHAF patterns that are non-monotonic temporally and irregularly-shaped
spatially. The proposed techniques will also guarantee the completeness of
results, i.e., report all the CHAFs in the data based on a given definition.
Specifically, the following ideas will be explored in the project. (1) Designing
interest measures of non-monotonic CHAFs that are statistically powerful and
computation-friendly. (2) Designing algorithmic building blocks to efficiently
evaluate a range of CHAF interest measure functions with similar properties
(e.g., algebraic). (3) Designing a generic computational framework for sub-space
enumeration that guarantees the completeness of results. In the proposed
framework, the three-dimensional sub-spaces and their dominance relationships
will be modeled as a novel sub-cube-based directed acyclic graph (SCB-DAG).
Efficient traversal and pruning strategies on the SCB-DAG will be explored to
enumerate candidate CHAFs. This research will provide theoretical and
experimental evaluations on real data to validate the correctness, completeness
and scalability of the proposed ideas. For further information see the project
web page: http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/faculty/xzhou/project/NSF_CRII/index.html