* 1566432
* Collaborative Research: Carbon Isotope and geotracer-enabled simulation of the Transient Climate Evolution of the Deglacial Ocean (C-iTRACE-O)
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Alexandra Jahn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 301,993.00

Global climate has undergone large changes during the last deglaciation (21,000
to 11,000 years ago), with a warming of ~3.5Â°C globally, a sea level rise of ~80
m, and the disappearance of the large continental ice sheets. The large
magnitude of the signals and the availability of extensive paleoclimate data
make this period an excellent target for investigating the mechanisms underlying
climate change and for the validation of state-of-the-art Earth System Models
(ESMs). However, up until now model simulations could not be directly compared
with the paleoclimate records, as the models did not simulate the geochemical
tracers ("proxies") on which the reconstructions are based. To address this
issue and provide insights into several long-standing scientific questions about
the evolution of the ocean's overturning circulation during the deglaciation,
this project will perform the first transient ocean simulation of the
deglaciation with the newly developed isotope modules in the ocean model of the
Community Earth System Model (CESM1), allowing for direct model-data comparison
of multiple marine paleo proxies. This project will contribute to STEM workforce
development by supporting the training of two graduate students in climate
modeling and model-data comparisons and by providing project leadership
experience for an early career female scientist, who will work in close
collaboration with U.S. and international colleagues. Results from this project
will be used in undergraduate and graduate classes at the University of Colorado
at Boulder and the University of Wisconsin-Madison and will be incorporated into
public outreach through a project website and through general-audience talks.
The output of the simulation (called C-iTRACE-O) will be made freely available
though the Earth System Grid gateway, allowing the entire paleoclimate community
to use it for their research. The simulation will also be contributed to the
Paleoclimate Model Intercomparison Project transient deglacial working group,
allowing for an evaluation of the CESM C-iTRACE compared to the deglacial
simulations from other ESMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By directly simulating oceanic
carbon-isotopes (d13C and D14C), Neodymium (eNd), and Protactinium/Thorium
(231Pa/230Th) for the deglaciation and by carrying out sensitivity experiments
to investigate the physical mechanisms causing the changing isotopic and
geotracer distributions in the transient simulation, it will be possible to
address some long-standing scientific questions through direct comparisons to
observations and by evaluating tracer-circulation relationships in the model
itself, such as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- What was the source and routing of the
low-radiocarbon CO2 released during the Mystery Interval? &lt;br/&gt;- What is
the implication of the d13C evolution in the Atlantic for the deep ocean
circulation during the last deglaciation and how much of the d13C change was
caused by nutrient- and air-sea gas exchange effects versus circulation changes?
&lt;br/&gt;- Why is the deglacial evolution of Antarctic Intermediate Water
controversial among proxies, notably in eNd and carbon isotopes? &lt;br/&gt;-
How does 231Pa/ 230Th represent the deglacial evolution of North Atlantic deep
circulation and Southern Ocean upwelling?