* 1566321
* CRII: SaTC: A Language Based Approach to Hybrid Mobile App Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Meera Sridhar, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 209,985.00

The last few years have seen an explosive growth in the share of hybrid mobile
apps worldwide, coinciding with the increasing ubiquity of HTML5. Hybrid app
frameworks allow mobile developers to design app code using web technologies
alone, and supply native and bridge code (APIs for accessing device resources)
necessary for instant porting to several mobile platforms.

This research will develop techniques to mitigate critical security and privacy
vulnerabilities in hybrid app frameworks, by creating an airtight security model
robust against bridge exploits, and minimizing the overall attack surface of the
hybrid framework. In a global society increasingly reliant on mobile technology,
mobile app security constitutes a pressing responsibility, and impacts several
sections of society, including children. This project will provide a significant
contribution towards meeting this challenge. Case studies, practical examples,
and research experience gained from this project will be integrated into
graduate-level courses, especially Master's and certificate programs in cyber-
security. Additionally, interesting techniques and examples developed in this
project will be incorporated into curricula specifically targeted for women in
computing initiatives, with the objective of attracting and retaining more women
in computing fields. This research will explore extension of powerful language-
based security techniques, in-lined reference monitoring (IRM) and static
analysis, to the novel and significant problem domain of hybrid app security.
The research has three major goals: 1) defining a systematic mapping of the
hybrid app attack surface, and establishing a class of security policies that
target effective language-based enforcement; 2) adapting the IRM approach to the
complex, cross-platform hybrid software stack, including effective complete
mediation for seamless protection and tamper-proofing of the monitoring system;
3) designing an effective static-analysis algorithm to infer fine-grained
permissions-regions for pages in a hybrid app. These permissions regions will
improve bridge access granularity, and serve as security policy models for
integration into the IRM framework for enforcement. These goals will serve
towards building automatic protection technologies for hybrid apps, transparent
enforcement that preserves the functionality of safe apps, and retroactive
enforcement that can be applied to vulnerable apps in the wild.