* 1566404
* 2016 Polymer Physics GRC and GRS:  Emerging Topics in the Behavior of Neat and Hybrid Polymer Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Richard Register, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 03/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Funds in the amount of $9,000 are
requested to cover the registration costs of eight US based participants in the
2016 Polymer Physics Gordon Research Conference (GRC)and associated Gordon
Research Symposium (GRS) to be held on July 23-24 (GRS) and July 24-19 (GRC) at
Mt Holyoke College in South Hadley MA. The combined GRC/GRS conference/seminar
are held every other year. The Polymer Physics GRC is an important venue for
scientific exchange in this interdisciplinary field. New experimental,
simulation, and theoretical developments in both existing and emerging areas in
polymer physics will be emphasized with particular focus on the influence of
structure and interactions on macroscopic behavior. The associated GRS provides
a complementary venue for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to
interact with senior mentors, and with one another, to cultivate scientific
exchange and collaborations. The themed GRC technical sessions will cover each
of the following areas: Crystallization and Crystalline Polymers; Polymer-
Polymer phase behavior; Structured Polymer Conductors; Block Copolymer Thin
Films; Segmental, Chain and Ion Dynamics; Confined Polymers; Nanocomposites; and
Ionomers. The GRS will be held the weekend before the GRC. It will comprise
twelve talks delivered by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and
two poster sessions, reporting on their research, and will include a panel
discussion featuring senior scientists.