* 1566142
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: The Design and Study of Systems for Making Solar Hydrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Detty, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 350,000.00

This project is supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the National
Science Foundation and involves a four-way collaboration between Professors
David McCamant and Richard Eisenberg of the University of Rochester, and Michael
Detty and David Watson of the University at Buffalo. The goal of the research is
to develop a new fundamental understanding of chemical systems that can produce
hydrogen by splitting water molecules into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) gases
using solar energy. For the capture and storage of solar energy, water splitting
is the ideal reaction. The recombination of H2 and O2 to produce water is a
convenient and clean source of energy upon demand. This research project
involves making new molecules to facilitate the water splitting reaction in the
Eisenberg lab, making new dye molecules to absorb visible light from the sun in
the Detty lab, studying the fast photochemical reactions that occur after those
molecules absorb light in the McCamant lab, and making new nanoparticle
semiconductor systems as scaffolds for solar hydrogen production in the Watson
lab. Each of the investigators brings to the collaborative research different
perspectives and skills that are leading to a significant new understanding of a
fundamentally challenging problem in solar energy conversion. In outreach
efforts, the scientists supported by this grant are working with local
elementary schools in Rochester and Buffalo, New York, to develop energy-related
science modules that can inspire the next generation of scientists.

This research, funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF, consists of
the design and study of systems for the light-driven generation of H2 from
aqueous protons, and associated photochemical and photophysical investigations
to fully understand this transformation. The reaction corresponds to the
reductive side of water splitting, 2H+ + 2e- -> H2, which is the key reaction in
artificial photosynthesis and the conversion of light into stored chemical
potential energy. While seemingly simple, the detailed mechanism of the light-
driven generation of H2 is complex, particularly in an integrated system. In
this project, the researchers focus on three specific research goals: the
synthesis and characterization of new chromophores; the design and development
of new catalysts containing common metal ions that are effective in
photochemical systems for light-driven proton reduction in aqueous media; and
the construction of new integrated proton reduction systems based on
semiconductor materials such as SrTiO3, as structural scaffolds and on
photocathode materials such as CuAlO2, to eliminate the need for chemical
sources of electrons for proton reduction. Each of these areas are being
explored with cutting-edge femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopy capable of
probing dynamics involving initial light-driven events, longer duration
transient absorption methods to follow later electron transfers and steady-state
methods that can establish mechanisms of catalysis, molecular and interfacial
structures, and long-term system stability. The scientists supported by this
grant are also working with local elementary schools in Rochester and Buffalo,
New York, to develop energy related science modules that can inspire the next
generation of scientists.