* 1566616
* Transport and Reactivity at the Ionic Liquid-Gas Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Timothy Minton, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2019
* USD 466,319.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Timothy K. Minton and his group at
Montana State University explore the chemical structure and reactivity of the
surfaces of ionic liquids (ILs), which are a class of liquids that are finding
important applications, for example, in gas separation and catalysis. ILs are
also potentially important for sustainable chemical processing because they are
non-volatile and resistant to degradation by heat. The Minton group directs
beams of atoms and molecules at the surfaces of ILs, and infers details about
surface structure and chemical reactivity from the angles, velocities, and
identities of the atoms and molecules that emerge from the surface. The
experimental results are compared with theoretical calculations (also done by
the Minton group). The ultimate goal of this project is to enable an
"understanding-driven" approach to designing and optimizing ionic liquid systems
for useful applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses experimental
atomic and molecular beam scattering techniques based on mass-spectrometric
detection, which is a general technique that provides dynamical scattering data
in exquisite detail and does not rely on spectroscopic detection schemes that
are limited to relatively few scattered species. The experiments are being
closely linked with molecular dynamics simulations of liquid surfaces and mixed
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics calculations of gas-surface interaction
dynamics. This joint experiment/computation project expands the scope of
inelastic and reactive collisions of atoms and molecules on IL surfaces, with
aims to (1) extend the use of reactive atoms as analytical probes of liquid
surface structure, (2) quantify the factors that influence the connection
between reagent gases and supported IL-phase (SILP) catalysts, and (3) uncover
the mechanisms by which an ionic liquid surface may control the reaction of two
reagent molecules. Outreach is actively promoted through the creation of a new
Interactive Scattering Dynamics (ISD) web app, which is employing a graphical
user interface to visualize atom-surface scattering processes through preloaded
lessons and through user directed experimentation. The ISD web app may be
preloaded on a tablet or laptop browser tab, thus providing a very portable
teaching/learning resource to aid understanding of liquid surface structure and
the dynamics of gas-liquid collisions.