* 1566623
* Coastal SEES: developing new modeling tools to predict ocean acidification impacts on coastal ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Christopher Edwards, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 921,157.00

An immediate consequence of the dissolution of CO2 in seawater is an increase in
the acidity of the water, which has implications for organisms that rely on
carbonate chemistry for vital functions. As the occurrence of lower pH and lower
oxygen events along the U.S. west coast is likely to increase in frequency and
worsen in magnitude over the next decades, it is paramount to carefully document
present-day variability in water column pH and oxygen associated with seasonal
and interannual changes in coastal upwelling, and produce reference pH and
oxygen fields at the spatial (kilometers) and temporal (days) scales needed to
assess their impact on ecosystem processes. To address this need, the proposed
research uses a state-of-the art, data-assimilative, coupled physical-
biogeochemical modeling framework to quantify the temporal variability of low pH
and low oxygen intrusions along central California at the spatial scales
relevant to coastal ecosystems. In addition, the modelling effort relies on an
ensemble approach to identify the degree of certainty with which the frequency
of occurrence and duration of low pH and low oxygen events can be predicted on
daily to seasonal timescales, a critical component for improving future
management strategies designed to mitigate the effects of ocean acidification on
marine organisms. It is also anticipated that the results will apply to other
eastern boundary current upwelling systems and improve broader knowledge of
coastal upwelling impacts on biogeochemical processes (e.g., the long-term sign
and magnitude of nearshore air-sea CO2 fluxes). The study will contribute to
training a new generation of scientists versed in multidisciplinary ocean
science and management concepts. Specifically, it will provide training for two
post-doctoral researchers and one graduate student in (1) coupled physical-
biogeochemical data assimilation, (2) regional-to-local downscaling of model
simulations, (3) interpretation of complex numerical model solutions, and (4)
creation of products targeted at improving resource management in the face of
ocean acidification. In addition, the lead PI will give general audience
lectures on the use of models and observations to study ocean acidification
along the California coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the significant amount
of variability occurring over relatively short spatial (&lt; 100 km) and
temporal (days to weeks) scales presents a challenge for coastal ocean observing
systems and monitoring programs, the routine use of data-assimilative physical-
biogeochemical models would greatly enhance current capabilities for predicting
the occurrence of low pH and low oxygen events off central California. In this
regard, this research has the following short- and long-term benefits: (1)
establish the connections between alongshore upwelling variability and the
frequency, magnitude and duration of low pH and low oxygen conditions on the
shelf, (2) examine the probability that certain pH and oxygen thresholds below
which conditions become detrimental to key marine organisms are exceeded for
extended periods, (3) guide the implementation of an efficient monitoring system
network by identifying specific regions where pH and oxygen variability is
expected to be largest, and (4) implement a modeling framework capable of
predicting the occurrence of extreme low pH and low oxygen events off central
California, and assess its usefulness for decision-making purposes. These
developments contribute to Coastal SEES overarching objectives of advancing
understanding of fundamental, interconnected processes in coastal systems on a
variety of spatial and temporal scales, improving capabilities for predicting
future coastal system states and impacts, and identifying pathways by which
research results will be translated to policy and management domains and used to
enhance coastal sustainability.