* 1566248
* CRII: RI: Towards Large-Scale Recognition and Fine-Grain Analysis of Human Actions: Pulling Actions Out of Context
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Minh Hoai Nguyen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 174,855.00

This project investigates problems of human action recognition in video. A human
action does not occur in isolation, and it is not the only thing recorded in a
video sequence. A video clip of a human action also contains many other
components, including the background scene, the interacting objects, the camera
motion, and the activity of other people. Some of these components are
contextual elements that frequently co-occur with the category of action in
consideration. The project develops technologies that separated human actions
from co-occurring factors for large-scale recognition and fine-grain visual
interpretation of human actions. The developed technologies can have many
practical applications in a wide range of fields, ranging from human computer
interaction and robotics to security and health-care. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research develops an approach to human action recognition by
explicitly factorizing human actions from context. The key idea is to exploit
the benefits of the information from conjugate samples of human actions. A
conjugate sample is defined as a video clip that is contextually similar to an
action sample, but does not contain the action. For instance, a conjugate sample
of a handshake sample can be the video sequence showing two people approaching
each other prior to the handshake. The handshake clip and the video sequence
preceding it have many similar or even the same contextual elements, including
the people, the background scene, the camera angle, and the lighting condition.
The only thing that sets these two video clips apart is the actual human action
itself. A conjugate sample provides complementary information to the action
sample; it can be used to suppress contextual irrelevance and magnify the action
signal. The specific research objectives of this project include: (1) collecting
human action samples for many action classes; (2) developing algorithms to mine
and extract conjugate human action samples; and (3) developing a framework that
utilizes the benefits of conjugate samples for separating actions from context
to learn classifiers for large-scale recognition and fine-grain understanding of
human actions.