* 1566454
* RUI:  Collaborative Proposal:  High Resolution Spectroscopic Studies of Ionic Metal-Ligand Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Leah O'Brien, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 186,166.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms program supports the
collaborative research projects of Professor Leah O'Brien at Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville and Professor James O'Brien at the University of
Missouri, St. Louis. They investigate the spectroscopy of diatomic metal
containing molecules that also contain nitrogen or halogen atoms (for example
fluorine or chlorine). The work is enabling a deeper understanding of these
molecules' chemical bonding and electronic structure. Participants record high
resolution spectra in the visible and infrared wavelength region with light-
absorption and/or emission spectroscopic methods. This project continues an
inter-institutional collaboration of faculty and students at a primarily
undergraduate institution and a major research university. It enhances the
research infrastructure at both Universities, and develops students and faculty
with skills in contemporary spectroscopy and instrument development. The project
also contains an outreach program that allows talented high school students to
participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The O'Brien groups use
intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy combined with high resolution Fourier
transform detection (ILS-FTS). The plasma discharge techniques to produce the
molecules of interest employ radio frequency (RF) and direct current (DC) plasma
generators as used in industry. The spectra are rotationally analyzed to obtain
new and/or improved molecular constants (e.g., transition energy, rotational and
vibrational constants, and angular momentum coupling constants). These constants
are used to develop energy level diagrams and potential energy curves for
molecules, which enable comparison of the experimental results with
computational results for these small molecules. This work enhances our
understanding of metal-ligand interactions, periodic trends in for metal-ligand
binding, and provides insight on metal-catalyzed reactions.