* 1566614
* SusChEM: Copper-Catalyzed Radical Reactions of Nitroso Compounds for the Synthesis of Carbon-Nitrogen Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Javier Read de Alaniz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Read de Alaniz. Professor Read de Alaniz is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB). He is
developing new strategies for the direct incorporation of nitrogen and oxygen
atoms into structurally diverse molecules using earth abundant metals. The goal
of this research is to develop a general and versatile strategy to expedite the
discovery of therapeutic agents. The molecular diversity of nitrogen containing
therapeutic agents and the strong influence nitrogen substituents have on both
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics mandates the development of new
methodologies for installing these functional groups into small therapeutic
organic molecules. In addition, the methodology has potential applications in
material science, as well as for the construct of agrochemical compounds. The
project is well suited for the education of scientists at all levels. The
educational plan includes training of underrepresented groups in outstanding
professional development and research training programs at UCSB's California
NanoSystems Institute and Materials Research Lab (notably the RISE, SIMS, UC
LEADS, CAMP, and MARC programs), as well as developing a new multi-layered
mentoring program for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the value
of amines and the synthetic utility of radical reactions are well-established,
exploration of the strategy for constructing carbon (C) - nitrogen (N) and
C-oxygen (O) bonds by merging radical reactions with nitroso compounds is almost
completely unknown. Through these studies, new opportunities in C-N bond-forming
reactions that are mild, functional group tolerant, and use earth abundant
copper are under development. These new transformations reduce the number of
synthetic steps required to access nitrogen containing molecules that are
otherwise difficult to prepare. The transformations also give chemists access to
new synthetic bond disconnections. Specifically, the goals of the proposed work
are: 1) extend the scope of the recently developed copper-catalyzed radical
addition with nitroso compounds to include heterocycles, benzyl bromides and
alpha-bromo nitriles; 2) develop the reaction with commercially available aryl
and heteroaryltrifluoroborates using nitrite salts to generate the nitroso
reagent in situ; 3) apply this strategy to the concise total synthesis of
pyrroloindoline alkaloid natural products; 4) develop a new intramolecular
radical based N-O transfer process that provides spatial control of the nitrogen
and oxygen heteroatoms over a range of architectures. Professor Read de Alaniz's
group is well positioned to provide the highest level of education and training
for students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving a new
multi-layered mentoring program are part of the project.