* 1566192
* Theoretical Models for Potential Energy Landscapes of Challenging Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Charles Sherrill, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

David Sherrill of Georgia Tech University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop theoretical
and computational approaches to study weak, non-bonded interactions between
molecules. Such interactions determine how medicines bind to their targets in
the body, how molecules pack into solids, and how liquids behave. Hence,
interactions between molecules are of fundamental importance for science and
technology, and understanding these interactions better could aid in the design
of better materials or more effective medicines. Sherrill and his research group
focus on new theoretical techniques based on quantum mechanics. They implement
their methods in user-friendly, open-source, widely-available and free computer
software. This allows other researchers to model and analyze interactions
between molecules more accurately, in more situations, and with a higher level
of detail. The project is contributing to the training of postdocs, graduate
students, and undergraduates in quantum chemistry methods and software
development. The project is cofounded by the Computational and Data-enabled
Science and Engineering Program in the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) will be
extended to compute interactions between different molecular fragments, even
when those fragments are in the same molecule (this is not possible with current
versions of SAPT). The intramolecular SAPT allows investigations of how linker
groups in molecular torsion balances affect the interactions they have been made
to study. These techniques are also being extended to molecules with unpaired
electrons, allowing an investigation of how methionine-aromatic contacts
contribute to protein stabilization, and how these contacts change their
strength upon ionization of the methionine group. The project is also
investigating various many-body expansion approximations (including density
embedding) for use in high-accuracy computations of extended systems. The
methods developed as part of this project are being implemented as open-source
software, to be made available to the entire scientific community. The enhanced
ability to model interactions between molecules should benefit researchers in
chemistry, materials science, biochemistry, and drug design. At the same time,
associated computational laboratory exercises are being developed that teach
fundamental concepts of intermolecular interactions.