* 1566578
* Dynamic Free-Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Inwon Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2020
* USD 345,699.00

A "dynamic free-boundary problem" is the problem of finding the solution of a
partial differential equation in a domain whose evolution is a priori unknown.
One example is the problem of modeling melting ice, where the interface of ice
and water is determined dynamically by the distribution of temperature (i.e.,
the solution of the heat equation) in the water region. This project addresses
some fundamental questions concerning free-boundary problems, such as the
existence and long-time behavior of solutions. This is an important topic, since
without a proper mathematical theory it is difficult to develop accurate and
trustworthy numerical methods for dealing with concrete physical problems. A
good example is the problem of liquid drops sliding on a tilted surface. In this
case the shape of the drop can change drastically when the velocity is
increased, and a singularity (corner) develops at the rear of the drop when the
velocity exceeds a certain critical value. At higher speeds the tail of the drop
may break into another component (pearling). Accurate modeling of the motion of
drops is therefore a highly complex question in fluid mechanics, with many
important applications in engineering. Another example is in the crowd motion of
individuals or cars in congested areas exiting through part of the boundary of
the confining domain (e.g., a room or a highway); in these examples, the exit
pattern is heavily influenced by the shape of the domain as well as the location
of the exit. The project aims towards a better understanding of the properties
of these problems and seeks to provide a framework for developing accurate
computer-based numerical simulations of the processes.

The problems studied in this project arise in a variety of physical phenomena,
including the phase change between liquid and solid, the motion of capillary
drops, congested crowd motion, and tumor growth. Particular focus will be on the
asymptotic behavior of solutions starting with general initial data, either in
the context of homogenization and long-time behavior or in the "stiff-pressure"
limit of nonlinear diffusion. In addition to standard methods in partial
differential equations, such as integral estimates, it will often be necessary
to introduce geometric methods to understand the pointwise behavior of the
moving interface. The first part of the project concerns volume-preserving
geometric motions and their large-time behavior. The challenge lies in possible
topological changes of the interface caused by the merging and splitting of
fronts. For this reason most results in this area hold only for convex surfaces.
The principal investigator will introduce a modified version of the moving-
planes method to investigate a more general class of interfaces and to study
their convergence to equilibrium. The second subproject concerns the evolution
of capillary drops on a flat or tilted surface in the quasi-static approximation
regime. While many models have been proposed in the study of dynamic capillary
drops, the analysis of such models is still in its early stages, due the wide
range of behavior with respect to parameters such as the roughness of the
surface or the volume of the drop. The aim here is to address the well-posedness
and long-time behavior of solutions in various regimes, to classify possible
singularities, and to investigate the process's transitional behavior upon the
change of parameters. The principal investigator also proposes to study the
emergence of congested zones in collective motions, for example the evolution of
jammed regions in crowd motions with a density constraint, or tumor growth in
the motion of cancer cells with anti-crowding pressure. The plan is to
characterize the motion law of the congested zones as well as to investigate the
stability and long-time behavior of the solutions. Finally, the principal
investigator proposes to study interface homogenization problems in random
media, where the inhomogeneity is present either in the advection vector field
or in the latent heat. The goal is to understand how the inhomogeneities in the
system interact with the geometry of the interfaces to affect the macroscopic
behavior of the solutions. New approaches will be introduced to the
investigation, using tools such as energy estimates and concentration
inequalities.