* 1566233
* Reagent Controlled Selective Dehydrative Glycosylation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Clay Bennett, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 09/30/2019
* USD 433,265.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Professor Clay S. Bennett of the Department of Chemistry at
Tufts University is developing new, efficient chemical approaches to combine
single sugar molecules into chains of sugars called oligosaccharides.
Oligosaccharides are found on the surfaces of cells and are important in
mediating immune system responses. Reagent kits are being developed for the
general construction of well-defined oligosaccharides much faster than is
currently possible and with the production of less waste. This research program
impacts science and technologies that utlize oligosaccharides, including
agriculture, biotechnology and pharmaceutical science. Professor Bennett's group
has an ongoing commitment to training undergraduate and graduate students in
chemistry research methods. They are also involved in outreach to Somerville, MA
high school students by providing them with an introduction to organic chemistry
and how it can be used to create biologically relevant molecules. The community
of Somerville is diverse, so this program reaches many students from groups that
are historically underrepresented in STEM fields.

Prof. Bennett is studying how to place the stereochemical outcome of a
glycosylation reaction entirely under control of the promoter. For beta-
selective glycosylations this involves activating hemiacetals with sulfonyl
chlorides, while alpha-linked deoxy-sugars can be synthesized from hemiacetals
using cyclopropenium cation promoted glycosylations. Three areas of
investigation are being pursued: 1) an examination of the generality of this
chemistry by exploring its compatibility with an array of deoxy-sugar coupling
partners. 2) A study of the utility of this chemistry in the linear and
convergent synthesis of penta- and hexasaccharides from natural products. 3)
Studies to determine if this chemistry can be applied to the construction of
beta-rhamnosides, an important class of carbohydrate linkages that currently
cannot be synthesized directly in a single chemical transformation. Together,
these studies may result in methods for the reliable stereoselective
construction of difficult to access glycosidic linkages. Lessons learned from
these studies also may permit the application of this chemistry to other classes
of glycosides or even oligosaccharide and glycoconjugate libraries. Such
libraries would open up new avenues for drug discovery and accelerate the pace
of research in the field of glycobiology.