* 1566019
* Complex Acid-Base Chemistry in Minimal Solvation Environments - The Case of Atmospheric New Particle Formation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Christopher Johnson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 417,000.00

In this project, which is jointly funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics,
and Mechanisms-A program of the Chemistry Division and the Atmospheric Chemistry
Program of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Science, Professor
Christopher Johnson of Stony Brook University is developing a quantitative
description of the fundamental molecular interactions involved in the formation
of aerosol particles directly from atmospheric gases. This process accounts for
a significant fraction of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. The underlying
mechanisms governing aerosol particle formation are not well understood, leading
to uncertainty about their impact on climate change. Due to the sub-nanometer
size of newly formed particles, it is difficult to study them using conventional
measurements. New techniques to create these particles are combined with
recently developed laser spectroscopy methods to investigate the chemistry
driving the formation of these particles. The results aid the refinement of
models of new particle formation that can be used to improve weather and climate
models. In the course of performing this work, young researchers from high
school through graduate school are involved in the design, construction, and
modification of sophisticated instrumentation and analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of a new
understanding of acid-base chemistry with minimal or no solvent. Though acid-
base chemistry in solvents is well understood, new particle formation occurs
largely via acid-base chemistry in air, and the role of water vapor in particle
formation has not been well established. Clusters of a few acid and base
molecules, chosen from those expected to play a role in new particle formation,
are generated in a mass spectrometer and studied one specific composition at a
time. In ion traps, clusters are exposed to atmospheric trace vapors and their
growth is determined by mass spectrometry. Each cluster composition is
characterized structurally using vibrational spectroscopy and energetically
using temperature-controlled ion traps. These results reveal the energetic
factors driving growth, how molecules arrange in the particle, the role of
proton transfer between the acids and bases, and whether atmospheric vapors
integrate into the acid-base salt structure or bind to its surface. The results
aid the refinement of models of new particle formation that can be used to
improve weather and climate models.