* 1566601
* Gyroscope-Like Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* John Gladysz, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Rauchfuss
* 06/30/2019
* USD 526,159.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gladysz. Professor Gladysz is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University and is developing novel gyroscope-like
metal complexes. Macroscopic gyroscopes serve as devices for sensing and/or
maintaining the orientation of an object (e.g., space stations; torpedo
warheads; virtual reality headsets; mobile phone displays; drones; flying
insects via biological assemblies termed "halteres"). The classic mechanical
gyroscope, encountered by many as a childhood toy, consists of an axle, a
flywheel that can rotate, and a protective housing. When the object is displaced
from its axis of rotation, there is a restoring force arising from the
conservation of angular momentum. The underlying physics holds at the molecular
level, allowing chemists to pursue the limit of gyroscope miniaturization. This
project is directed at the synthesis of molecular gyroscopes that contain a
metal based flywheel contained in a novel cage-like structure anchored by two
phosphorus atoms that are 180Â° apart. The ease of rotation of the flywheel is
maximized, and the demonstration of gyroscopic properties sought. These systems
are linked to give "gearboxes", and investigated as catalysts for fine and
commodity chemical syntheses, for which metals are commonly required. Since the
metals are confined to a restricted space, it is hoped that new selectivities
based upon reactant or product size or shape can be realized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the synthesis, fundamental
structural and dynamic properties, reactivity, and applications (molecular
devices, catalysis) of gyroscope-like metal based molecular rotors. These most
commonly feature a trans-diphosphine ligand in which the phosphorus atoms are
spanned by three chains, usually of the formula (CH2)n (n &gt; 10) but also
incorporating hetero-atoms, p-phenylene groups, or other functionalities. They
are accessed by three-fold intramolecu-lar ring closing metatheses of precursors
of the type trans-LyM(P((CH2)mCH=CH2)3)2, followed by C=C hydrogenation (n =
2m+2). The coordination geometry may be square planar, trigonal bipyramidal, or
octahedral (y = 2-4). If the ligands (Ly) are sufficiently small relative the
(CH2)n linkages, the LyM unit may rotate within the gyroscope cage. Arrays of
gyroscope like units with parallel axes are synthesized with spacings that allow
the rotators to interact, enforcing correlated motion such as in gearboxes or
waterwheels. The metal fragments are extruded from the gyroscope cages,
providing a heretofore unknown class of macrocyclic dibridgehead diphosphines.
These are independently synthesized, combined with various metal species to form
new gyroscope-like complexes, and (in view of their ability to turn themselves
"inside out") investigated as "transport containers" for toxic or harmful metal
species.