* 1566086
* Strategic Formal [5+2]-Cycloadditions Toward Heteroaryl-fused Seven-membered Rings
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Stefan France, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2019
* USD 546,154.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Stefan France of the Georgia Institute of Technology is
developing new approaches to synthesize natural products, which are organic
chemical compounds that are naturally produced by living organisms. The
particular goal of this research project is to develop a toolbox of chemical
reactions that lead to the efficient construction of molecules that contain
rings of seven atoms. Professor France is applying these methods toward the
synthesis of complex natural products that have a wide variety of biological
activities. These natural products may serve as lead compounds for the
development of new pharmaceuticals. Through this research project, Professor
France is also providing high-level education and training for undergraduate and
graduate students. He and his research group are also active in outreach
activities to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in science,
including participating in NOBCChE and acting as a mentor for Georgia Tech FACES
fellows.

Heteroaryl-fused seven-membered rings are present in a large variety of natural
products that play an important role in the field of drug discovery. Despite the
ubiquity of this molecular structure in natural products, the efficient
construction of seven-membered systems remains a synthetic methodology challenge
due to vast skeletal diversity exhibited in these compounds. Consequently, the
ability to synthesize these motifs in a concise, regio- and stereocontrolled
manner is of high importance to organic chemists. Professor France is studying
ways to develop formal [5+2] cycloadditions of heteroaryl alpha-alkylidene
1,3-dicarbonyls derivatives with alkenes to generate (hetero)aryl-fused
cycloheptyl rings. To demonstrate the overall utility of the [5+2] cycloaddition
approaches, Professor France is applying the newly developed methodologies in a
few representative natural product syntheses. Three of the syntheses being
pursued are: 1) the synthesis of azepino[1,2-a]indoles using N-indolyl
alkylidene malonamides; 2) the synthesis of cyclohepta[b]indoles using indolyl
alpha-alkylidene beta-ketoesters; and 3) the synthesis of cyclohepta[b]furans
using furyl/benzofuryl alpha-alkylidene beta-ketoesters.