* 1566274
* CRII: Cyberlearning: Mobile Computers to Enhance the Building Industry and Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Steven Ayer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 212,000.00

The building industry has been criticized for lagging in productivity compared
to other industries and for wasting billions of dollars annually due to
interoperability. Part of this industry's challenge is that buildings cannot be
physically prototyped to test performance, making every new building a first-of-
its-kind. To help plan for unique designs, project teams often create either
physical or virtual reality (VR) mockups of critical spaces (hospital patient
rooms, courtrooms, etc.) to inform project decisions. While physical mockups do
enable intuitive exploration, they can be challenging for quickly testing "what-
if" design alternatives. And while VR mockups allow for quick consideration of
design alternatives, they can only simulate navigation through a physical space,
which can skew the comprehension of a design by VR users. This CRII research
aims to use augmented reality (AR) to realize, at once, both the physical
exploration benefits of purely physical mockups and the rapid-design-concept-
experimentation benefits of VR mockups. Similar to the yellow "first-down" line
on televised American football games, AR allows users to see virtual content
superimposed on top of a real view of a space. Mobile information technologies
(IT), including smartphones, tablets, and head-mounted displays (HMD), will be
used with existing Building Information Model (BIM) content to enable AR-based
design and constructability review sessions. Industry participants will use the
resulting technologies to view and modify room layouts based on their project
concerns. The perceptions and observable behaviors of the research participants
will be recorded and analyzed. This will contribute to a better understanding of
how AR may facilitate (or potentially hinder) design comprehension among
industry practitioners when generating project decisions. Ultimately, this
project will provide a critical resource for future researchers and
practitioners who need to strategically plan for the use of technology that
affords specific human benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI on this work has
partnered with design and construction companies in Phoenix, AZ. These companies
will share BIM content for upcoming projects, which will be imported into the
Unity game engine and linked to printed fiducial markers using Vuforia in order
to enable AR registration. This development approach will allow the same AR
environment to be exported to each of the Android-based mobile IT devices
explored. Once all AR devices are prepared for the review sessions, industry
participants will experiment with the placement of printed fiducial markers.
Each marker will represent a single building element to allow for design
modifications. When participants view the markers with the provided mobile IT,
they will see a corresponding AR mockup at full scale. This case-study approach
will allow the PI to explore the process of design review in a natural and
realistic context while testing the AR visualization as a research intervention.
Pre- and post-activity questionnaires will be used to collect perception-based
feedback from the participants, while video and audio recordings will provide
documentation for subsequent analysis of observed behaviors. The investigator
hypothesizes that, even though all devices will technically show the same AR
environment, the AR will nevertheless enable (or hinder) design comprehension
differently for different participants. Because such differences may impact
decision-making, the design comprehension impacts will be specifically measured
using existing construction-related frameworks (Conceptual Product/Process
Matrix model, or CPPMM; and the DEEPAND framework: Description, Explanation,
Evaluation, Prediction, Alternatives, Negotiation, Decisionmaking) for assessing
design and constructability review sessions.