* 1566460
* Nanospiked Particles for Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2019
* USD 359,535.00

Professor Nicholas Kotov of the University of Michigan Ann Arbor is supported by
the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry to develop
photocatalytic nanospiked particles as a new type of heterogeneous
nanocatalysts. These particles are made of zinc oxide (ZnO) needles, a highly
active material, used to speed up (catalyze) reactions when exposed to light.
The needles are grown around a spherical core that have the ability to form
suspensions in both water-loving and water-hating liquids. The main advantage of
particles with a surface of nanospikes is their ability to disperse and conduct
reactions in water-hating solvents while retaining their water-loving surface
states. In most cases, nanoscale photocatalysts improve efficiency and
selectivity, reduce energy costs and simplify manufacturing operations for many
important industrial processes. Many nanoscale photocatalysts work only in water
and other polar solvents important starting materials and reaction products are
only compatible with nonpolar (water-hating) solvents. The ability of nanospiked
particles to perform photocatalysis may improve the efficiency of plastics
manufacturing. These materials may also open up new reaction pathways and
improve the chemical and pharmaceutical production. During the course this
research, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in advanced research
methods in nanoscience and catalysis. A collaborative program with science and
art teachers in the Ypsalanti, Michigan area school district is established to
devise new teaching and learning projects that combine art and science to help
promote interest in nanoscience and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
omnipdispersive nanospiked particles are synthesized by growing ZnO nanorods on
silica, alumina and titania microscale cores. The utility of these catalytic
particles in organic solvents with respect to conversion rate and selectivity
are tested for the photooxidation of cyclohexane to cyclohexanol and
cyclohexanone, which are the key precursors for the large scale production of
many common polymers. The reaction mechanism and kinetics are investigated. In
addition, detailed experimental and theoretical modelling studies are conducted
to arrive at a basic understanding of the catalytic activity of nanospiked
particles and to develop an engineering foundation of inorganic, colloidal,
heterogeneous photocatalysts.