* 1566138
* Hydrogen oxidation reaction at alkaline polymer electrochemical interfaces: Achieving mechanistic understanding through surface sensitive spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yushan Yan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Professors Bingjun Xu and Yushan Yan of the University of Delaware are supported
by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry to develop a
basic understanding of the electrochemistry of fuel cells and electrolyzers.
Increased efficiency and reduced cost are key to the economical performance of
these clean energy producing devices. Replacing the traditional precious metal
containing components of these devices with less expensive metals reduces costs
but results in lower efficiency. In this project a fundamental understanding of
the interaction between the device components is developed to enable the use of
inexpensive metals while maintaining or even improving their efficiency. Both
K-12 and undergraduate students are involved in the project. In addition, a
mobile device-based software application is developed to raise awareness on
carbon footprint and the environment and provide a platform for sharing green
energy related information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
research program is to understand the interaction of alkaline polymer
electrolytes (organic cations) with electrodes at the molecular level, and its
impact on the activity of the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR). In-situ
attenuated total reflection - surface enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy
(ATR-SEIRAS) is primarily employed to correlate the molecular structure of free
and tethered organic cations and their potential-dependent configurations when
adsorbed on electrode surfaces. The chemistry of free and adsorbed organic
cations, including their interactions with HOR intermediates and their impact on
HOR activity and mechanism, are also investigated. The structure-activity
relations established from this project guides the design of both hydroxide
exchange membranes and electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy conversion
devices.