* 1566169
* Challenges and Solutions for Integrated Management of Environmental, Health, and Community Impact Data Pertaining to the Oil and Gas Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2015,10/31/2017
* Mark Williams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,956.00

1566169 Williams, Mark W.

An integrated data management framework is essential to charting a route that
facilitates the sustainable development of natural gas and oil while protecting
associated environmental (e.g. soil, water, air) and socio-economic resources in
the United States. The system must integrate the heterogeneous, structured and
unstructured data into an inter-operable and explorable system, one that can be
re-purposed by researchers and other stakeholders in order to transfer knowledge
between industry, land-use managers, government officials and the general
public. This workshop brings together data developers, data managers, and data
consumers from government, university, NGO, industry and other public/private
sector stakeholders in order to improve the overall quality, comprehensiveness
and accessibility of data. Discussions will also focus on identifying areas
where improved data access for stakeholders can lead to positive outcomes and
benefits for the stakeholder community as a whole.

The goals of this workshop are to identify strategies and propose next steps to
improve data discoverability, preservation, accessibility, integration, and
utilization for a wide range of end uses, science, policy, regulation, resource
and environmental advances in the oil and gas industry. The workshop will serve
to inform across and between each stakeholder group about data management needs,
status of current system, and future work and directions of the community.
Topics include: 1)The current state of oil and gas datasets and related data
resource systems, including but not limited to challenges for the database
providers and users; 2)Discussions towards a national integrated oil and gas
clearing house or networked data system, including improving access, assisting
compliance, and expanding the types and formats of data currently collected.