* 1566162
* Isocyanide-Promoted Buchner Reaction of Ruthenium Carbenes: A Useful Mechanistic Tool to Study Ene-Yne and Alkene Metathesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the research
of Professors Steven T. Diver and Jerome B. Keister. Professor Diver and
Professor Keister are faculty members in the Department of Chemistry at the
University at Buffalo, the State University of New York. Ene-yne metathesis is a
metal-catalyzed reaction that brings together two molecules, one with a carbon-
carbon double bond and the other with a carbon-carbon triple bond. The two
molecules are linked together by the action of the catalyst. The reaction is
widely used in organic synthesis and materials chemistry. The ene-yne reaction,
however, is difficult to study and the selectivity is hard to predict. The goal
of this project is to better understand the structure of the intermediates and
the catalytic cycle. A better understanding of reactive intermediates
facilitates the prediction of selectivity and the design of better catalysts.
Graduate students and undergraduates are trained in organic, organometallic, and
inorganic chemistry through their participation in the project. Additional
outreach efforts at the elementary school level develop scientific awareness in
eager young minds, and often give students their first exposure to the many
roles of molecules in our world.

The Grubbs ruthenium carbenes have improved organic synthesis. Alkene metathesis
and ene-yne metathesis are widely used in the synthesis of natural products,
pharmaceuticals agents, and organic materials. However, decomposition of
catalytic intermediates and low selectivity in cross metathesis are two
fundamental problems that limit the efficiency and scope of these powerful
reactions. In this collaborative project, a research team led by Drs. Diver and
Keister are developing the Buchner reaction to trap reactive intermediates and
thus study of mechanism of these reactions. Key questions center on the
decomposition pathways and reactivity of ruthenium vinyl carbenes. The
reactivity of substituted vinyl carbenes has not been evaluated previously,
despite the importance of these intermediates in the ene-yne pathway. Quenching
of metathesis reactions continues to be a problem and reliable, rapid methods
for quenching a wide variety of ruthenium catalysts is an important goal of the
project. Solid-supported isocyanides are being developed and used for the
quenching and removal of ruthenium carbenes. Dr. Diver presents a molecular
science course for non-majors at SUNY Buffalo that increases general scientific
literacy of the University students.