* 1566402
* SusChEM: New Hydrogen Bond Donor Catalysts for Asymmetric Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Viresh Rawal, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Viresh H. Rawal. Professor Rawal is a faculty member in the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Chicago. He is investigating the design and
use of novel small molecule catalysts that, like enzymes, can activate reactants
through hydrogen bond interactions and thereby catalyze highly selective
reactions. This metal-free acceleration of reactions is not only of fundamental
interest, but also has benefits to society, since metal impurities are
undesirable in consumer products, such as specialty materials and medicines. The
research focuses on the development of new hydrogen bonding catalysts, including
bifunctional catalysts, for the synthesis of chiral substances. Such compounds
possess mirror asymmetry and have considerable economic and biomedical
importance. These projects provide training in chemical synthesis, problem
solving, and oral and written communication to researchers at all levels.
Through this work, Professor Rawal provides scientific research opportunities
for students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New classes of
chiral hydrogen bond donor compounds are being developed and examined as
catalysts for asymmetric reactions. These novel hydrogen (H)-bond donor
scaffolds are expected to expand the classes of reactions that can be rendered
enantioselective and lead to improvements in the effectiveness and substrate
scope of other reactions. A particular focus is on the study of catalysts
possessing two or more H-bond donor groups, enabling the activation of
substrates containing a carbonyl group, an important functional group for
organic synthesis. The catalysts under study probe the importance of the
distance between the two donor hydrogens, as well as their acidity, for
effective activation of the carbonyl group. The investigations, which are
carried out in conjunction with mechanistic, computational, and crystallographic
studies, provide information on the activation capabilities of the new hydrogen
bond donor scaffolds. Three distinct catalyst scaffolds are under development.
The structural and reactivity properties of each are examined in a wide range of
reactions. Studies show that the catalysts are highly active, requiring only
0.1-1 mol% loading, so they provide environmentally friendly solutions for
chemical synthesis. The work opens access to a wide range of chiral compounds,
of importance for natural product synthesis, drug development, and materials
chemistry. Outreach activities involve participation by high-school students,
particularly those from underrepresented groups.