* 1566509
* Redox Behavior and Chemical Reactivity of Heme-HNOx Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Michael Shaw, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2019
* USD 516,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry
Division at the NSF supports the collaborative research between Professor George
B. Richter-Addo at the University of Oklahoma (OU) and Professor Michael J. Shaw
at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville (SIUE). The overall goal of this
research is to prepare and characterize reactive biological intermediates of
relevance to the global nitrogen cycle and human health. Emphasis is placed on
the fundamental iron-mediated chemistry of the nitrogen oxides (NOx) that have
been implicated in various processes such as atmospheric pollution, blood
pressure control in humans, and in bacterial survival or death. Although the
simplest NOx species, namely nitric oxide (NO) is known to regulate normal blood
pressure, not much is known about the generation and action of related species
such as nitroxyl (HNO) and nitrosoalkanes (RNO). This collaborative group has
joint expertise in chemical synthesis and electroanalytical chemistry, and
combines a Ph.D. environment (at OU) and a primarily undergraduate environment
(at SIUE) to provide high-level training to a diverse group of students.
Outreach activities involving inner-city high school students from low-income
and disadvantaged backgrounds are an essential component of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heme-HNO and -hyponitrite compounds are important
intermediates in the biological pathways of the overall global nitrogen cycle.
For example, bacteria convert the diatomic vasodilator molecule NO to nitrous
oxide via a hyponitrite intermediate using a di-iron active site, whereas fungi
perform a similar NO-to-nitrous oxide reaction using a mono-iron active site.
The fungal reaction involves initial hydride attack at a ferric heme nitrosyl to
generate a heme-HNO intermediate. This research team recently succeeded in
generating a synthetic model system to demonstrate heme-HNO formation via
hydride attack on a ferric heme nitrosyl, which provided an appropriate
framework to determine factors that promote further reactions of these heme-HNO
species. In this project, the aims are to: (i) prepare a representative range of
ferric heme nitrosyls, (ii) explore reactions involving nucleophilic attack at
the bound nitrosyls to generate heme-XNO derivatives (X = H, alkyl/aryl), (iii)
determine the redox behavior of these species especially those involving proton-
coupled electron transfers, (iv) prepare heme model-hyponitrite compounds and
establish their reactivity patterns, and (v) prepare the related heme model-
NONOate derivatives to determine the factors that promote decomposition of these
species to generate the vasodilator NO molecule.