* 1566246
* CDS&amp;E: Bridging electronic structure theory and dynamics with applications to nonadiabatic processes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Rainer Glaser, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2020
* USD 459,849.00

Richard Dawes of the Missouri University of Science and Technology is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
for his work on methods that create highly accurate potential energy surfaces
(PES). This award is cofunded by the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering program in the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. The PES are
central to how chemists think about the structure and dynamics of molecular
systems, in terms of minima and asymptotes connected by paths across landscapes
or over energetic barriers. The potential energy surfaces that Dawes and his
coworkers create are used to study molecular dynamics and spectroscopy data that
is relevant to many chemical processes including atmospheric chemistry,
astrochemistry, and combustion. A major thrust of the project is to develop a
user-friendly, freely-distributed software package to support and enable members
of a wider community, both experimentalists and theorists, to create their own
potential energy surfaces to study a large variety of different systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop user-friendly
software that acts as a bridge between codes that perform electronic structure
calculations and those that compute the dynamics of interest. The idea is to
represent the electronic structure data with such high-fidelity that the
computed dynamics directly reflect the underlying level of electronic structure
calculations. (The fit only serves to render affordable the millions of
potential evaluations required by dynamics codes). Very high fitting accuracy is
required in order to assess the performance of subtly different methods or the
importance of small correction terms. Previous work by Professor Dawes has
resulted in suitably accurate interpolative methods known as interpolating
moving least squares (IMLS). The automated fitting methods that were developed
have reduced the bottleneck of PES generation and produced a stockpile of
spectroscopically accurate PES. The current plan is to develop a generalized,
extendable software distribution that others in the community can use to
generate and fit their own PES. The particular focus of this project is on
processes involving several coupled PES. This involves systematic studies of
systems which include various non-adiabatic interactions between electronic
states such as conical intersections, Renner-Teller interactions, and spin-orbit
coupling. Accurate treatment of these effects in real applications represents
the frontier of theoretical dynamics.