* 1566244
* CRII:   CHS:   Next Generation Computational Design Tools for 3D Printable Objects that can Move, Deform and Sense
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* James McCann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 174,818.00

3D printing has the potential to eliminate constraints associated with
traditional manufacturing techniques and to provide the general public (casual
people, artists, tinkerers, even children) with the means to fabricate any
physical artifact they envision. Thus, 3D printer technology promises to enable
a future where the mass production of a very small number of designs as we do
today is replaced by manufacturing small quantities of a vast array of unique,
highly personalized products. But the ability to easily manufacture one-of-a-
kind products, the limitless design possibilities, and the new class of
designers 3D printing is empowering also introduce important challenges. In
particular, the process of generating content for 3D printing is currently a
major bottleneck in the digital fabrication pipeline; after all, a manufacturing
device capable of creating custom objects is only valuable if one can quickly
generate appropriate designs for it. It is easy enough to download and fabricate
existing designs from an online database, but personalizing these objects or
creating new ones from scratch currently requires specialized CAD software, a
significant investment of time, and a great deal of knowledge, experience and
skill. The PI's vision is to create design software that will dramatically
simplify the process. The broader impacts of the work, however, go beyond
consumer products and the corresponding socio-economic implications, by
supporting the development of digital literacy skills for the 21st century,
thereby promoting in turn the appeal of STEM disciplines. To reach the widest
possible audience, the PI will make his technology available to the Carnegie
Science Center, local Maker Spaces and interested educators around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's goal in this project is to establish a
research program that will ultimately overcome current technological barriers by
developing next-generation computational design tools that empower casual users
to easily generate content for personal fabrication. To this end, rather than
focusing on the design of static 3D printable artifacts the PI will develop
intuitive authoring tools for a broad class of functional physical objects that
can move, deform and sense. He will create efficient and robust mathematical
models and intuitive computational methods that allow casual users to capture
the characteristics of 3D printed materials and to seamlessly integrate off-the-
shelf components (such as motors, sensors, bearings, etc.) into their designs.
Project outcomes will allow anyone to create physical devices that improve their
own life or the lives of others, such as robotic devices that help with kitchen
tasks, housekeeping and gardening, assistive devices for people with
disabilities, smart furniture, and kinetic art.