* 1566282
* RUI: Sulfur Chemistry: Molecular Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* AnGayle Vasiliou, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor AnGayle Vasiliou in the Department
of Chemistry at Middlebury College. Professor Vasiliou and her students are
working to understand the decomposition of carbon compounds containing sulfur
when heated. Sulfur-containing contaminants are often present in fuel sources
such as coal, petroleum and biomass. It is important to remove the sulfur from
potential fuel sources to reduce the formation of corrosive acid rain. Dr.
Vasiliou investigate the use of heat to break the chemical bonds of larger
molecules into smaller more volatile species and removal of sulfur. The high-
temperature chemistry of sulfur compounds in petroleum and biofuels is poorly
understood. This knowledge gap hinders progress in the development of refinery
clean-up processes. This project studies the high-temperature reactions of eight
important sulfur-containing molecules. The research is conducted at a
predominantly undergraduate institution, Middlebury College, with only
undergraduate students as collaborators. This type of research experience
encourages undergraduates to pursue careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the unimolecular
decomposition of eight petroleum and biomass relevant molecules: dimethyl
sulfide, diethyl sulfide, dimethyl disulfide, ethanethiol, tert-butylthiol,
methylthiophene, 3-ethylthiophene and cysteine. This research is the first to
establish direct evidence for radical intermediates formed during thermal
decomposition. The reaction studies are conducted using a hyperthermal nozzle
configured to facilitate matrix isolation infrared absorption and vacuum
ultraviolet photoionization mass spectroscopies. These techniques allow for
thermal tuneablity (298-1700 K) and sensitive detection of intermediate species
such as radicals. In addition to experimental studies, the thermal decomposition
mechanisms of the eight sulfur species are investigated theoretically using
density function and ab initio quantum chemical techniques. As the project has
both experimental and computational aspects it exposes the undergraduate
students to physical chemistry.