* 1566036
* Theoretical Studies of Intermolecular Forces
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 11/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Krzysztof Szalewicz of the
University of Delaware is developing theoretical and computational methods to
model and understand intermolecular forces. When two molecules are placed next
to each other, each molecule acts on its partner with a weak force that is an
order of magnitude weaker than the chemical forces that bind atoms together into
molecules. A broad range of physical, chemical, and biological phenomena
originate from such intermolecular forces. Knowledge of intermolecular forces is
necessary to interpret a variety of phenomena including the structure and
function of crystals and proteins. Professor Szalewicz and his coworkers are
developing new ideas to improve the modeling of intermolecular forces and to
extend their range of applicability. This research is expected to have an impact
on metrology standards, energy resource exploration, atmospheric modeling,
understanding processes in interstellar clouds, simulating biological phenomena,
and predicting the crystalline forms of drugs. These computational approaches
are being implemented in software that is freely available to the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To predict properties of clusters, biomolecular
aggregates, and condensed phases, one needs to know the potential energy
surfaces, also called force fields, of the system that describe the possible
mutual orientations and separations between molecules. Such surfaces can be
computed via ab initio approaches using symmetry-adapted perturbation theory
(SAPT). SAPT provides a unique ability to interpret properties dependent on
intermolecular forces in terms of the four fundamental physical mechanisms that
lead to the electrostatic, exchange, induction, and dispersion contributions to
the interaction energies. SAPT is based on monomers described by density-
functional theory (DFT), a method denoted as SAPT (DFT), and is as accurate as
the regular SAPT but significantly faster. Professor Szalewicz is working to
develop SAPT further and increase its range of applicability. and strives to
expand SAPT's range of applicability to molecules with hundreds of atoms, a step
in the direction of physics-based biomolecular force fields which may bring
biomolecular simulations to a new level of reliability.