* 1566463
* CRII: RI: Energy Effective and Versatile Bipedal Robots Using Event-Based Switching Between Parameterized Steady-State Controllers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Pranav Bhounsule, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 02/29/2020
* USD 167,024.00

Bipedal robots, unlike humans, are either energy-effective or versatile but not
both at the same time. For example, the Honda ASIMO can walk over stairs and
navigate around obstacles but needs to be recharged about every hour or so. On
the other hand, robots inspired by passive dynamics use trivial amounts of
energy to move but are limited to a single speed and step length. This project
develops a theory that fills this knowledge gap by enabling bipedal robots to
make informed decisions about what strategy to follow given a particular
circumstance. For example, on rough terrains, a robot may have to decide to
expend more energy in order to maximize stability while, in cases where the
terrain is flat and regular, the same robot can decide to use its most energy-
efficient gait while paying little heed to stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is a need to develop a theory that would simultaneously enable improved
performance metrics for the energy-efficiency and versatility of bipedal robots.
The instability of bipedal robots, due to their inverted pendulum like nature,
makes this challenge even greater; hence, metrics for balance and stability also
need to be met simultaneously. The gap in knowledge is that, it is unclear how
to enable bipedal robots to satisfy all these performance metrics, some of which
can actually be conflicting (e.g., energy-efficiency trade-offs with stability).