* 1566264
* I Corp Teams: Travel Assistant Device (TAD)
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,12/31/2016
* Miguel Labrador, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Transportation is essential for independent living in today's society. The
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requires transit agencies to provide
complementary paratransit origin-to-destination service to ADA eligible
individuals. The average number of annual ADA paratransit trips provided by a
transit agency increased by 7% from 2007 to 2010 and the average cost per trip
was $29.30 in 2010 compared to $8.15 for a fixed-route trip. Since transit
agencies are not allowed to pass the majority of the additional costs of a
paratransit trip to the rider, the transit agency must either absorb the costs
(approximately $4 million per year) or find ways to make the fixed-route service
usable by those individuals currently using paratransit service. About 55% of
the 145 transit agencies surveyed are using travel training to help transition
paratransit riders to fixed-route services. The proposed technology (Travel
Assistant Device, TAD) is a GPS-enabled mobile phone technology to help
individuals who need assistance navigating bus and train routes, such as persons
with disabilities or tourists. TAD provides timely auditory and visual cues for
two of the hardest skills that transit users must master to travel independently
(1) watching for landmarks in unfamiliar territory and (2) recognizing the
landmark near the desired bus stop in time to signal the need to alight. A
desired travel route, including bus or train numbers and schedules, is input
into the system. The system provides step-by-step instructions for the transit
rider. The technology has the potential to improve the quality of life for
individuals with disabilities, increase the efficiency of exiting travel
training programs, and reduce overall transit agency costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate goal of the project is to identify potential
customers while studying the possibility of using TAD in different markets. The
main product of this initial phase will be a business value proposition to find
interested investors in the technology. The long term vision is to license the
technology or create a startup company to host the software and market the
technology to transit agencies. Primary functions of the company will be to
update the software to be used with current smartphones, upgrade the bus and
train routes of subscribing transit agencies and provide travel training
services to the transit agencies, their paratransit riders, and care givers.
Finally, the modification of TAD to meet the needs of other markets, such as
tourists and people having long commutes, will also be included.