* 1566375
* CRII: CSR NeTS: Enabling Secure and Trusted Device I/Os on Smartphones
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Yifan Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2020
* USD 175,000.00

The recent success of smartphones is largely due to the integration of various
built-in input/output (I/O) devices (e.g., touchscreens, sensors, cameras, and
microphones), which not only permit easy interaction between users and
smartphones, but also enable a plethora of useful applications. However, these
I/O devices, if exploited by attackers, can pose severe security and privacy
threats to smartphone users. The root cause of these threats is that smartphone
device I/Os carry important and sensitive user information, but currently there
lack systematic approaches to protect these device I/Os. This research will
investigate the system design and prototype implementation towards enabling
secure and trusted device I/Os on smartphones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the following three objectives with the proposed system,
named IOGuard: 1) Securing device inputs: IOGuard aims to secure smartphone
device inputs such that attackers cannot infer or steal user sensitive info from
device inputs. 2) Enabling trusted device inputs: IOGuard aims to provide
protected applications with the guarantee that the device inputs delivered to
the applications are authentic and have not been tampered with. 3) Providing
trusted screen outputs: IOGuard aims to enable trusted screen outputs for
protected applications to defend against UI spoofing/activity hijacking attacks.
This project aims at achieving the above objectives with practical and scalable
solutions, which support running both unmodified smartphone operating systems
and unmodified applications with good system performance and user experience.
Specifically, support of unmodified operating systems will be achieved by a
small and dedicated bare-metal hypervisor built using the recently introduced
ARM hardware virtualization technology. Support of unmodified applications will
be achieved by a novel user-space sandbox framework. A series of novel designs
will also be carried out and evaluated to enable smooth system integration and
good system performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring an
effective, practical, and deployment-scalable solution that could benefit
billions of smartphone users and many mobile services. Besides smartphones,
other smart mobile devices that feature a rich set of I/O devices can also
benefit from the resulted solution of this research. The understandings,
insights, and experiences gained in this project will be extremely valuable to
other mobile computing fields that can be benefited from virtualization
technologies, such as mobile cloud systems/applications and cyber-foraging.