* 1566587
* CRII: CIF: Multi-version Distributed Storage - from Instantaneous to Evolving Information
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Zhiying Wang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

The research objective of this project is to study the fundamental problem of
storing evolving information in distributed networks through coding-based
distributed computing. When multiple versions of a message are to be written to
a storage network, the project studies how to use erasure codes and distributed
algorithms to tolerate communication and storage node failures and obtain
consistent storage, while maintaining a low cost in terms of storage and
communication sizes. Storing evolving information in a consistent way is one of
the critical problems in multi-processor programming, sensor networks,
distributed databases, and cloud storage. Schemes produced in this project seek
solutions to reduce storage and communication cost, both in theory and in
practical distributed systems. The project leverages coding theory and
distributed computing, combined with information-theoretic and algorithmic
arguments, of use in understanding other distributed algorithms as well. The
project will educate students through research and graduate course development,
and will provide online materials for a non-expert
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under standard assumptions of coding for
distributed storage, a static message is to be written and read, with the
operations completed instantaneously. As a result, temporal aspects of the
information access processes are not considered. On the other hand, shared
memory in an asynchronous and unreliable message-passing network results in many
read and write operations with delays that are not known a priori, and each
write operation has a potentially different version of the dynamic message. An
information-theoretic assessment of this setting is presently lacking. This
project addresses several basic problems in storing evolving information in
distributed networks. First, multi-version coding with a changing message is
proposed. This is a new framework of error-correcting codes, which allows
multiple versions of a message to be present in the storage network, and
different subsets of versions to be written at different storage nodes, such
that the newest possible version can be decoded despite node failures. Second,
multi-version storage with synchronous communication is studied, where a
possibly infinite series of write and read operations communicates to the
storage nodes in synchronous rounds, such that every read can recover the newest
possible message version. Third, multi-version storage in asynchronous networks
is studied, such that a write or a read can access the nodes many times and the
decoded message version satisfy a given consistency condition. The project will
study these different settings, construct achievable coding and algorithmic
schemes, and prove information-theoretic outer bounds for the storage and
communication cost.