* 1566567
* CRII: CIF: Data compression with low distortion and finite blocklength
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Victoria Kostina, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 175,000.00

The quality of data compression systems is gauged by an appropriately defined
distortion measure between the input and the output, by the amount (rate) of
communication expended by the system, and also by the delay due to coding.
Ideally, one would like to transmit at as low data rate as possible, while
reconstructing with good fidelity, and suffering only a short delay. All three
goals cannot be met at the same time; rather, there exists a fundamental
distortion-rate-delay trade-off, unbreachable by any technology. This project
aims to advance the state of the art in the understanding of that fundamental
trade-off. Its intellectual impact fuses theoretical interest in coverings of
space with practical considerations of lossy source coding. The project is
expected to generate mathematical tools to study efficient multidimensional
coverings of space, and suggest simple and efficient coding schemes informing
further technological progress in high definition content
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to the proposed technical approach is a
rigorous analysis of high resolution lossy data compression. In that regime, the
data is compressed with low distortion at the expense of a high rate. The most
relevant regime in many practical data compression scenarios, it also lends
itself to analysis more easily than the general case, giving rise to explicit,
computable formulas that provide valuable insights into the design of practical
data compressors. Leveraging the simplifications afforded by the high resolution
assumption, the project is expected to provide approximations to the optimal
finite blocklength trade-offs and suggests simple coding schemes that achieve
them in such analytically challenging scenarios as universal lossy data
compression, lossy data compression of sources with memory, and multiterminal
lossy data compression. In addition to the planned research activities, the
project includes curricular development, graduate student mentoring, and
outreach to undergraduates and under-represented minorities.