* 1566213
* SusChEM: Deoxygenation and Reductive Coupling of Alcohols Catalyzed by Oxo-Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kenneth Nicholas, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kenneth M. Nicholas, Chemistry Department, University of
Oklahoma, is developing methods for removing oxygen from alcohols. Many
components of plants, such as cellulose and glycols, are alcohols and the
conversion of these into valuable commodities often requires the removal of
oxygen. However, this is a difficult process to accomplish. In this project
rhenium and vanadium compounds are being developed as catalysts that effectively
deoxygenate and couple alcohols in an environmentally benign way. Ultimately,
the project may develop new chemical processes for the conversion of renewable
feedstocks made from plants into useful chemicals and fuels. The project
provides educational and technical training for future scientists at the
University of Oklahoma, two regional colleges (in Texas and Louisiana), and the
Oklahoma School of Science and Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective
of this project is to discover, develop and mechanistically elucidate selective
deoxygenation reactions of all classes of alcohols employing oxo-rhenium and
-vanadium catalysts and economical, benign reductants. The targeted reactions
include alcohol and phenol deoxygenation, alcohol reductive coupling, and
reductive cyclizations of 1,n-diols. Structure/reactivity relationships and
mechanistic insights into oxygen-transfer reactions are being established
through the study of substrate- and catalyst-dependent catalyze deoxygenation,
reductive coupling product selectivity, the reactivity of probable metal-
alkoxide reaction intermediates, reductions of oxo-metal complexes by hydrogen
and carbon monoxide, and computational modeling of potential reaction pathways.