* 1566170
* CRII: CHS: Towards Understanding the Capability of Spatial Audio Feedback in Virtual Environments for People with Visual Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Rongkai Guo, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 169,497.00

Virtual Reality (VR) applications have been developed for physical
rehabilitation, education, healthcare and other domains; the beneficiaries of VR
technology include children, the elderly, and persons with physical and mobility
impairments. Platforms for the safe training of personnel in diverse occupations
such as aircraft pilots or operators of conveyer belts in mines are an area
where the contributions of the technology are especially important.
Unfortunately, however, the majority of VR research to date has been based on
visual feedback, thereby excluding persons with visual impairments from enjoying
the potential benefits of the technology. The PI's goal in this project is to
establish a research program that will ultimately overcome this shortcoming by
developing techniques that allow persons with visual impairments to use 3D audio
for perception and movement in VR, and by providing designers with inclusive
guidelines for future systems. Project outcomes will not only benefit users with
visual impairments; rather, they will also be useful to people without visual
impairments for whom the VR user experience will be enhanced. This project will
afford undergraduate student research opportunities at the PI's institution, and
will provide trainees at Atlanta's Center for the Visually Impaired which is
located close to the PI's campus with new safe-practice opportunities.

The research will be carried out in three phases. In Phase 1 the PI will
investigate to what extent persons who are visually impaired can accurately
estimate the depth of, and direction of, sound sources. In Phase 2 he will
explore the design of interfaces and compare alternative audio-based techniques
for navigation in virtual environments, with a particular focus on determining
key factors that affect user self-confidence for members of the target
population. Finally, in Phase 3 the PI will develop and evaluate a virtual
training environment for persons with visual impairments. Each phase of the work
will be conducted in collaboration with the Center for the Visually Impaired,
both with respect to study design and data analysis.