* 1566638
* CDS&amp;E: Fast, Accurate Molecular Solvation Theory for Multiscale Modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Tyler Luchko, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 374,867.00

Tyler Luchko of California State University, Northridge, is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational methods program in the
Chemistry division to develop methods for large-scale molecular simulations. The
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) Program in
the Division of Advanced Cyber Infrastructure contributes to the award.
Computational modeling is frequently used to understand interactions between
proteins, DNA, and a wide variety of small molecules at the molecular level. The
use of computational methods has lead to advances in our understanding of
fundamental biology and to the design of new molecules, such as anti-viral
medications. However, realistic computer simulations require accurate models of
the water environment that supports these interactions. Models that consider the
position of every molecule of water are physically accurate but the computation
time required quickly becomes prohibitive as the number of molecules grows.
Other methods replace the molecular detail of water and are much faster, but at
the cost of accuracy. The 3D reference interaction site model (3D-RISM) is a
third approach that avoids following the atomic positions of water by
calculating the density distribution of water molecules. 3D-RISM has already
been successfully used to study biological problems, such as the salt and water
distribution around DNA and the binding of small molecules to proteins. This
project aims to improve 3D-RISM by further developing the theory to better
capture the pressure and density distribution of molecular water and apply
advanced numerical methods to make these calculations faster. Luchko and co-
workers target problems that cover multiple length scales, such as the self-
assembly of structures within the cell. Advances in 3D-RISM theory are
distributed with the AmberTools molecular modeling suite, allowing free access
to these methods for the broader research community. Undergraduates and Master's
level students are involved in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is to develop three independent but complementary approaches to
increase the detail and accuracy of large-scale simulations to enable molecular
simulations that are not currently possible. Improving the underlying theory of
3D-RISM provides the accuracy of atomistic solvent models without explicitly
simulating them. This allows crystal structure refinement and solvent
distributions around DNA to be determined using atomistic solvent models at a
fraction of the computational cost presently required. Increasing computational
efficiency one to two orders of magnitude brings the existing atomistic detail
of 3D-RISM to biomolecules consisting of millions of atoms for the first time.
The new end-state free energy method capitalizes on recent developments for and
unique features of 3D-RISM, bringing faster, easier and more accurate free
energy calculations to systems of multiple scales. Combined, these advances
improve the accuracy of all solvent properties, decrease calculation time by one
to two orders of magnitude and improve binding free energy predictions for large
systems. These improvements are significant because they drastically increase
the scope and scale of biophysical problems that atomistic molecular modeling
can address.