* 1566374
* CRII: NeTS: Building Quality-of-Information Aware Distributed Sensing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Lu Su, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 04/30/2018
* USD 175,000.00

The proliferation of increasingly capable and affordable sensing devices that
pervade every corner of the world has given rise to distributed sensing systems
that have fundamentally changed people's ways of interacting with the physical
world. Despite their tremendous benefits, distributed sensing systems pose great
new research challenges, of which one important facet stems from the conflicts
between the Quality of Information (QoI) provided by the sensor nodes and the
consumption of system and network resources. On one hand, individual sensors are
not reliable, due to various reasons such as incomplete observations, background
noise, and poor sensor quality. To address this problem, a possible solution is
to integrate information from multiple sensors that observe the same events, as
this will likely cancel out the errors of individual sensors. On the other hand,
distributed sensing systems usually have limited resources (e.g., bandwidth,
energy, storage, etc). Therefore, it is usually prohibitive to collect data from
a large number of sensors due to the potential excessive resource consumption.
Targeting on this challenge, this project seeks to develop a resource-efficient
information integration framework that can intelligently integrate information
from distributed sensors so that the highest quality of information can be
achieved, under the constraint of system resources. Successful completion of the
proposed research will benefit a wide spectrum of applications that rely on
distributed sensing systems for the collection, transmission and analysis of
sensory data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make several
contributions in this area of research. First, it will develop a novel
information integration algorithm that can jointly estimate the QoI of each
sensor and integrate the information provided by the sensors. This algorithm
puts more weights on the sensors with high QoIs, and thus can achieve improved
accuracy than the straightforward integration methods such as averaging and
voting that treat all the sensors equally. Second, to address the challenge
brought by the constrained system resources, this project will propose a set of
QoI-aware resource allocation mechanisms for the data collection on different
types of distributed sensing systems. For physical sensing systems that are
usually wireless systems deployed at remote, harsh or even hostile locations, an
optimization framework will be developed to maximally utilize the network
bandwidth as well as renewable energy in order to achieve the optimal aggregate
quality of delivered information. For crowd sensing systems where data
collections are carried out by a human population, a novel incentive mechanism
will be designed to compensate participants' resource consumption and potential
privacy breach, based on not only the efforts a user has spent but also the QoI
the user can provide.