* 1566077
* CRII: III: Automated Discovery of Predictive Regulatory Models from Morphogenetic Experimental Data
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Lobo, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 191,000.00

Continuous advances in molecular biology are producing an extraordinary amount
of detail about the necessary genes required for multicellular organisms to grow
the correct shapes and forms during development and regeneration. However,
reconstructing the genetic mechanisms explaining precisely the experimentally
observed patterns and, more importantly, the morphological outcomes in terms of
shape and forms, is an extraordinarily difficult task for human scientists due
to the complex regulatory networks and dynamics characteristic of biological
processes. This project will produce and use novel computational tools to aid in
the discovery of dynamic predictive models explaining at once the exponentially
growing experimental datasets of morphogenetic shapes, forms, and patterns. The
interdisciplinary characteristic of this project will foster new links between
computational and biological sciences, resulting in fundamental changes in the
research methodology in these fields that will lead to an acceleration of novel
applications in developmental and regenerative medicine. The computational tools
developed in this work will also serve as educational advances for the teaching
of dynamic regulation and systems theory in biology, computer science,
engineering, and mathematics. Importantly, this project will involve graduate
and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM fields. This
work will be performed at UMBC, which has traditionally served large minority
communities, and this project will advance the participation of these
communities in the fast-paced field of computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop the necessary set of
computational algorithms and tools that will readily assist scientists in the
discovery of the genetic mechanisms controlling the development of biological
shapes, forms, and patterns. The technical methods to be employed will include:
the use of a mathematical ontology for experimental perturbations, genetic
expression patterns, and morphological outcomes; a computationally-efficient
continuous modeling approach based on partial differential equations for both
genetic regulation and biomechanical forces; and high-performance heuristic
methods for the automation of the discovery of regulatory models. The project
will be grounded on mathematical models of partial differential equations, which
will leverage our understanding of biological mechanisms of morphogenesis using
the theory of dynamical systems. Furthermore, these novel computational tools
will allow us to streamline the building of predictive, dynamic models of
morphogenesis, explain the ever-increasing large dataset of morphogenetic
experiments being laboriously produced by the community, and advance many fields
of biology and engineering.