* 1566023
* Synthesis and Reactivity of Alkoxysilanoates and Derivatives
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Suslick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 180,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Thomas Rauchfuss of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Professor Rauchfuss studies the preparation of molecules called
alkoxysilanoates, with special emphasis on molecules of small size. While these
compounds are intermediates in the production of silicone rubber, their
fundamental properties are rarely examined. This research enables less
expensive, and more earth-abundant resources to be used in the formation of this
commercially important class of compounds. The alkoxysilanoates also bind to
metal ions, and the basic properties of these metal complexes are being
evaluated. Graduate students are trained in fundamental research protocols. In
addition, undergraduate researchers, drawn from a broad pool, are recruited, not
only to conduct research on this project, but to gain additional training
through their participation in checking procedures for the book series Inorganic
Syntheses. The checking process provides a benchmarked and mentored framework
for students to develop skills in synthetic chemistry, culminating in their
coauthorship as checkers. Similar training projects involve the students in
developing experiments for a synthesis textbook, coauthored by Dr. Rauchfuss.

Methoxy and ethoxy derivatives of alkoxysilanoates are of practical significance
both from the perspective of applications and the fundamental consideration of
synthesis. Professor Rauchfuss is preparing and characterizing the simplest
sodium alkoxysilanoate salts and the protonation of these salts to form silanols
that rapidly polymerize. These salts are used to develop the basic coordination
chemistry via salt metathesis reactions with transition metal halides. Other
routes to alkoxysilanoate complexes are pursued via the reaction of metal
hydroxides and metal oxides with the methoxysilyl ethers. The mechanisms of
these reactions are studied via kinetics measurements and isotopic labeling.
These studies contribute knowledge relevant to the tin-catalyzed condensation of
methoxysilanes to give siloxane resins, as practiced industrially.