* 1566011
* Multi-State Organic Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Lei Zhu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Lei Zhu and Kenneth L
Knappenberger of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State
University are developing new organic fluorescent molecules that are
individually capable of emitting light of different colors. The goal of this
research is to understand the fundamental molecular structural requirements that
give rise to the unique property of multiple emissions. These multi-emitting
molecules can be developed into components of energy-efficient, light-emitting
materials. This project lies at the interface of organic, physical, and
materials chemistry, and is therefore well suited to the education of scientists
at all levels across disciplines in chemistry. This research group is ethnically
and culturally diverse, which is also well-positioned to provide the highest
level of education and training for students underrepresented in science.
Outreach activities include developing short courses targeting non-chemistry
students on the societal impact of chemical research, and a summer workshop on
training college students on the promises and perils of original research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-state organic fluorophore is one that undergoes
ground state equilibria and/or excited state transformations to result in
simultaneous fluorescence at different wavelengths (i.e., multiple emission).
The goal of this project is to understand the fundamental molecular photophysics
of novel multi-state organic fluorophores. By doing so, means to control the
overall brightness and color mixing of a multi-fluorescence profile can be
developed to afford, for example, white light emission. Bright, near-white
light-emitting fluorophores are assessed for their potential utility in
electroluminescence-based energy-efficient lighting devices. Fluorophores that
are capable of rapid intra- or intermolecular proton transfer either in the
excited or the ground state (i.e., proton transfer dyes) are the specific multi-
state fluorophores under investigation in this application. The photophysical
properties of these compounds are studied by quantum mechanical calculations,
steady-state and ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopies. If successful, new
fluorescent compounds with utility in white light-emitting materials will be
identified.