* 1566201
* Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption Modules and Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Kai Landskron, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

CBET - 1566201 PI: Landskron, K.

Gas separations are a key requirement for many of today's industrial operations
and are important for environmental safety, human health, and energy production.
For example, carbon capture, which is essentially a separation of carbon dioxide
from nitrogen resulting from the combustion of natural gas or coal in a power
plant, will avoid emission of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Other
important gas separations include recovery of hydrogen for industrial use,
recovery of noble gases such as xenon from air, and separation of key light gas
petrochemicals such as propane and propylene. In this project, a new gas
separation technology - Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption - will be researched
and designed. The project's approach will use capacitive energy to achieve the
gas separation. This form of energy has the advantage that it can be recovered
with minimal losses. As a consequence, the technique is promising to achieve gas
separations with lower energy consumption compared with currently used methods.
The energy efficiency of gas separations processes is very important for
economic viability. In addition, Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption has a
potential lower environmental footprint since it requires non-toxic,
environmentally friendly chemical solvents and carbon-based materials as the
adsorbent. Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption has the potential to be applicable
to several important industrial gas separations. In this project the PI will
focus on the separation of carbon dioxide from nitrogen because of the extreme
importance of carbon capture and sequestration.

In contrast to conventional pressure and temperature swing adsorption processes,
Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption offers an approach for full selectivity towards
a targeted gas mixture component. In the process, the sorbent itself is
reversibly altered by capacitive charge and discharge leading to a change in gas
adsorption behavior. An electric double layer is formed and the targeted
component is adsorbed in/on the electrode. Capacitive charge and discharge is a
thermodynamically reversible process that can be operated with high energy
efficiency, since a continuous current is not used and the gases are adsorbed
similar to physisorption energetics. Supercapacitive Swing Adsorption modules
will be tested for their performance in the separation of carbon dioxide from
nitrogen as an example of carbon capture. The modules will allow for charge and
discharge under continuous gas flow. The primary performance parameters of
investigation will be energy efficiency, purity of the produced gas, gas
adsorption capacity, and adsorption and desorption kinetics. To maximize the
energy efficiency, the team will design electrodes with minimal internal
resistance. The shape and morphology of the electrodes will be optimized with
regard to charge and discharge kinetics as well as gas adsorption and desorption
kinetics. To maximize the gas adsorption capacity the PI will perform
experiments with increased voltage, explore new sorbent materials as electrodes,
and test alternative electrolytes.