* 1566411
* CRII: SHF: General, Precise and Accurate Fault Localization
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Danfeng Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Locating faults is one of the (if not the) most expensive tasks in software
development. Given the complexity of software systems, identifying a fault is
like searching for a needle in a haystack. This project explores a general
approach that will aid programmers in locating faults in software systems. The
goal is to develop a methodology for pinpointing at the exact fault locations in
a program, based on evidences collected from program executions. This project
can greatly reduce software development cost. More broadly, this project can
advance the scientific knowledge of fault localization in general. Advances that
aid programmer in debugging will also make computer science education more
accessible to the public.

The project explores novel techniques for general, precise and accurate fault
localization. The new method is applicable to various representations of program
execution with different granularities, using a novel execution trace model.
Based on probabilistic inference, it accurately pinpoints at the most likely
fault locations in a program, rather than reporting every location that might
contribute to a failure, or reporting a code fragment that is highly correlated
with failures. The practicality of this approach will be demonstrated on complex
real-world systems.