* 1566258
* SusChEM: Water Oxidation by Homogeneous Manganese Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Jeremy Smith, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jeremy M. Smith, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Indiana University, investigates how well-defined manganese catalysts convert
water into oxygen. Nature has learned to convert water to oxygen using visible
light. This process is called photosynthesis and uses manganese in a complicated
biological protein. In this project, smaller managanese compounds are being
studied both to provide basic information on photosynthetic oxygen formation and
to provide new catalysts, based on inexpensive, abundant metals, for use in the
laboratory or by the chemical industry. An important part of the project
involves the training of students in bioinorganic and energy
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes synthetic, spectroscopic
and physical studies to investigate the mechanism of water oxidation by
manganese macrocyclic complexes. The modular catalyst design allows for the
introduction of functional groups, enabling systematic studies into the effect
of proton and hydrogen atom transport as well as metal cofactors on catalyst
performance. A family of manganese pyridinophane compounds serve as functional
models for the oxygen evolving complex of Photosystem II. This work sets out to:
(1) experimentally validate a computationally-proposed mechanism for water
oxidation by these complexes, (2) determine the impact of pyridinophane
stereoelectronic properties on catalytic selectivity and activity, and (3)
delineate the effect of the second coordination sphere on catalytic activity,
including the presence of proton and hydrogen atom relays, and redox-innocent
metals. Spectroscopic, reactivity and mechanistic investigations of these
species provide insights relevant to the biological water oxidation mechanism,
particularly the key O-O bond forming step. Compounds are characterized by
standard physical methods of X-ray diffraction, NMR, EPR, and IR, while
catalytic behavior is investigated by a combination of electrochemical
measurements and standard mechanistic probes.