* 1566465
* CRII: CPS: Towards Reliable Cyber-Physical Systems using Unreliable Human Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Dong Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2019
* USD 190,998.00

A growing number of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) domains, such as environment,
transportation, energy, and disaster response, involve humans in non-trivial
ways. Humans act as sensors in these scenarios when they contribute data (either
directly or via sensors they own) that a CPS application can use. Using humans
as sensors (commonly known as social sensing or crowdsensing) is an emerging
paradigm, which provides unprecedented opportunities to sense the physical world
in an inexpensive, versatile and scalable manner. However, these benefits are
based on the assumption that the human-sensed data are reliable, but this is not
always the case. In order for social sensing to become a viable component in CPS
feedback loops, there is a critical need to understand the correctness of
collected observations from unreliable individuals. This challenge is referred
to as reliable social sensing. The objective of this project is to develop a new
Reliable Social Sensing Model (RSSM) and system prototype, which enables correct
reconstruction of states of physical environment from unreliable human sensors.

This project leverages and innovates techniques in estimation theory and CPS to
fill a critical gap in the rigorous analysis of human-sensed information,
thereby providing a reliable social sensing component to build robust CPS with
humans-in-the-loop. This project contains three key components. First, a RSSM
will be developed to formally reason about the correctness of collective human
observations and accurately assess the quality of analysis results. Second, a
new reliable social sensing system prototype will be built to integrate the
proposed RSSM with the state-of-the-art data processing techniques to handle
different types of human sensed data. Third, by evaluating the proposed model
and system through a real world social sensing application, the project will
effectively validate the correctness of the RSSM and provide new insights into
modeling humans as sensors for future research.

The success of the project and follow-up work inspired by it could lead to a
paradigm shift in CPS with human-in-the-loop by explicitly incorporating
rigorous accuracy assessment into the development of new theories, systems and
applications that rely on the collective observations from massive human
sensors. The proposal is timely due to the increasing interests in social
networks, big data, and human-in-the-loop systems, as well as the proliferation
of computing artifacts that interact with or monitor the physical world. This
research project will also contribute to the curriculum of CPS and Social
Sensing courses, and will engage undergraduate and graduate students in STEM
disciplines and from underrepresented groups.