* 1566438
* Tailoring the Colorimetric and Luminescence Response of Supported Platinum(II) Salts for Aqueous Ion Sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Peng Zhang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor William B. Connick of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati is preparing a new class of materials
containing salts of transition metal complexes that undergo a distinct color
change (and change in phosphorescence) upon exposure to certain ions in water.
These materials are of interest for the development of a new generation of
sensors to monitor toxic pollutants in flowing natural water, underground
plumes, industrial effluent, and drinking water. The project lies at the
interface of molecular inorganic chemistry and materials science, and is
therefore well suited to the education and preparation of young scientists who
will contribute to solving scientific challenges in the 21st century. The
project also provides scientific education and training for students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. Outreach activities engage local 8th
grade students in hands-on, inquiry-based laboratory learning.

Linear-chain salts composed of stacked square planar platinum (II) ions are
attractive candidates for the development of highly specific ion detection
systems. This project focuses on determining the factors that govern the
colorimetric and luminescence-based responses of supported platinum (II) salts
to aqueous anions and cations. The objective is to establish how synthetic
parameters can be used to tailor the properties of these materials. In addition,
this research provides fundamental insight into the influence of micro- and
nanoenvironments on structure and electronic properties of the incorporated
platinum salts. The research helps to delineate the role of the metal salt
solubility and water evaporation in the kinetics and thermodynamics of ion
transport and the resulting spectroscopy. The research is accomplished by
exploring a series of synthetic strategies and employing a battery of physical
methods for materials characterization and investigations of ion exchange.
Ultimately, these studies are expected to provide the fundamental understanding
needed to develop rational strategies for designing aqueous anion sensing
devices.