* 1566443
* CRII: CSR: An Asynchronous Design to Reduce the Long Tail Latency of n-Tier Applications in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Qingyang Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Low latency is essential for web facing e-commerce applications. For example,
Amazon reported that every 100ms increase in the page load time correlates to a
decrease in sales by 1%. However, practitioners have consistently experienced
the long tail latency problem, or wide response time variations, of web
applications in the cloud as the utilization of the system reaches moderate
levels (e.g., 50%). A practical consequence is that enterprise cloud data
centers have been reported to purposefully keep utilization levels low (e.g.,
18%) to avoid the penalties caused by the long tail latency problem, wasting
considerable computing resources and power. Solving the latency long tail
problem will have a great impact on achieving higher cost efficiency of cloud
computing resources, leading to lower cost of cloud users and higher return of
cloud providers, among other benefits of more sustainable large-scale computing
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
investigate and resolve a key factor that causes the long tail latency problem
of n-tier web applications: the Cross-Tier Queue Propagation. The Cross-Tier
Queue Propagation is an effect caused by strong inter-dependencies in the
request processing chain of an n-tier web application with synchronous inter-
tier communication (RPC-style call/response). With such Cross-Tier Queue
Propagation, a small queuing delay in a downstream server (e.g., a database) can
be propagated and amplified to upstream tiers (e.g., a web server), leading to
wide response time variations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes an
asynchronous design of inter-tier communication that addresses the long tail
latency problem caused by the Cross-Tier Queue Propagation of an n-tier system.
The rationale of asynchronous communication is to decouple complex inter-tier
dependencies enforced by traditional RPC-style synchronous communication.
Servers involved in asynchronous communication adopt an event-driven design in
which the processing threads in one component server are "independent" from
those in other component servers in the request processing chain. The new design
is expected to break the Cross-Tier Queue Propagation in the request processing
chain and prevent the amplification of small queuing delay into the long tail
latency problem. To validate the hypothesis, this research will design a
representative asynchronous 3-tier system consisting of component servers that
support asynchronous communication, implement asynchronous benchmark
applications that are compatible with the developed asynchronous servers, and
run large-scale cloud experiments and validate the effectiveness of the
asynchronous design to break the Cross-Tier Queue Propagation.