* 1566388
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Non-Intrusive Detection of Resilient Mobile Malware and Botnet using Application Traffic Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Qiben Yan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 182,739.00

The development of the mobile Internet economy has brought numerous benefits to
people and society, with the promise of providing ubiquitous computing and
communications. Mobile devices have penetrated almost every aspect of our lives
and, as a result, are storing a large amount of personal data. Unfortunately,
the promise of the mobile Internet is easily undermined by "smart" malware and
botnets, creating a precarious situation in which sensitive data stored on
mobile devices could be leaked to adversaries through the mobile Internet or a
wealth of compromised mobile devices could launch a denial of service attack to
destruct the mobile infrastructure. This project develops non-intrusive,
network-based solutions to detect mobile malware and botnets and mitigate their
impact to ensure that mobile communications are carried out in a trustworthy
manner despite the potential security threats. The research offers valuable
insights into mobile malware's spreading mechanisms and malicious intents and
will inspire studies in network behavior analysis of mobile applications. The
project also has an important educational impact via the creation of new mobile
security course projects and modules, widening students' views of mobile system
security, and guiding next-generation mobile developers to include security and
privacy considerations in designing mobile protocols and apps.

This project addresses three closely intertwined research issues in developing a
network-based mobile malware detection system. The first part focuses on
investigating malware traffic collection by identifying malware's network-
related application program interfaces (APIs) and designing novel inputs to
activate the malware's covert network behaviors. The second part focuses on
designing a network-based malware detection system that identifies potential
malware features based on their malicious network behaviors, which in turn will
provide precise and unique identification of mobile malware. The third part
focuses on the development of group behavior based detection mechanisms to
identify organized network activities from malicious botnets that are built on
the cooperation of malware. A local testbed will be developed to evaluate the
performance of the proposed techniques and system designs, which aims to
guarantee that the technologies developed are suitable for deployment in real
mobile systems. The project uses machine learning techniques, statistical tools,
and network traffic analysis to support secure communications in mobile
networks.