* 1566228
* Acetylene Hydrogenation on Alloy Catalysts Spanning Ternary Alloy Composition Space
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Andrew Gellman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 628,095.00

Catalysts are used to accelerate production of chemicals in industrial
processes, greatly increasing the efficiency of production and providing
significant energy savings in chemical manufacturing. Multicomponent alloys,
homogeneous mixtures of two or more metals, are used as catalysts in these
reactions because they are more effective than any of the pure metal components
by itself. The relative metal compositions are variable over a wide range, which
presents a challenge in designing alloy catalysts in finding the optimal
relative amounts of each metal component for maximum catalyst efficiency. This
can become a tedious and time-consuming research activity because it requires
the preparation, characterization and catalytic evaluation of hundreds of
different alloy catalysts, each with a different composition. Dr. Gellman has
invented a rapid, high-throughput method to accelerate the study of three-
component (ternary) alloy catalysts over a wide range of possible compositions.
Dr. Gellman fabricates a single material in which the composition of the alloy
is varied continuously along the material surface. He then uses a number of
state-of-the-art spatially-resolved analytical tools. Each measurement probes a
catalyst alloy with a different composition. This methods allows 100 catalyst
compositions to be prepared at once, then characterized and studied in a
fraction of the time that sequential preparation of each composition would
allow. Dr. Gellman is using his high-throughput method to understand how the
composition of alloy catalysts influences the kinetics and selectivity of
acetylene (HCCH) hydrogenation to ethylene (H2CCH2), an important chemical
process in polymer production. Ultimately, Dr. Gellman's work may lead to
improvement of alloy catalysts for numerous applications and may contribute to
clean energy technologies for its relevance to hydrocarbon conversion. In
addition to his advancement of the field of catalysis, Dr. Gellman is making
broader impacts in his work with students. He mentors female undergraduate
students in research to encourage their interest in pursuing advanced degrees in
the STEM fields. He also is engaged in public education activities as part of
his role as co-Director of the Carnegie Mellon University's Scott Institute for
Energy Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the complexity of
multicomponent alloy catalysts is confounded by the experimental challenges of
measuring the physical characteristics and the catalytic activities of alloy
materials as a function of multidimensional composition. With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division and the Catalysis and
Biocatalysis Program of the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environment
and Transport Systems Division, Dr. Andrew Gellman of Carnegie Mellon University
addresses this challenge by using a unique set of high-throughput methods
developed in his lab. The analysis employs an alloy film containing all possible
compositions of alloys in a process called Composition Spread Alloy Films
(CSAF). Ternary alloys, CuxAuyPd1-x-y, CuxAgyPd(1-x-y), and AgxAuyPd(1-x-y), are
fabricated with x and y varied over the entire compositional range within an
approximately 1 cm2 area sample size. Spatially resolved surface analysis tools
are used to map alloy characteristics, including bulk composition, surface
composition and valence electronic structure, as a function of composition
space. A unique, 100 channel microreactor array is then used to make parallel
measurements of the kinetics and selectivities of several catalytic processes,
HD exchange, ethylene hydrogenation and acetylene hydrogenation, at 100
different alloy compositions. Microkinetic analysis is used to extract the
fundamental reaction parameters for elementary mechanistic steps. These
measurements establish correlations among kinetic parameters and alloy
characteristics and yield insight into rate dependence of individual elementary
steps with alloy composition. In addition to his advancement of the field of
catalysis, Dr. Gellman is making broader impacts in his work with students. He
mentors undergraduate female students in research to encourage their interest in
pursuing advanced degrees in the STEM fields. He also is engaged in public
education activities as part of his role as co-Director of the Carnegie Mellon
University's Scott Institute for Energy Innovation.