* 1566124
* RUI: Catalyst Systems to Effect Asymmetric Induction in the Hydroamination of Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anna Wenzel, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 193,099.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the research
project by Professor Wenzel. Professor Wenzel is a faculty member at the W. M.
Keck Science Department at Claremont McKenna College. She is developing new
molecules to catalyze selective hydroamination of alkenes. Hydroamination
reactions are an efficient route for the preparation of amines, a common
structure found in pharmaceutical and agrichemical products. The reactions are
focused on making the synthesis sustainable. The catalyst molecules are designed
to be readily available and to support robust reactions. The study is uncovering
a wealth of fundamental information regarding the factors governing reaction
design. The research is conducted entirely by undergraduate students. Professor
Wenzel's program is well-poised to address the ongoing deficiency of
underrepresented groups in science. She has an excellent record in training
underrepresented minority students and successfully encouraging them to pursue
graduate studies in chemistry.

This research outlines the preparation of chiral heterodonor
phosphorous/thioether (P/S) and phosphorous/amine (P/N) ligands as alternatives
to classically-used bisphosphines for coordination onto palladium, ruthenium,
and copper. The chiral, bidentate ligands are equipped with strong and weak
donor-heteroatom pairs (e.g., P/S or P/N) to utilize favorable electronics to
strongly influence the stability and reactivity associated with stereochemistry-
defining reaction intermediates. The new catalysts are evaluated in two types of
hydroamination reactions: an intermolecular, asymmetric anti-Markovnikov
hydroamination of unactivated olefins and the enantioselective, Markovnikov
hydroamination of dienes to produce dihydroquinolines. It is through a robust
program in the training of undergraduate researchers that Professor Wenzel tries
to advance of science as well as the education of future science professionals.