* 1566266
* Detection, Structural Characterization, and Chemistry of Reactive Oxygen Species
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Carl Gottlieb, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2020
* USD 455,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Carl Gottlieb and Dr. Michael McCarthy
will isolate and identify oxygen-bearing species that play key roles in chemical
reactions which are ubiquitous on Earth, occurring both in the atmosphere and in
hydrocarbon combustion. To meet this challenge, new diagnostic tools will be
developed to simultaneously analyze mixtures of gases that contain many chemical
compounds rapidly. The work will allow chemical models with greater predictive
power to be developed for our atmosphere and combustion. The project will also
lead to improved analytical gas sampling techniques, which has practical
implications to human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
characterization of elusive reactive intermediates that are produced in many
reactions involving oxygen, ozone, and the OH radical. These studies will
establish the existence of the key intermediates by using sensitive high-
resolution rotational spectroscopy, and provide insights into their formation
and molecular structure. Synergistic collaborations with leading experimental
and theoretical groups here and abroad will enhance many of the proposed
investigations. Technological innovation is an integral component of the work,
and efforts to develop automated, "library-free" approaches to identify entirely
new chemical compounds will be developed. Activities of potential societal
benefit include an extensive education and outreach program with partners that
entails an interactive traveling exhibit to three New England venues; the
introduction of students to new experiences in science, engineering and
mathematics; and a student visitor program. These programs will reach public
audiences and underrepresented groups, and serve as an excellent vehicle for
teaching, training, and learning.