* 1566113
* I-CORPS: Scalable Production of Polymeric Nanoparticles Encapsulating Hydrophobic Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2015,04/30/2017
* Ying Liu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this NSF I-Corps activity is to systematically study technology
transition and establish the commercial viability of the technology of scalable
production of polymeric nanoparticles encapsulating hydrophobic compounds. One
of the greatest advantages of polymeric nanoparticles is that they can carry
hydrophobic compounds at much higher concentrations than the solubility of these
compounds in aqueous solutions and yet, the encapsulation keeps the compounds
from being exposed to physiological conditions until they reach their targets.
However, it is challenging to generate large-scale polymeric nanoparticles with
well-controlled physical, chemical, and pharmaceutical properties for biomedical
applications. The product being proposed is a continuous, scalable process for
generating polymeric nanoparticles by integrating flash nanoprecipitation with
drying processes. The resulting nanoparticles can have high drug loading, high
drug encapsulation efficiency, and narrw particle size
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will reach the goal of this I-Corps
study through assessing product possibilities, potential markets, economics and
business models. If successful, the technology of commercial scale production of
polymeric nanoparticles with controlled properties will initiate a paradigm
shift in the biopharmaceutical industry with realized potential for health
benefits for society at large. Low dose and dose frequency, and reduced side
effects of the hydrophobic compounds can be achieved by increasing drug
bioavailability. Drug compounds demonstrated to have in vitro or ex vivo
therapeutic efficacy but undeliverable or difficult to administer can be
formulated and available for clinical applications of treating complex diseases.
Reproducibly generating nanoparticles with controlled propertied can serve as a
platform to study drug pharmacokinetics,functionality, and efficacy.