* 1566297
* CRII: SaTC: Automated Proof Construction and Verification for Attribute-based Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Roopa Vishwanathan, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 174,860.00

This project develops a comprehensive proof construction and verification
framework for a well-defined class of cryptographic protocols: attribute-based
cryptosystems. In particular, existing automated proof construction and
verification frameworks, such as EasyCrypt and CryptoVerif, are extended to
provide support for attribute-based cryptography. The extensions consist of
libraries of simple transformations, algebraic manipulations, commonly used
abstractions and constructs, and proof strategies, which will help in generation
and verification of proofs in attribute-based cryptography. Additionally, the
investigator seeks to understand the limitations, if any, on the development of
verification tools for attribute-based cryptosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project builds upon and expands the scope of the toolset to include other
classes of cryptographic protocols, such as identity-based cryptosystems, and
non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs, which share the same underlying
mathematical assumptions and constructs. All code and modules produced from this
peoject will be compatible with existing proof verification tools. Educational
activities are an integral part of this project. This project provides
undergraduate and master's-level students an introduction to, and an opportunity
to work on an advanced area in cryptography, and provide an opportunity to work
with state-of-the-art model-checkers, and proof assistants.