* 1566013
* Meeting: Fourth Topical Meeting on C. elegans Pathogenesis, Aging, Stress, Small RNA, and Metabolism, Madison, Wisconsin, July 21-24,2016
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Javier Irazoqui, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 04/30/2017
* USD 13,459.00

This award will support participation of under-represented minority graduate
students and postdoctoral trainees in the 4th C. elegans Topical Meeting:
Pathogenesis, Aging, Stress, Small RNAs, and Metabolism to be held at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison, July 21-24, 2016. Nematodes like C. elegans
are ubiquitous in nature, and are important ecologically, agriculturally, and
medically. Furthermore, insights gleaned from studies of C. elegans interactions
with microbes are broadly applicable to many other animals. The meeting draws
scientists from many different disciplines, thus proving fertile ground for new
inter-disciplinary collaborations and exchange of cutting-edge ideas. As broader
impacts, the Meeting is organized by junior faculty members and provides
opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees to present their
work, thus providing opportunities for science dissemination and career
development, and contributing to a strong U.S. biomedical workforce. The 2016
Meeting provides a novel program, in which break-out sessions are specifically
designed to foster communication between distinguished scientists and young
trainees. The award will provide support for attendance and presentations by
promising young investigators, including women and underrepresented minorities
as a focus. In addition dependent day-care will be available on site, which will
enhance participation of young investigators, particularly women. NSF-sponsored
awards for best poster (undergraduate, graduate, and postdoc categories) and for
a new Worm Art show are other key innovations that promote science communication
through the visual arts. Results discussed at the meeting will be disseminated
to the scientific community by having abstracts accessible online at
wormbase.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As is clear from a large body of work, Host-
Microbe Interactions pervade every aspect of host physiology, including its
longevity, ability to confront environmental stress, its metabolism, and its
epigenetic gene regulation. In any other experimental system, the study of
aging, stress responses, epigenetic gene regulation by small RNA, and metabolism
are often conducted with little regard for the central relevance of host-microbe
interactions. Not so in C. elegans. It is now clear that the insights gleaned
from C. elegans host-microbe interaction studies are broadly applicable to many
animal species beyond the nematode clade. Comprehensive study of the intricate
mechanisms of host-microbe interaction and their consequences on host physiology
mandates an experimentally tractable model organism, of which C. elegans is
unrivaled. This is the premier meeting focused on host-microbe interactions in
stress responses and epigenetics of small RNA in C. elegans.