* 1566423
* Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design: Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on New Annelation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Paul Wender, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2019
* USD 560,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
project by Professor Paul Wender in the Department of Chemistry at Stanford
University. Professor Wender studies the design and development of new
reactions, reagents, catalysts and strategies for the synthesis of organic
molecules. Specifically, the reactions connect smaller molecules into more
complex structures that contain many rings of carbon atoms. These activities
create new knowledge that informs how we strategize about making molecules and
understand the chemical steps through which the molecules are formed. The
research lays the foundation for longer-term impacts in diagnostics,
therapeutics, and materials science. Graduate student research training performs
an indispensable role in the growth of students into scientists. Professor
Wender trains future scientists, workers and educators, who will go on to
address environmental, economic and health problems that are addressable through
chemical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Wender pursues several projects
to develop new ways of thinking about bond formation through the creation of new
reactions, reagents and catalysts and through their use in the step-economical
synthesis of molecules of interest. In the first, a new class of reagents
(cumulene equivalents) is studied and their use in the synthesis of kinase
inhibitors is proposed. This project introduces a new way to construct
polycycles and illustrates the value of this route in accessing molecules that
inhibit the activity of kinases. The second project is directed at the use of
ketene equivalents in the construction of functionalized seven-membered rings
and their use in the synthesis of tropane alkaloids, molecules of interest due
to their biological activity. The third project develops tetramethylene ethane
equivalents, which are reagents that enable step economical synthesis of
numerous basic building blocks of synthesis. This study is coupled to the
synthesis of a new family of solvochromatic dyes, agents that can sense their
molecular environment and "report" optically through changes in their
fluorescence. Finally, the project also seeks to develop new catalysts that
would operate in water, an environmentally attractive solvent for synthesis and
a necessary solvent for studies of catalysis in biological systems. These
catalysts could be used to target cells and organs by enabling the catalytic
release of small molecule sensors and drugs. These projects provide an
comprehensive training program, exposing students to the fundamentals of
chemical structure, mechanism and synthesis, while at the same time creating new
knowledge that provides connections to applications of societal value. The PI
and his coworkers are actively involved in the creation of new courses, web
sites, and outreach to high school students that collectively draw on the
research proposed in this project.