* 1566154
* CRII: SHF: EVID: Evidence-Assisted Detection and Elimination of Memory Errors in Single and Multi-threaded Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Tongping Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2019
* USD 206,731.00

Title: CRII: SHF: EVID: Evidence-Assisted Detection and Elimination of Memory
Errors in Single and Multi-threaded Programs

Despite decades of efforts, most real-world C/C++ software is still deployed
with memory errors. Existing approaches either introduce significant performance
overhead (for detection) or only partially defeat memory errors. The
intellectual merits of this project are an evidence-assisted approach (EVID) for
dynamic analysis and prevention of memory errors. The project's broader
significance and importance are in (a) efficient and precise detection tools
that significantly reduce manual effort in locating and fixing memory errors;
(b) the improvement of availability and security of software systems; and (c)
outreach to underrepresented groups such as Hispanic students.

This project proposes several techniques to detect and prevent memory errors,
which can greatly reduce zero-day vulnerabilities and improve the
reliability/security of software systems. EVID employs the following insight: it
is often possible to discover the evidence of errors such as buffer overflows,
use-after-frees, and memory leaks, after-the-fact. Assisted by the evidence,
this project utilizes deterministic and instrumented re-execution to pinpoint
the exact causes of memory errors in both single and multithreaded programs.
EVID further proposes an innovative system that automatically eliminates
detected memory errors, without restarting the software or compromising its
availability. Thus the tools developed in the project have a direct impact on
improving robustness of national cyberinfrastructure.