* 1566074
* Development of algorithms combining molecular dynamics with time-dependent quantum statistical mechanics for environment-assisted electronic transport through biomolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Branislav Nikolic, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 405,000.00

In this project, co-funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational
Methods program in the Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and
Materials Theory program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor
Branislav Nikolic of the University of Delaware is developing a new theoretical
model with supporting computer programs open to the public. This model will
allow researchers to simulate the transport of small charged or neutral
molecules through larger molecules of biological interest. These biomolecules
can be coupled to small, microscopic devices. The development of the theoretical
models to simulate the combination of biological molecules to these devices is
critical to develop fast and low-cost DNA and protein sequencing. Such research
could be extended to the development of personalized medicine, as well as for
the development of systems that generate fuels directly from sunlight. This
research at the intersection of chemistry, physics, biology and engineering
trains students and postdoctoral fellows to pursue careers in basic research,
industrial applications and high performance scientific computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops multiscale theoretical and
computational tools for systems containing very large number of atoms by
combining classical molecular dynamics, nonequilibrium Green functions + density
functional theory for multiterminal molecular electronics, and time-dependent
quantum transport algorithms of reduced computational complexity (scaling
linearly in the number of time steps). The tools are employed to model and
design nanostructures made of two-dimensional materials (like graphene, boron
nitride and transition metal dichalcogenide) hosting nanopores for ultrafast DNA
and protein sequencing, or to investigate time-dependent transport in protein
complexes for photosynthetic energy transfer. Besides fundamental interest in
the interplay between quantum coherence, transfer efficiency, fluctuating
environment-induced dephasing, and feedback of nonequilibrium electrons on the
motion of atoms, the high performance computing simulations conducted on this
project can significantly shorten the path toward functional devices for
applications in biosensing and artificial photosynthetic light harvesting.