* 1566483
* CRII: SHF: System-Level Detection, Modeling, and Mitigation of DRAM Failures to Enable Efficient Scaling of DRAM Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Samira Khan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 03/31/2019
* USD 174,803.00

Future computing systems will be dominated by enormous amount of data
processing. These systems will have to compute over exponentially growing user
focused data from ubiquitous network and internet of things (e.g., sensors,
self-driving cars, mobile devices, social media). At the same time, the forward
progress of scientific innovations will greatly depend on the fast and efficient
computation on high volume datasets generated from scientific experiments
(analyzing gravitational waves, colliding particles in the particle
accelerators, etc.). However, the current computing systems are bottlenecked by
memory, but high capacity, scalable memory is essential for fast and efficient
data processing in the future. Unfortunately, DRAM, the predominant underlying
technology for memory is facing major scaling challenge. As DRAM scales down to
smaller technology nodes, cells become more vulnerable, resulting in DRAM
failures. Enabling a higher capacity memory system without sacrificing
reliability is a major research challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on developing fundamental breakthrough that can enable scalable memory
system for the future systems. This proposal provides research plan and ideas to
solve the DRAM scaling challenge in a completely new approach by separating the
responsibility of providing reliable DRAM operation from designing memory cells
with smaller feature size. The central vision of this proposal is to develop
system-level detection and mitigation techniques for DRAM failures such that
cells can be manufactured to be smaller without providing any reliability
guarantee. It is expected that ideas developed in this research will bridge the
gap between circuits and systems and will enable a holistic approach to solve
the DRAM scaling challenge. The cross-cutting nature of the work will influence
circuit-level testing, computer architecture, and OS and systems design and can
potentially enable collaboration between different communities (testing and
systems/architecture). The ideas developed in this research will not only impact
innovation in computing, but will also help numerous scientific fields to take a
leap towards new innovations. The results of this research will be integrated to
existing and new courses to impact student training and education, designed
focusing on attracting the minority groups towards hardware and systems design
to enhance diversity in the field.