* 1566175
* CRII: CSR: Large-scale Systems Software Atop Scale-out In-memory Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Ryan Stutsman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2019
* USD 174,949.00

Research over the past 5 years on in-memory data center storage has resulted in
systems that can provide on-demand access to billions of pieces of information
per second. However, the benefits of these fast systems has not resulted in more
powerful and interesting applications for users. The key problem is that these
new storage systems are stripped down to provide speed and can only fulfill very
basic requests for information. To compensate, applications must make many
requests to these storage systems to perform the same operations they were able
to perform with a single request to older database systems. The result is that
applications spend most of the performance benefits they gain from these systems
overcoming their limited programming model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks
to understand the hidden costs of the limited interfaces of these large-scale
in-memory key-value stores and to alleviate those costs with a new stored
procedure model uniquely suited to these systems. To explore these costs, data-
intensive applications from three different domains will be prototyped on
today?s low-latency key-value stores, first with their conventional interfaces
and then again with custom application logic built into the storage system. The
results of this exploration will motivate and aid in the design of the main
contribution of this work: a generalized model for safely collocating
application logic inside of key-value stores. Application prototypes will
include a scale-out database kernel, a simple scale-out graph database, and
large-scale machine learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rich programming
model for developing large-scale software systems will lower the barrier for
building information-intensive applications: an art that requires specialized
expertise. Low-latency systems equipped with fast stored procedures will be a
powerful tool for building new, data-intensive systems in industry, science, and
the military. They will enable deep real-time analysis of social and natural
graphs; rich, interactive worlds where millions of users manipulate and modify a
shared environment; the fine-grained coordination and routing of millions of
autonomous vehicles on the highways in a metropolitan area; and real-time
decision support for military intelligence. All components will be built as a
practical and usable software system with all development done publicly and
available as open-source.