* 1566561
* SusChEM: Studies on Catalytic Asymmetric C-H Amination of Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Radhey Srivastava, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2020
* USD 375,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Radhey S. Srivastava and Dr. Siva Murru. Prof. Radhey S. Srivastava is
a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at University of Louisiana at
Lafayette. Prof. Srivastava's group is developing novel catalytic systems to
convert simple hydrocarbons to value-added products. The main goal of the
proposed research is to design and develop novel catalytic systems for the
production of valuable molecules that are of industrial significance. The method
uses copper catalysts with chiral ligands. The demand for chiral allyl amines
has escalated sharply in recent years, driven by the demands in pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, flavors, fragrances, and materials. In addition, these catalytic
methods are potential useful for the total synthesis of bioactive molecules and
chiral drugs. The researchers have introduced comprehensive educational and
outreach programs associated with intellectual and economic development.
Professor Srivastava's group has been working at the interface of organic,
organometallics, and catalysis chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the development of a direct catalytic asymmetric amination of simple
(non-functionalized) allylic carbon-hydrogen (C-H) substrates using
hydroxylamines as aminating agents. The prior art on this field used oxidative
amination to make chiral N-hydroxy allyl amines that require additional methods
to make chiral allyl amines. The main aim is to find suitable catalytic systems
that would deliver the chiral allyl amines with high yields and
enantioselectivities. This approach includes rational design and synthesis of
new chiral ligands and complexes. The research project screens the catalysts
under various reaction conditions while varying solvents, temperature, and
additives. The next objective is to explore the synthetic applications to access
valuable chemicals such as chiral beta-alkyl N-aryl Aza Baylis-Hillman (ABH)
adducts, beta-amino esters and beta-lactams, as well as bioactive molecules such
as hydroxymethyl docetaxel fragment, Ezetimibe, and Vigabatrin. Another
objective is to address mechanistic aspects of the reaction and provide a better
understanding of the reaction pathway and the catalytic activity. This objective
helps to develop new catalysts and novel synthetic methods. Professor
Srivastava's program enhances public awareness of the importance of chemical
sciences. Undergraduates, K-12 students, and high school teachers are exposed to
cutting-edge science related to chemical catalysis through summer research and
teacher training workshops. The education outreach initiatives involve the
inclusion of women and underrepresented groups and strengthen competitiveness by
promoting enhancement programs such as LSAMP and McNair program to retain
students.