* 1566382
* CRII: RI: Towards Abstractive Summarization of Meetings
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lu Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 147,649.00

Meeting is a common way to collaborate, share information and exchange opinions.
Many available meeting transcripts, however, are lengthy, unstructured, and thus
difficult to navigate. It would be time-consuming for users to access important
meeting output by reading the full transcripts. Consequently, automatically
generated meeting summaries is of great value to people and businesses alike by
providing quick access to the essential content of past meetings. The core
objective of this research project is to automatically generate abstract-style
focused meeting summaries to help users digest the vast amount of meeting
content in an easy manner. It helps the research community to better understand
the characteristics of the meeting domain, define the summarization task in
meetings in a more consistent way, improve speech summarization evaluation
metrics, and allow the wide use of speech summarization techniques in many
applications (such as generating meeting minutes or lecture outlines). The
broader impacts of this project includes sharing insights on conversational text
with social scientists, providing natural language processing research training
to students, and contributing effective methods for meeting summarization to the
general public.

This research project aims at constructing abstractive summaries of meetings by
developing computational models for important outcome identification and natural
language summary generation, as well as designing objective summary evaluation
methods. Existing meeting summarization systems remain largely extractive: Their
summaries are comprised exclusively of patchworks of utterances selected
directly from the meetings to be summarized. Although relatively easy to
construct, extractive approaches simply present a set of utterances as the final
summary, and fall short of producing concise and readable summaries, largely due
to the spontaneous nature of spoken dialogue. This project formulates a new
framework that accounts for the special aspects of meetings and use them to
identify the utterances that contain important outcomes. A discriminative
learning-based latent variable model trained with rich features is utilized to
jointly capture topic shifting and extract utterances with important outputs. To
perform sentence planning and surface realization in one single process, a
neural network-based natural language generation model is developed. Objective
evaluation methods are designed to measure various aspects for the quality of
generated summaries.