* 1566085
* The quantum mechanics of small molecules nanoconfined in complex chemical environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Zlatko Bacic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Zlatko Bacic and Mark Tuckerman
of New York University are performing theoretical calculations on molecules
confined in cages formed by other molecules, or within a single C60 "Buckyball"
molecule. They are interested in understanding how molecules such as water
(H2O), hydrogen (H2) and other small molecules move when they are in restricted
spaces. This theoretical study will improve the interpretation of experimental
measurements, for example the results of a technique called inelastic neutron
scattering (INS). It will also have implications for the control of material
properties at the molecular level (for advanced "nanoelectronics" applications),
and possibly for the design of efficient and economical hydrogen storage media
for energy technologies. Two graduate students are directly involved as
researchers in this project. The conceptual advances and new results from this
research will be integrated into educational materials for undergraduates.
Finally, methodology developments achieved in this project will be incorporated
into the Principal Investigators' user-friendly software tools that will be made
freely available to the general community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An array of
sophisticated theoretical and computational approaches, some developed in the
realization of this project, ranging from multidimensional bound-state and
scattering methods to path-integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) simulations, is
implemented in these investigations. The INS spectra of H2O confined in C60 are
calculated with high accuracy utilizing the newly developed methodology for
quantum simulation of the INS spectra of nanoconfined polyatomic molecules. The
PIMD simulations of the crystalline H2O in C60, an extraordinary 3D cubic
lattice of highly quantum H2O dipoles, each confined inside C60, shed light on
its dielectric properties and free energetics, including the ferroelectric phase
transition, arising from the many-body dipolar correlations. Path-integral
simulations also probe the temperature and pressure dependence of the free
energetics and approximate diffusion rates of H2 and D2 molecules in the sII
clathrate hydrates, simple and binary, accounting for quantum effects and
framework flexibility. These studies address the fundamental problem of the
diffusion of molecular hydrogen in the quantum regime, inside a chemically and
structurally complex environment. Quantum treatment of the condensed-phase
effects, including the proton disorder of the framework water molecules, on the
"rattling" dynamics and the INS spectra of H2 in the sII clathrate hydrate
addresses the general question of how the dynamical and spectroscopic properties
of guest molecules inside a host environment evolve and approach their bulk
limits.