* 1566253
* RAPID: Illapel Earthquake and Tsunami - Environmental Impacts on the North Central Chile Coast
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2015,11/30/2016
* Benjamin Horton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 11/30/2016
* USD 17,799.00

On September 16, 2015 a Mw8.3 earthquake and accompanying tsunami struck the
coast of north-central Chile. This rapid response project documents the
geomorphic impacts of the event by collecting perishable physical data, which is
being rapidly lost due to post-earthquake reconstruction and post-depositional
change. The project enables comparison of the 2015 Illapel event with
paleoearthquakes and tsunamis discovered during previous NSF-funded fieldwork in
north-central Chile. Rapidly dispatched survey teams will collect data from the
Illapel earthquake and tsunami from existing and new study sites. The field,
laboratory, and modeling research will: (1) assess co-seismic and post-seismic
land-level change; (2) investigate sedimentary deposits and geomorphic impacts
of the tsunami; and (3) compare model simulations of the 2015 tsunami to run-up
measurements and surveying data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the frequency of
earthquakes and tsunamis in north-central Chile, very few studies have been
directed at the geologic impacts of historical and prehistoric events. Geologic
records of earthquakes and tsunamis can expand the range of events available for
study, thereby improving the understanding of subduction zone hazards. The 2015
Illapel earthquake and tsunami provide an invaluable opportunity to examine the
nature of co-seismic land-level change and tsunami evidence in this region. The
project advances desired societal outcomes through full participation of women
in STEM through support of an early career female PI and her female
collaborators, improved well-being of individuals in society through a better
understanding of tsunami hazards in Chile, development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through post-doctoral researcher and student training
and increased partnerships between academia and government researchers as well
as a strong international collaboration. The Earth Sciences Division Deep Earth
Processes Section and the Office of International Science and Engineering
support the project.