* 1566186
* CRII: RI: Accelerated Stochastic Approximation for Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Martha White, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 12/31/2018
* USD 182,616.00

This project develops a new class of accelerated learning techniques for
reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning is an approach to autonomous
decision-making through trial-and-error interaction with an unknown environment,
with a focus on learning incrementally from this stream of data. Reinforcement
learning has significant industrial potential, particularly for real-time
control systems, such as active network management for energy and search-and-
rescue robots, and is already used in a wide range of fields, including
robotics, psychology, animal learning and neuroscience. To improve the practical
application of reinforcement learning, this project proposes a new class of
algorithms with the goal to balance computational complexity and the sample
efficiency of learning, which often requires significant computation and memory.
This space of algorithms that attempt to balance both requirements has been
under-explored for reinforcement learning, and provide exciting opportunities to
impact industrial applications and the growing area of computational
sustainability. An important aspect of this project will be to implement and
study these algorithms on a wide-range of simulated environments, and engage a
diverse group of students through courses and summer
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops efficient incremental
approximations to summarize gathered samples for improved sample efficiency and
an empirical framework to evaluate these algorithms. This new class of
accelerated learning techniques formally trade-off computation and accuracy and
have many promising extensions and research directions, through a variety of
accelerated stochastic gradient descent techniques and incremental matrix
approximations. Further, another focus is to develop tools and novel measures
for the reinforcement learning community that evaluate this balance between
sample efficiency and computational complexity, with the code framework released
through an existing open-source platform. This initial systematic exploration of
these novel optimization variants will lay the foundation for the long-term goal
of improving efficacy of reinforcement learning in industry and for practical
autonomous agents.