* 1566363
* CRII: SHF: Regression Testing for Projects with Distributed Software Histories
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2019
* Milos Gligoric, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 183,000.00

Developers practice regression testing -- running tests against
each&lt;br/&gt;project commit -- to check that project changes do not break
any&lt;br/&gt;functionality. While important, regression testing is expensive
due to&lt;br/&gt;the number of tests and the number of commits. Regression
test&lt;br/&gt;selection (RTS) techniques speed up regression testing by
skipping to&lt;br/&gt;run tests that are not affected by recent changes, and
regression test&lt;br/&gt;prioritization (RTP) techniques reorder tests to run
failing tests&lt;br/&gt;faster. Existing regression techniques analyze only two
adjacent&lt;br/&gt;commits, effectively assuming a linear software history.
However, the&lt;br/&gt;revolution in version-control systems changed the shape
of software&lt;br/&gt;histories. Distributed software histories are complex
graphs of&lt;br/&gt;branches and merges, which do not match the simplistic view
of the&lt;br/&gt;existing techniques. Although existing regression techniques
can be&lt;br/&gt;run if a distributed software history is linearized, these
techniques&lt;br/&gt;underutilize the data available in the distributed software
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To speed up regression testing, the PI proposes to
design techniques&lt;br/&gt;that utilize the data available in the entire
distributed software&lt;br/&gt;history. This project proposes four tasks to
improve RTS and RTP: (1)&lt;br/&gt;non-adjacent commit reuse - discover likely
optimal commit to be used&lt;br/&gt;in each analysis rather than always
analyzing adjacent commits; (2)&lt;br/&gt;multi-commit analyses - design methods
that analyze more than two&lt;br/&gt;commits rather than always analyzing only
two commits; (3)&lt;br/&gt;command-aware methods - specialize the methods for
various commands&lt;br/&gt;that create each commit rather than be command-
unaware; and (4)&lt;br/&gt;unified implementation and evaluation - share the
implementation and&lt;br/&gt;results among techniques, and evaluate the
techniques on open-source&lt;br/&gt;and industrial projects. The broader impacts
of improving RTS and RTP&lt;br/&gt;are to increase developers' productivity and
reduce the resource usage&lt;br/&gt;during testing phases.