* 1566445
* Nanoparticles Embedded in Nanoporous Materials: A New Way to Control Heterogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Chia-Kuang Tsung, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 478,297.00

Professor Chia-Kuang Tsung of Boston College is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of Chemistry to develop a new type of
heterogeneous catalytic system, whereby colloidal nanoparticles are embedded
within crystalline nanoporous metal-organic framework (MOF) materials. The
research seeks to alter the size, structure, and chemical environment of the
catalytic cavities in order to control the catalytic activity and selectivity.
The long-term objective for this research is to use this new concept to design
catalysts for a wide range of reactions. The catalytic study is carried out via
a collaboration with Professor Wenyu Huang of Iowa State University. Success in
this endeavor enhances the understanding of molecular behavior at the interface
between nanopore and metal surfaces and facilitates the development of
heterogeneous catalysts for industrial uses from manufacturing of fine
chemicals, petrochemicals, and agrochemicals to producing liquid fuels. Graduate
and undergraduate students at the two institutions acquire valuable skills in
building catalytic nanostructures and in instrumental characterization of
nanostructures and their use in catalysis. High school teachers in the Boston
area are educated in nanoscience and catalysis to enhance their science
education programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, a synthetic strategy for
the development of new hybrid heterogeneous catalytic systems, whereby colloidal
nanoparticles are embedded within crystalline nanoporous MOF materials, are
developed. The structures are subjected to a battery of surface characterization
techniques including chemisorption, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),
FTIR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD), and low energy
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) combined with electron diffraction
tomography (EDT). Selective acetylene hydrogenation, selective hydrogenation of
alpha, beta-unsaturated aldehydes, and selective cyclic aromatic hydrogenations
are systematically tested to verify the validity of the approach. The long-term
objective for this research is to use this new concept to design catalysts for a
wide range of reactions. Success in this endeavor enhances the understanding of
molecular behavior for the development of heterogeneous catalysts for industrial
uses from manufacturing of fine chemicals, petrochemicals, and agrochemicals to
producing liquid fuels.