* 1566604
* RUI:  Synthesis, Structural and Functional Studies of Bioinspired Macrocyclic Oligoamides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Amelia Fuller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

In this Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Amelia Fuller of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Santa
Clara University is studying the synthesis and properties of large molecules
that mimic compounds found in nature. The synthetic methods to make these
compounds allow Professor Fuller to easily change structure and chemical
composition, ultimately enabling a comparison of these variations on molecular
function. The three-dimensional structures of these molecules and their
abilities to bind to metal ions is studied. These molecules have potential
application as therapeutics and sensors. Experiments are being conducted by
undergraduate students in two venues: in Professor Fuller's independent
laboratory, and in an introductory undergraduate organic laboratory course at
Santa Clara University. Integration of research experiences into the course
curriculum enhances the scientific training of approximately 50 undergraduate
students over the course of the award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macrocyclic
peptide-derived natural products exhibit a range of applications as potential
therapeutics, supramolecular hosts, and metal-binding agents. These inspire the
design, synthesis, and study of diversely functionalized macrocyclic
N-substituted oligoamides. The syntheses provides access to diverse macrocycles
that include either azole heterocycles or carbocyclic aromatic rings in the
oligoamide backbone. Examples to be prepared modulate appended functionality,
ring size, and ring flexibility, all of which are anticipated to confer
interesting conformational and functional contributions. Their structures are
investigated in solution and in the solid state. The capacity of azole-
containing macrocycles to bind metals in analogy to azole-containing peptide-
derived natural products is evaluated.