* 1566160
* SusChEM: Understanding and controlling photoinduced self-exchange reactions across sensitized mesoporous thin films to drive multiple-electron-transfer catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Shane Ardo, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 385,000.00

Professor Shane Ardo of the University of California-Irvine is supported by the
Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate dye-
sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). DSSCs are an inexpensive alternative to
commercial solar cells but have exhibited low solar-energy-conversion
efficiencies that hamper their commercialization. This project is investigating
an alternative reaction to dramatically increase the efficiency of iodide-
containing DSSCs, from their current world-record efficiency of ~12% to over
20%. The project promotes the progress of science and facilitates environmental
stewardship. Outreach workshops accompany this research program with the aim of
increasing the participation and interest of female middle-school students in
research related to solar energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is motivated by a new mechanism of operation for DSSCs and dye-sensitized
functional assemblies for solar fuels where multiple-electron-transfer redox-
shuttle chemistry is driven at molecular electrocatalysts co-anchored to dye-
sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2. Fundamental studies include (i) surface-
confined electrocatalysis of multiple-electron-transfer redox-shuttle oxidation,
(ii) self-exchange electron transfer between molecules anchored to the TiO2
surface, and (iii) (slow) recombination of electrons in TiO2 with oxidized
surface-anchored molecules. Several series of polymeric materials and Pt and Pd
organometallic coordination compounds are synthesized and investigated for their
ability to facilitate inner-sphere iodide oxidation electrocatalysis. The
molecular structure of dyes is varied to identify those with the most rapid
self-exchange electron transfer and slowest recombination. TiO2-bound
electrocatalysts and dyes are studied simultaneously in order to interrogate the
effects of several interacting functions and with the aim of realizing efficient
light-driven iodide electrocatalysis. The electrocatalysis work is performed
using a rotating ring-disk electrode setup and/or cyclic voltammetry to assess
the catalytic competency of the molecules. Dye phenomena are interrogated using
spectroelectrochemistry and nanosecond pump-probe transient-absorption and time-
resolved photoluminescence (polarization) spectroscopies. In addition to
spectrally modeling transient spectra and polarization kinetics, numerical
models and Monte Carlo simulations helps clarify what controls the rate of
(desired) self-exchange electron transfer and (undesired) recombination.