* 1566281
* CRII: CIF: Towards Linear-Time Computation of Structured Data Representations
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Chinmay Hegde, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2019
* USD 173,282.00

Estimating an unknown object from noisy, nonlinear, and incomplete observations
constitutes a basic problem in data science. Standard solutions first assume
that the unknown object obeys a structured mathematical representation, and then
develop optimization algorithms for recovering the parameters of the
representation. Moreover, rigorous analysis reveals that several such algorithms
are statistically optimal. However, despite these advances in statistical
understanding, the role of computation is far less well understood; in many
cases, even the best methods incur a computation time proportional to a high-
degree polynomial in terms of the data size. Therefore, to reap the full
benefits of these methods in applications involving massive data, new
algorithmic approaches are necessary. This research project introduces new
theory and computational tools for learning structured data representations in
linear running time.

The new algorithmic approaches are based on the intuition that challenging
optimization problems encountered in data analysis can be circumvented if the
answers are merely approximate, rather than exact. Establishing precise
tradeoffs between statistical performance, approximation quality, and running
time is a key focus. With this intuition, the project addresses three specific
problems: (i) Reconstructing signals and images from nonlinear observations.
(ii) Recovering graphs from partial observations, such as linear sketches or
inter-node distance measurements. (iii) Estimating multidimensional probability
distributions from random samples. Algorithms developed within the scope of the
project impact applications ranging from medical imaging, computer network
monitoring, social network analysis, and non-destructive evaluation (NDE). All
publications, data, and source code are publicly available. The project involves
the active participation of both graduate and undergraduate students, and
exposes them to a span of areas including mathematics, statistics, computer
science, and optimization.