* 1566392
* SusChEM: Mechanistic Investigations of Oxidative Carbon-Hydrogen Functionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Brenton DeBoef, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 08/31/2020
* USD 370,545.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Brenton DeBoef of the University of Rhode Island. Professor DeBoef is
developing new chemical reactions that convert carbon-hydrogen bonds to carbon-
nitrogen or carbon-carbon bonds. These reactions are significant because most
organic molecules are constructed with a skeletal framework containing carbon-
carbon and carbon-nitrogen bonds, surrounded by many carbon-hydrogen bonds on
their periphery. Consequently, the ability to directly convert selected carbon-
hydrogen bonds to other bonds is a valuable tool for chemists. The key to the
development of these new reactions is the use of new gold and iron-based
catalysts. These new reactions will help chemists construct technologically
relevant, complex molecules such as pharmaceuticals, conducting polymers and
organic dyes. Additionally, Professor DeBoef has formed a joint research and
training program with the Community College of Rhode Island in which students in
the Chemical Technology program synthesize a potential Alzheimer's drug. This
collaboration is having an impact by expanding research infrastructure and
scientific workforce training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective
of the project is to systematically test mechanistic hypotheses concerning the
catalytic synthesis of carbon-carbon (C-C) and carbon-nitrogen (C-N) bonds via
oxidative carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bond activation. Accomplishing these goals
provides fundamental knowledge about the mechanistic steps by which noble or
earth-abundant transition metal catalysts cleave strong, non-acidic C-H bonds.
Specifically, this proposal seeks to discover the active catalytic species in a
gold catalyzed regioselective C-H amination reaction and an iron-catalyzed C-H
arylation reaction. DeBoef has hypothesized that the former reaction is
catalyzed by a unique dimeric gold species. An iron catalyst, whose resting
state is in the unique +1 oxidation state, is hypothesized to catalyze the
latter reaction. The fundamental knowledge gained by this work facilitates the
development of novel chemical reactions and synthetic schemes. The DeBoef group
contributes to the training of a diverse workforce in science by providing an
excellent training environment for both graduate and undergraduate students,
including women and minorities. Additionally, the outreach work with the
Community College of Rhode Island provides aspiring chemical technicians with a
meaningful and marketable research experience.