* 1566600
* Action-at-a-Distance via Ice-Like point Defects: Relating Catalytic Gas-Hydrate Formation and Antifreeze Protein Action to Epitaxial Growth of Gas Hydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* J. Paul Devlin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 320,596.00

Paul Devlin of Oklahoma State University is supported by the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry Division to understand and
modify the basic physical and chemical properties of crystalline hydrates that
contain trapped gas molecules. These gas hydrates are ice-like lattices of water
molecules with incorporated small cages that serve as molecule-size traps for
other species. Gas hydrates are abundant in nature and have significant
technological roles. Much is known about their occurrence and physical
properties; but less about their participation in hydrogen-bond chemistry and
catalytic processes during their formation. A better understanding of these
processes may have implications with respect to the suppression of ice formation
by adsorbed antifreeze-proteins (AFP) as observed in fish and other species.
This project provides research opportunities for a number of undergraduate
students, and involves collaboration with a researcher from Turkey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes both experimental and theoretical
studies. Lattice defects, common in ice and readily generated in much greater
abundance by hydrogen-bonding guests, facilitate rapid hydrate formation by
inducing solid-state molecular mobility. With a proper guest catalyst included
(for example, the ether tetrahydrofuran (THF)), droplets instantly crystallize
as gas-hydrate particles. This catalytic action of defects at micron distances
within gas hydrates is of more general interest. In this project, Prof. Devlin
and his undergraduate research assistants are using Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) spectroscopy to explore how the behavior of ice-like point defects that
underlie molecular actions that may influence the formation of clathrate
hydrates (CH), as well as the function of antifreeze proteins. Insights are also
being gained through ab initio and molecular dynamics (MD) calculations on the
CH systems being studied experimentally. The computational work is being done in
collaboration with Professor Nevin Uras-Aytemiz, of Karabuk University, Turkey.