* 1566136
* Research Data Centers: The Rocky Mountain Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Jason Boardman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project will establish a Federal Statistical Research Data Center in the
Rocky Mountain region. The Rocky Mountain Research Data Center (RMRDC) at the
University of Colorado-Boulder will be a restricted and secure environment where
social scientists and health researchers in this region will have improved
access to confidential federal statistical data. Nearly all major research
institutions near the University of Colorado-Boulder will use and support the
center, including the University of Wyoming, Colorado State University,
University of Colorado-Denver, the Anschutz Medical Campus, the University of
Colorado-Colorado Springs, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and the Colorado State Government. This
project will facilitate cross-institutional research and allow scientists in the
region to study new questions in such areas as international economics,
environmental sciences, and public health. The research to be conducted will
expand knowledge about regional issues, benefiting federal and local government
agencies and citizens of the area. Because this region has an information-based,
knowledge-intensive economy, commercial innovation will be stimulated by the
research advances gained from the federal statistical data. The research to be
conducted will advance scientific knowledge and simultaneously deliver tangible
benefits to the federal statistical system. The project will enhance graduate-
level training in cutting-edge social statistics and support specialized
workforce development across multiple disciplines. Students, faculty, and other
researchers will transfer considerable technical expertise to local and national
organizations as they become familiar with restricted federal data and build
skills in analyzing large and complex datasets.

Several important areas of economics, geography, sociology, and public health
will be emphasized at the RMRDC. One immediate set of projects will study how
the movement of U.S. production overseas affects employment and wages across
detailed locations and occupations, accounting for trade-induced national and
international innovation impacts. A second set will consider how mineral and
energy extraction influences state and local economies within the region. These
and other issues will be addressed using data from the Census of Manufacturing,
the Annual Survey of Manufacturing, and the Longitudinal Business Database.
Spatial scientists will use restricted census data to improve population
estimates for small geographic areas and to enhance methods of disseminating
data for the U.S. Census Bureau. Studies of the effects of changing
environmental conditions and extreme events on human populations will benefit
from having access to more detailed socioeconomic and demographic data. Health
scientists will combine restricted population data with health data from the
National Center for Health Statistics to ask questions about how local
socioeconomic characteristics affect health behavior and outcomes, such as
declines in teenage birth rates, increased early life mortality, and the
protective influences of Hispanic neighborhoods.