* 1566301
* RUI: Preparation and Kinetic Characterization of New Bimetallic Au-M Selective Hydrogenation Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Christopher Pursell, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 357,000.00

This award is funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of
Chemistry. Professors Bert D. Chandler and Christopher J. Pursell of Trinity
University are supported to investigate the advantages of combining inexpensive
metals with gold (Au) to form bimetallic nanoparticle catalysts. The project
addresses the need to find alternatives to scarce and expensive catalysts which
are prohibitive to large-scale chemical production. Improving the fundamental
understanding of bimetallic nanoparticles and their catalytic properties has the
potential to positively impact both the U. S. catalysis industry and the
national economy by providing cheaper materials and consumer products as well as
reducing pollution and industrial waste. The project involves preparing tailored
nanoparticles with an inexpensive metal, such as copper, nickel and iron, at the
core and Au on the outside. This includes finding new synthetic means to
assemble a few hundred atoms from two metals - which is a challenging chemical
synthesis problem. The goals are to evaluate synthetic methods, understand how
the inexpensive metal alters the catalytic chemistry of gold, and test the new
catalysts for improved performance in some industrially important reactions.
Integrating the research with education provides research opportunities for
undergraduate students, giving them hands on experience in this nationally
important area of research and training them to be the next generation of
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nanoparticle and catalyst
synthesis techniques are being employed to prepare bimetallic nanoparticles on
alumina and titania. The primary goal is to take advantage of recent
developments in solution nanoparticle synthesis to develop new routes to
synthetically challenging bimetallic core-shell nanoparticle catalysts. Kinetics
-based analytical techniques are being used to evaluate the new catalysts
including (i) intentional poisoning studies to evaluate relative numbers of
active sites, (ii) Michaelis-Menten analysis of poisoning experiments to
evaluate the effects of thiol poisoning, and (iii) Hammett relationships to
probe changes in nanoparticle surface charge. These studies enable new
quantitative comparisons between catalysts and allow for assessing heterometals
affect the chemistry of Au nanoparticles. In addition, these studies are
addressing fundamental questions regarding the nature of the catalytic active
sites. This project also expands on a recent discovery of "broad band IR
absorption" for Au/TiO2 catalysts, and uses this phenomenon to characterize the
strength of H2 and CO adsorption on the catalysts. These physical
characterization studies, combined with detailed kinetics studies, are enabling
the development of structure-property-activity relationships that guide
researchers in designing the next generation of catalysts. In particular, these
studies are (i) providing clear information regarding how Au nanoparticle
chemistry and catalysts can be tuned using other transition metals, (ii) testing
recent computational models, and (iii) providing insight into potential new
applications for Au based catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.