* 1566407
* Hydrocarbon and ammonia activation by transition metal cations and cluster ions: Spectroscopy and photofragment imaging of reactants and intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2020
* Ricardo Metz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 499,214.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ricardo Metz of the University of
Massachusetts Amherst is studying how metal ions and metal cluster ions interact
with methane and ammonia, and catalyze their conversion to more industrially
useful chemicals. Although natural gas is widely used for heating and to
generate electricity, it is not typically employed as a transportation fuel.
This is because methane (the major component of natural gas) is a gas that
cannot be turned into a liquid at room temperature using pressure. Converting
methane into a compound that is liquid at room temperature, such as a larger
hydrocarbon (e.g., octanes) or methanol, will make it much more useful as a
transportation fuel. Professor Metz is also helping to introduce eighth-grade
girls to research in STEM fields through the Eureka! program. The broader
impacts of this work include potential benefits from improved catalysts as well
as the training of graduate and undergraduate students in mass spectrometry and
laser spectroscopy and in broader skills such as problem solving, instrument
design, data acquisition and analysis and communication of their
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal cluster ion-methane/ammonia complexes are
produced in a laser ablation source, cooled via supersonic expansion and
characterized using vibrational and electronic spectroscopy in a mass
spectrometer. Interaction of the methane or ammonia ligand with the metal
weakens the carbon (C)-hydrogen (H) or nitrogen (N)-H bonds in the ligand, and
this weakening is key to the subsequent catalytic activation of these bonds. The
experiments measure bond weakening and polarization by the metal, as they lead
to red shifts in vibrational frequencies and enhanced IR absorption. Vibrational
spectroscopy also reveals the identity of reaction intermediates and products in
cases where multiple isomers could be involved, as in sequential methane
activation. By studying different metals and clusters with differing numbers of
metal atoms, these studies elucidate the structural and electronic factors that
lead to size-dependent reactivity. Complementary velocity map imaging studies
study ion dissociation dynamics following electronic excitation, measuring
accurate bond strengths and probing the couplings between excited electronic
states. The broader impacts of this work include potential benefits from
improved catalysts as well as the training of graduate and undergraduate
students.