* 1566149
* CRII: CHS: Sharing Over Direct and Extended Social Networks - Towards A Trustworthy and Efficient Sharing Economy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Haiyi Zhu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,355.00

The sharing economy is large and expanding, as demonstrated by the rapid ascent
of services such as Uber and AirBnB. One significant impediment to the growth of
the sharing economy is trust. This investigation will contribute to social
computing research by exploring &amp;#8232;the possibility of building a
trustworthy and efficient sharing economy system that facilitates posting
requests and sharing resources within people's existing direct and extended
social networks. The advantage of a social-network-based sharing economy system
is that social networks produce trust between participants without relying on
third-party institutions or reputation systems; trust is built based on the
personal and interpersonal&amp;#8232;characteristics of the sharing economy
participants. The key challenge of a successful social-network-based sharing
economy system is to design the payment structures and system infrastructures to
efficiently mobilize the direct and extended social
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation focuses on the following three
questions: How to leverage social network structural and contextual information
to produce trust between participants in sharing economy systems? Which payment
structures encourage friends and friends of friends to respond to requests while
also maintaining long-term relationships? 3) Which routing mechanisms are able
to quickly match requests with resources without overloading people's social
network? This investigation will lead to four research outcomes: (1) Advance
theoretical understanding of trust production mechanisms in a sharing economy.
(2) Gain empirical knowledge about people's perception and practices regarding
different types of payment (e.g., cash, gifts, and IOUs)in a social-network-
based sharing economy. (3) Gain empirical knowledge about people's perceptions
and practices around routing their requests across their direct and extended
social networks. (4) Develop a research platform that embodies the findings of
the investigations.