* 1566065
* Generation and Solution Reactivity of Small Molecule Signaling Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* John Toscano, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program is
supporting the work of Professor John P. Toscano of the Chemistry Department at
Johns Hopkins University. The research addresses the generation and solution
reactivity of the biologically relevant small molecules, nitroxyl (HNO, azanone)
and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). HNO has recently received significant attention as a
potential alternative to current treatments of cardiac failure. H2S is a small
molecule signaling agent whose physiological effects in the brain have been well
documented. The chemical mechanisms responsible for these effects, however, are
very poorly understood. This research examines the quantifies and studies the
reactivity of HNO and H2S using a number of advanced analytical techniques. This
research provides broad, comprehensive training for graduate students and
undergraduates, serving them well for future opportunities in both industry and
academia. Undergraduate participation in research continues to be a high
priority since previous students have indicated that this experience was the
highlight of their college careers and was instrumental in clarifying their
interests and preparing them for future studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its
inherent reactivity, HNO must be generated in situ, but only a limited number of
appropriate precursors currently exist. This research project focuses on the
development of novel precursors to nitrosocarbonyl intermediates (RC(O)N=O),
which are reactive electrophiles that react with nucleophiles, including water,
to release HNO. In addition, the development of new methods for the mild
generation of nitrosocarbonyls are developed for use in synthetic applications.
To investigate the chemistry of H2S, specific and sensitive detection methods
are required. Membrane inlet mass spectrometry is used to detect H2S directly in
aqueous solution and to examine its reactivity in detail. A hallmark of HNO
biology is its reactivity with thiols (RSH). Since HNO is also expected to have
significant reactivity with the related species, H2S, selenols (RSeH), and
persulfides (RSSH), the reactivity of these species with HNO is examined and
compared to the well-established reactivity of HNO with thiols. Characterizing
this reactivity is critical to understanding the biological roles of H2S,
selenols, and persulfides. Selenol studies relies on 77Se Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopic studies to distinguish various selenium-containing
species. Since persulfides are inherently difficult to study, as they are
unstable and decompose to a variety of species, photoprecursors are developed
and utilized in nanosecond time-resolved infrared (TRIR) experiments to examine
the reactivity directly. Analogous photoprecursors to thiols, H2S, and selenols
are also examined for comparison. Finally, thermal precursors to persulfides are
utilized in aqueous solution to investigate their reaction with HNO.