* 1566513
* CRII: RI: Efficient Structure Learning and Approximation of Networks of Causally Interacting Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Christopher Quinn, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 10/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

The study of networks is important in numerous scientific domains: neuroscience,
microbiology, social science, and economics, to name a few. A major challenge in
these fields is to identify causal influences in the networks. Experimentation
can directly determine causal influences. However, it can be more costly and
less practical than passively recording activity in the network and inferring
influences from those observations. There are numerous methods that can identify
correlations from observational data, though identifying causal relationships
often requires expert knowledge or strong modeling assumptions. There is a need
for computationally efficient and statistically robust causal inference methods
to extract relevant information from network time-series data to facilitate
human analysis.

This research aims to significantly advance the state of the art in inferring
causal influences between time-series. The research develops new and efficient
algorithms to learn and approximate the structure of a recently proposed
probabilistic graphical model: the directed information graph. The algorithms
find optimal or near-optimal approximations of the network topology that have
user-controlled sparsity levels, such as the number of edges in the graph or the
amount of computation performed. The quality of approximation is measured using
Kullback-Leibler divergence. The work also involves proving correctness of the
algorithms and developing variations that find provably-good approximations
which are robust to noisy or limited data. To achieve these goals, the project
develops new bounds for directed information.