* 1566270
* CRII: RI: Automatically Understanding the Messages and Goals of Visual Media
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2019
* USD 182,590.00

This project develops technologies to interpret the visual rhetoric of images.
The project advances computer vision through novel solutions to the novel
problem of decoding the visual messages in advertisements and artistic
photographs, and thus brings computer vision closer to its goal of being able to
automatically understand visual content. From a practical standpoint,
understanding visual rhetoric can be used to produce image descriptions for the
visually impaired that align with how a human would label these images, and thus
give them access to the rich content shown in newspapers or on TV. This project
is tightly integrated with education. The work is interdisciplinary and can
attract undergraduate students to the research from different fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on three media understanding tasks:
(1) understanding the persuasive messages conveyed by artistic images and the
strategies that those images use to convey their message; (2) exposing a
photographer's bias towards their subject, e.g., determining whether a
photograph portrays its subject in a positive or negative light; and (3)
predicting what part of an artistic photograph a viewer might find most
captivating or poignant. To enable decoding of artistic images, a large dataset
is collected and annotated with a number of artistic properties and persuasion
techniques that are intended for human understanding, then methods are developed
to model visual symbolism in artistic images, as well as adapt positive/negative
effect methods from sentiment analysis. To predict the photographer's bias
towards a subject, a dataset of historical and modern portrayals of minorities
and foreigners is collected, then an algorithm is created that reasons about
body language and 3D layout and composition of the photo. To predict poignance,
eyetracking data on a set of artistic images from famous photographers is
collected, then semantic and connotation conflicts between the objects in the
photographs are analyzed.