* 1566167
* Catalytic Approaches to Dehydrogenation, Energy Storage, and Carbon Management
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Travis Williams, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2019
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professor Travis Williams of the University of Southern California's
Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute is studying hydrogenation and
dehydrogenation catalysis that is directed toward new approaches for carbon
dioxide utilization, hydrogen storage, and fine chemical production. Catalysts
are species that facilitate chemical reactions and are utilized throughout the
chemical industry. This project develops catalysts for several important
processes. These include a catalyst for the removal of hydrogen from formic
acid, which may allow formic acid to be used as a hydrogen carrier, another to
remove hydrogen from glycerol, which may allow the formation of valuable
products from waste materials of biodiesel refining, and a third to convert
carbon dioxide to methanol, an important industrial starting material. This
project includes a K-12 outreach program that brings local high school students
into the research laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three target areas. First, a diiridium catalyst supported by a chelating
phosphorus (P)-nitrogen (N) ligand is being developed for formic acid
dehydration. In related work, a series of iridium and ruthenium complexes
containing bidentate, pyridine containing ligands are being developed as
catalysts for the conversion of glycerol to lactic acid. Finally, ruthenium
complexes containing a borate ligand are being designed for carbon dioxide
reduction. The mechanisms of these processes are being determined by chemical,
kinetic, and spectroscopic studies in order to optimize the catalytic processes.
The selected target reaction have the potential to be licensed commercially or
adapted by others for industrial use. The student-hosted colloquia program
exposes graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral students to a variety of
career possibilities.