* 1566469
* CRII: Cyberlearning: Lived Science Narratives: Meaningful Elementary Science through Wearable Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sharon Lynn Chu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 190,989.00

A key goal of the Next Generation Science Standards is to shift the focus of
science instruction away from the classroom and out into the world. This
research aims to extend what students learn in their science classes beyond the
formal context of the school. The project will investigate an approach whereby
students will be encouraged to think critically about how science is present and
applicable in their daily life experiences through the use of smartwatches. The
approach consists of three main parts. First, students will use smartwatches to
voice-record observations related to a science topic in their everyday lives.
Second, students will be able to reflect on their "lived science stories" and
edit them into fuller narratives via a web interface, thus contributing to their
language arts learning. Third, the students' science stories will be presented
to the school teacher via a web application that will help that teacher to
diagnose and correct their misconceptions and make science teaching more
relevant and meaningful in the classroom. This work could have lasting benefits
to society, not only in terms of the support of children's engagement and
interest in STEM topics but also in the practice of listening, reading and
writing at a critical period of their development.

A server-based system will be designed that integrates (1) a smartwatch
interface for children to audio-record science stories, (2) a web-based
storytelling interface to allow them to transcribe and edit their audio story
snippets, and (3) a web-based instructional support interface in the form of a
curation board that draws together the students' edited science stories for the
teacher. The project will employ an iterative design methodology to develop the
lived-stories interfaces and test them for usability. A school study will be
conducted in two 4th-grade science classes over two science topics at an
elementary school with a high percentage of students from populations typically
underrepresented in STEM fields. The same science classes will be taught with
and without the lived-science narrative technology in a counterbalanced
experimental design. Pre-/post-test quizzes, interviews, self-report
questionnaires, and video-based analysis will be used to assess whether and how
the lived-stories approach may enhance not only students' understanding of
science concepts and their motivation to study science but also the teacher's
instructional strategies. This project will advance our understanding of how
children's narrative way of thinking about their everyday embodied experiences
may be used to scaffold their understanding of science concepts gained from
formal instruction. The research will also contribute knowledge on the design of
novel instructional strategies for elementary science teaching that are anchored
in students' personal experiences as well as guidelines and technical frameworks
for the design of wearables to support science learning.