* 1566212
* GOALI: SusChEM: A Collaboration on Catalysis between UCSB and Novartis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Fabrice Gallou, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division supports this Grant
Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award to Professor Bruce
Lipshutz. Professor Lipshutz is a faculty member at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB). The project is a collaboration between UCSB
and Novartis, a pharmaceutical company. The research undertaken at UCSB focuses
on developing new catalysts for valuable organic reactions, where the amount of
precious metal, palladium, is only needed in parts per million, rather than the
greater levels normally used in palladium-catalyzed reactions. These new
reactions reduce the environmental footprint associated with industrial uses of
palladium as the reactions are done in water, avoiding use of toxic, flammable,
and costly organic solvents. The reagents and experiments under development are
of general synthetic utility, and thus may have an impact in academic settings.
Students in these research groups learn to couple industrial manufacturing with
sustainable chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nanoparticles (NPs) are formed
by treatment of inexpensive iron(III) trichloride (containing ca. 350 ppm
palladium) and a phosphine ligand, with methyl Grignard at room temperature. The
new iron nanoparticles (NPs) containing trace palladium metal (Pd) catalyze
Suzuki-Miyaura cross-couplings reactions. Synthesis of the Novartis drug
valsartan, which contains biaryl residue, is under development using this
technology. These NPs are being investigated as catalysts for other important
Pd-catalyzed reactions, such as Sonogashira couplings. The reactions are
performed in water, thereby eliminating organic solvents as the reaction medium.
The NPs can be recycled, effectively reducing not only the amount of Pd needed,
but also the levels of residual metal found in the products. In addition, it has
been found that these same iron nanoparticles, in the absence of ligand, are
effective catalysts for the reduction of aromatic and heteroaromatic nitro
groups in water. The reduction leads to the corresponding amine, which is a
valuable transformation in the pharmaceutical industry. These new technologies
are developed by graduate students, who receive their training both in synthetic
organic chemistry and in green chemistry. The students involved in the project
are develop the know how to minimize organic and metal waste in reaction
development and scale-up.