* 1566158
* CRII: SHF CSR: A High Performance and Reliable Non-Volatile Memory Framework for Handheld Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Lide Duan, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2019
* USD 174,371.00

Handheld platforms, such as smartphones, tablets, and wearable devices, nowadays
dominate the semiconductor market. Increasingly demanding programs are run by
users on handheld platforms powered by batteries. Therefore, specialized
hardware components, i.e., IP cores, are introduced to improve handhelds? energy
efficiency. However, the memory access patterns of CPUs and IPs are dramatically
different, making main memory a critical bottleneck for a handheld system. Non-
volatile memories, particularly STT-MRAM, are emerging as replacements for the
existing DRAM-based main memory, achieving a wide variety of advantages.
Nevertheless, substituting DRAM with STT-MRAM in handhelds also results in new
design challenges such as read disturbance. Consequently, two read disturbance
mitigation schemes are proposed in this project, constructing a high performance
and reliable memory framework for handheld platforms.

In this research, a flexible STT-MRAM read scheme, namely FlexRead, is proposed
to optimize handheld platform performance and energy efficiency under read
disturbance. FlexRead combines the advantages of two existing data sensing
schemes, dynamically issuing the best sensing scheme based on the runtime system
state. Furthermore, an application flow pattern prediction scheme, namely
FlowPaP, is proposed to identify and remove unnecessary memory restores
originally required for preventing read disturbance. FlowPaP analyzes the data
flow behavior in the applications running on handhelds, recognizing that the
memory is in a consistent loop of being alternately written and read. These two
proposed schemes optimize multiple handheld platform design aspects, thus having
a transformational impact on the handheld research community, industrial
products, and even society. The discovered read disturbance issue is an
important and realistic design challenge for future handheld platform
generations. Moreover, the proposed research can benefit the courses and
research seminar taught by the PI, also advancing the education of students from
highly diverse backgrounds, e.g., those from under-represented groups in the
STEM field.