* 1566007
* New Nonheme Iron Complexes for Nitric Oxide Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* David Goldberg, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2020
* USD 495,000.00

The support provided by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division
allows the research group of Professor David Goldberg in the Department of
Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University to develop a new family of iron-containing
compounds that activating nitrogen oxide or NOx species. The chemical changes of
NOx species, including nitric oxide and its related molecules nitroxyl (HNO) and
nitrite ion (NO2-), are critically important for a number of biochemical
processes, including cell signaling, immune response, and therapeutic
strategies. Nitric oxide is a key neurotransmitter in the brain and throughout
the nervous system. There is also significant current interest in the role of
HNO in the brain and how it is generated. In this project, Dr. Goldberg and his
group construct new iron complexes that bind and react with NOx species. They
carry out chemical changes on these molecules related to enzymatic processes.
Graduate and undergraduate students are educated and trained in experimental
chemical science. An outreach program for students underrepresented in science
involving a Baltimore City high school is underway.

The synthesis of a new family of polydentate ligands and their related nonheme
iron complexes is under investigation for the binding and activation of NOx
species. The oxidative and reductive transformations of several forms of NOx are
examined. The observed reactivity is related to enzymatic processes that occur
in iron-containing nitric oxide reductases, nitrite reductases, and nitric oxide
dioxygenases. In addition, the fundamental reactivity of NOx species, which are
potent signaling molecules, is important to a range of processes in the brain
and nervous system. Through ligand design, the steric and electronic properties
at the metal center are controlled. The study of these complexes may provide
insights regarding how structure relates to function in iron-mediated NOx
reactivity. Specific efforts will focus on the reduction of NO to NO-/HNO and
N2O, the oxidation of NO to NO2- and NO3-, and the reduction of nitrite (NO2-)
by biologically relevant reducing agents. The educational plans include an
outreach program to a local Baltimore City high school that provides a hands-on
laboratory experience.