* 1566059
* Highly Active Neodymium Catalysts for Polymerization of Dienes and Vinyl Monomers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Mihaela Stefan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

Professor Mihaela C. Stefan of the University of Texas at Dallas is supported by
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop
polymerization catalysts based on neodymium (Nd) metal complexes. The objective
is to provide research laboratories and the chemical industry with an
alternative for the well-known Ziegler-Natta (ZN) catalyst system, which is
widely used in industry for the preparation of polymers (large multi-unit
molecules) from smaller molecules. The proposed Nd-based catalytic systems have
the advantage of producing polymers from unusual starting materials, in
reactions that are beyond the capabilities of current ZN catalysts. The
versatile nature of the Nd-based catalytic system enhances the likelihood of
success for the synthesis of stereoregular (highly ordered) polymers from
different classes of small organic compounds. If successful, the project is
likely to have immediate impact on the commercial production of polymeric
materials, such as elastomers, adhesives and man-made fibers. Students working
on the project are trained in organic and polymer synthesis and product
characterization techniques. Female high school students are given the
opportunity to participate in summer research to gain skills in a chemistry
laboratory environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop a novel catalytic system composed of NdCl3 and phosphate ligands for
the polymerization of a variety of monomers, such as dienes, styrene and polar
vinyl monomers. A mechanistic investigation of these polymerizations will be
conducted to understand the function of each component and to optimize the
reaction conditions for the production of polymers with high stereoregularity
and well-defined molecular weights. The variation of the phosphate ligands
around the Nd metal center is expected to influence the stereoregularity,
molecular weights, and polydispersities of the synthesized polymers. The crystal
structures of the synthesized neodymium catalysts is determined and correlated
with their catalytic activity. The use of these catalysts for copolymerization
of dienes with polar vinyl monomers demonstrates the versatility of the
neodymium catalytic systems. The ability to polymerize polar vinyl monomers is
especially attractive because the conventional Ziegler-Natta catalysts are not
active for polymerization of polar vinyl monomers.