* 1566563
* Educating Technicians in Energy Efficiency
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Allen Teel, Lurleen B. Wallace Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,899.00

Improved energy efficiency in manufacturing and transportation are of vital
importance to the United States. This project at Lurleen B. Wallace Community
College (LBW) in rural South Alabama, which is designed to enhance energy
efficiency, will have a widespread impact by meeting the needs of students,
educators, and regional employers. The primary goal of the project is to meet
emerging needs for increased energy efficiency by improving the quality of
technician education in Industrial Electronics and Diesel and Heavy Equipment
Mechanics. Faculty will actively recruit diverse student groups including
veterans and other non-traditional groups to programs through career fairs,
campus visits, and visits to military installations. The program responds to
industry demands as graduates of the Industrial Electronics program will have
experience with Siemens Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs), which are widely
used in industry for their efficiency and scalability. Graduates of the Diesel
and Mechanics program with preparation on natural gas engines will serve
employers not only on offshore rigs, but also in the transportation industry
with fleet vehicles and local and regional carriers. Diesel technicians who have
experience with these engines are integral to the continued growth and evolution
of the natural gas industry. By better preparing program graduates and providing
instructional resources for classroom integration, the college will advance
technician education in the diesel and electronics
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The college plans to meet its project goals through
professional development for faculty, to include instruction in natural-gas
engines and Siemens components, and through respective curriculum revisions that
will ensure graduates are more fully prepared for the workforce. Students
enrolled in the Industrial Electronics and Diesel and Heavy Equipment Mechanics
programs will receive an enhanced curriculum taught by instructors who have
participated in extensive professional development in their fields. The
inclusion in the curriculum of instruction on natural gas engines will assure
that the enhanced programs meet the needs of employers as these additions
respond directly to industry demands. Technicians with this additional knowledge
will be more flexible and better able to respond to the developments in their
field. During the professional development phase of the project, faculty will
participate in rigorous industry training and gain the knowledge and expertise
needed to master emerging trends, expand their technical programs, and meet
workforce demands. During the curriculum revision phase, faculty will
collaborate with one another, the Dean of Applied Technologies, their technical
advisory committees, and state-wide curriculum development committees to ensure
the creation of well-developed course objectives, activities, and student
learning outcomes. The programs will include additional mathematics and science
courses, and more mathematics and science will be integrated into the technical
courses. Extensive assessment of student learning will ensure that students are
graduating with the knowledge and skills required to be successful in their
field. Articulation agreements are in place with two universities for students
who wish to continue their educations.