* 1566588
* Catalytic activation of thioesters via nucleophilic acyl substitution
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Vladimir Birman, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2020
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the research program of Professor Vladimir Birman. Professor Birman is
a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in
Saint Louis. Prof. Birman's research interests revolve around chiral organic
compounds: compounds whose structures exist as distinct mirror images called
enantiomers. The two enantiomers of the same compound often display different
biological activities, which becomes vitally important in the case of chiral
pharmaceuticals. The wrong enantiomer of a drug may have reduced pharmacological
activity or even be toxic. Therefore, there is considerable interest in
developing methods for preparing chiral compounds in the form of single
enantiomers. Selective catalysis, which is the main focus of research in the
Birman group, is an economical and waste-free approach to accomplishing this
goal. The present project aims to explore a new family of reactions using
Birman's chiral catalysts, which previously were developed in the Birman group
and are currently used by many researchers worldwide. These reactions provide
access to new classes of chiral compounds that may find applications as drug
development and biological studies. Prof. Birman's research program, which
encompasses many areas of synthetic organic chemistry, is suited for educating
students at all levels: graduate students involved in research, undergraduates
receiving training in the Birman lab, and those students taking Advanced Organic
Lab under his supervision. In addition, Professor Birman's outreach activities
in the public schools of Saint Louis are designed to spark the interest of
elementary school students in science.

The overarching theme of the proposed project is the Lewis base-catalyzed
enantioselective activation of thioesters. Specifically, the Birman group is
developing an asymmetric catalytic rearrangement of alpha,beta-unsaturated
thioesters into zwitterionic enolates, followed by a formal cycloaddition with
pi-electrophiles. The resulting polycyclic structures, adorned with several
stereocenters, are expected to be important in natural product synthesis and
medicinal chemistry. These polycyclic products are difficult to access by other
synthetic methods. In addition, the enantioselective alcoholysis of racemic
thioesters is being explored, both in static and dynamic kinetic resolution
mode. Amidine-based enantioselective acylation catalysts previously developed in
the Birman laboratory are employed to achieve both of these new transformations.
The educational plan associated with this research program includes further
development of the organic chemistry component of the undergraduate curriculum
at Washington University and continued outreach to elementary/middle school
students in the public schools of Saint Louis.