* 1566071
* Modular Synthesis of Natural Products via Site- and Stereoretentive Couplings of Secondary Csp3 Boronic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Martin Burke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2019
* USD 510,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports the
research of Professor Martin Burke in the Department of Chemistry at The
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Professor Burke and his students are
developing new methods for assembling molecular building blocks that contain
non-planar "sp3" carbon atoms. Such methods have the potential to enable a
simple, building block-based approach for making many different types of
molecules with well-defined three-dimensional shapes. Such molecules have many
potential applications, including serving as medicines, biological probes,
diagnostics, agrochemicals, materials, molecular technologies, perfumes,
sweeteners, and many other household products. One goal of the research is to
develop new ligands for palladium that promote such assembly reactions in a
manner that allows the three-dimensional shapes of the building blocks to be
translated into the shapes of the final products. The project also aims to
incorporate these new coupling methods and a readily accessible collection of
building blocks into a fully automated platform for on-demand small molecule
synthesis of a large family of biologically active molecules found in nature.
This research is well suited for the education of scientists at all levels.
Professor Burke's group is also well positioned to provide the highest level of
education and training for students from groups that are underrepresented in
science.

The development of new methods for site- and stereospecific cross-coupling of
stereogenic sp3 carbon atoms largely comprise an actionable roadmap toward
automated building block-based construction of many different types of small
molecules. The proposed studies aim to develop such methods for coupling
unactivated chiral secondary non-racemic boronic acids that possess one or more
stereogenic sp3-hybridized carbon atoms. New phosphine ligands are targeted that
promote such couplings by favoring transmetalation and reductive elimination at
sp3-hybridized carbons while eliminating or minimizing undesired beta-hydride
elimination reactions. These methods are evaluated for their capacity to enable
fully automated total synthesis of an entire family of complex natural products
from pre-assembled chiral building blocks. This research yields new strategies
and methods that enable both the manual and automated synthesis of many
different types of chiral Csp3-rich small molecules. This research program also
contributes to the training of graduate and undergraduate students at the
frontiers of organic synthesis.