* 1566283
* Exploring Synergy of Composition-Tunable Nanoalloys for Catalytic Oxidation of Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 362,419.00

Professor Chuan-Jian Zhong of SUNY at Binghamton is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis program of the Division of Chemistry to design and prepare alloy
catalysts, consisting of combinations of two or three metals. The research
discovers new and more robust and effective catalysts for hydrocarbon oxidation
by combining platinum, palladium, or gold with other transition metals in
optimum compositions and structures. These catalysts are essential for several
important practical applications, such as the elimination of hydrocarbon
pollutants from vehicle emissions, the production of hydrogen for fuel cells,
and the production of chemical building blocks for the manufacture of industrial
chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Course and laboratory modules are developed to
engage students in clean energy and clean environment research and education.
The energy and environmental sustainability theme of the project provides a
platform for outreach through on-campus programs specifically designed to help
students from underrepresented minorities, such as the Bridges to the
Baccalaureate and the McNair Scholars programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to establish design principles for alloy nanocatalysts that
exhibit synergistic, multifunctional activities for the catalytic oxidation of
hydrocarbons such as propane or ethanol. Nanocatalysts of noble metals, such as
platinum, palladium, or gold, alloyed with other transition metals are
synthesized with tunable compositions. Specifically, the investigation
determines how alloy nanocatalyst composition, structure, and shape control
surface reaction mechanisms, adsorption sites, and intermediate species. These
fundamental issues are addressed by: (1) preparation of nanoalloy catalysts on
different supports with controlled compositions and shapes; 2) characterization
of surface species during the catalytic oxidation using in situ time-resolved
diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy and other
complimentary techniques; and 3) correlating the structure and composition of
surface sites with the catalytic properties.