* 1566272
* The influence of hydrogen bonding on the atmospheric chemistry of peroxy and carboxylic acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Amitabha Sinha, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2021
* USD 531,965.00

In this project funded jointly by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms A Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Atmospheric Chemistry
Program in the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences, Professor Amitabha
Sinha of University of California San Diego investigates the role played by
hydrogen bonding in influencing the chemistry of oxygenated organic molecules of
atmospheric importance. Organic molecules released into the atmosphere through
anthropogenic and biogenic activity undergo reactions that result in the
formation of oxidized products. The enhanced polar character of these oxidized
products results in their ability to interact through hydrogen bonding. Although
weak, hydrogen bonds are pervasive. Investigating the subtle impact of hydrogen
bonding on the chemistry of oxygenated organics contributes to improving our
understanding of atmospheric processes that control urban air quality as well as
atmospheric radiative balance. In addition, the research permits the training
and education of students at the graduate and undergraduate. The project also
provides opportunities for high school students and students from
underrepresented groups to be exposed to university
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, vibrational overtone excitation
combined with laser induced fluorescence detection, kinetic analysis, and
computational chemistry is used to investigate the impact of hydrogen bonding on
the chemistry of several oxygenated organic molecules. In the first phase of the
work the impact of intramolecular hydrogen bonding on the vibrational
photochemistry and unimolecular dissociation dynamics of peroxyacids is probed.
In the second phase of the study the ability of carboxylic acids to promote
hydrogen atom transfer reactions through intermolecular hydrogen bonding is
investigated. Organic acids are ubiquitous in the atmosphere as they are
byproducts of hydrocarbon oxidation. Their ability to catalyze hydrogen atom
transfer reactions makes them an important contributor to various atmospheric
processes including aerosol growth.