* 1566532
* CRII: SaTC: Robust and Platform Independent Recovery of Design Features from C++ Binaries
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Aravind Prakash, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 10/31/2019
* USD 191,000.00

Computer software play a ubiquitous role in the modern way of life. Attacks
against vulnerable software lead to compromise and loss of financial and
personal information. While the application stores and the software
manufacturers may strive to provide vulnerability-free software, the onus to
defend against attacks and ensure integrity of one?s personal information and
resources is on the end-user. However, due to the lack of source code, (1) end
users are unable to identify and fix vulnerabilities in the software they run,
and (2) the open source community is unable to detect violation of software
licensing terms by closed source software. This project aims to recover design
information from binaries in a platform-neutral and obfuscation resilient
manner. As a direct consequence, this project promises advancement in end-user-
level security, and for the first time, facilitates detection of design-level
plagiarism in software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to reconstruct a
design profile of a C++ binary by leveraging the unavoidable information leakage
that occurs due to adherence to Application Binary Interface (ABI)
specification. It takes advantage of the platform-independent nature of ABI
specification to offer both platform neutrality and obfuscation resilience in
design recovery. First, traditional static and dynamic binary analysis
approaches are employed in order to extract design elements and design pertinent
features. Then, theorem proving is utilized to establish relationship between
various design-level program entities. This project views adherence to ABI as a
source of design leakage, exploits the leakage to recover design information,
and investigates ways to minimize the leakage while maintaining interoperability
through adherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this research will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and software release. Based on
the research, new course materials and professional training tutorials will be
developed, to help future security engineers and researchers gain in-depth
knowledge about design recovery.