* 1566428
* New methods for non-linear spectroscopy of molecules in complex environments by combination of coupled-cluster and polarizable embedding approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Anna Krylov, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2019
* USD 506,657.00

Anna Krylov of the University of Southern California is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop
robust and accurate theoretical methods and computational tools for modeling
properties of molecules when they interact with light. This award is cofunded by
the Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering program in the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. Krylov and her research group are
interested in properties known as non-linear optical (NLO) properties. NLO
properties are exploited in novel technologies such as microfabrication, 3D
optical data storage and nanolithography, ultra-fast electro-optic modulation
and switching, bioimaging, photodynamic therapies, and a variety of other nano-
bio-photonics applications. The new tools for interpretation of experimental
spectra and for the in silico design of new materials with properties matching
particular application are expected to impact both fundamental and applied
research (such as bioimaging and molecular electronics) on NLO properties.
Computer software generated from this research are made available to the broader
research community through the widely-used Q-Chem and Spartan package. Once
mature, the software is distributed as open-source code.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis of this research is on open-shell species and
molecules in complex environments. The proposed developments capitalize on the
work conducted in the previous funding period, which included developing
formalisms and implementing calculations of electronic factors for two-photon
absorption (2PA) and static and dynamic polarizabilities within the coupled-
cluster (CC) and equation-of-motion (EOM) family of methods. The main thrust the
current work is to develop the formalisms and codes: (i) to include the effect
of the environment (solvent, molecular solids, proteins) via the Effective
Fragment Potential method; and (ii) for higher-order NLO properties within the
EOM-CC framework, such as three-photon absorption moments and
hyperpolarizabilities. The planned applications of the new methods include
investigations of fundamental aspects of non-linear spectroscopy, such as: (i)
the extent of (non)-locality of NLO properties and the convergence of these
properties computed within polarizable embedding schemes with respect to the
size of the QM region; (ii) the relative importance of the electrostatic
perturbation and polarization response of the solvent versus the contribution
from delocalized excited states (such as charge transfer to solvent states); and
(iii) the effect of electron correlation on NLO properties, with an emphasis on
open-shell systems.will be distributed as open source, similarly to our tensor
library and other Q-CHEM modules. Professor Krylov is an active contributor to
the Women in Science and Engineering program at USC and beyond. She continues to
maintain and develop the ??Women in Theoretical and Computational Chemistry,
Material Science, and Biochemistry?? webpage, promoting research by women in
these areas.