* 1566132
* RUI:  Determination of the orientation of 13C labeled specific residues of alpha-synuclein(61-95) in the pore structure formed on supported phospholipids bilayer by IRRAS
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Chengshan Wang, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2020
* USD 199,878.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Chengshan Wang of the Chemistry Department
at Middle Tennessee State University is studying the structure of aggregates of
a protein, alpha-synuclein, that is abundant in the human brain and that has
been linked to Parkinson's disease. Alpha-synuclein forms two types of
aggregates: mature fibrils and oligomers. The mature fibrils are known to be
non-toxic, but oligomers can cause the death of the neuronal cells by forming
pore structure in the cell membrane. Understanding the structure of oligomer
aggregates should provide clues for the development of therapeutic agents for
Parkinson's disease. Undergraduate and graduate students working on this project
include first-generation and underrepresented minority students who are learning
about research areas that could influence their career choices. In addition, a
new laboratory experiment on peptide synthesis for a graduate level organic
chemistry class is being developed.

Various techniques have been developed to determine the structure of proteins.
Among them, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) provides a fast
response and has been used to evaluate various conformations (such as alpha-
helix, beta-sheet, unstructured conformation) in proteins and peptides. This
method utilizes the amide I band, which arises from the stretching mode of the
carbonyl group in the backbone amide bonds. Traditional FTIR can only provide
information about an overall fraction of the conformations. To expand its
capability, 13C labels can be introduced to the carbonyls in the backbone amide
bonds and a new band (the 13C amide I band) can be generated to determine the
conformation of specific residues. In this project, 13C labels are introduced
into the sequence of alpha-synuclein to study the conformation of the oligomers
of alpha-synuclein at the residue level. In addition, Infrared Reflection-
Absorption Spectroscopy is used to address the orientation of 13C labeled
carbonyls. With both conformation and orientation information, the structure of
alpha-synuclein can be evaluated in phospholipid bilayer structures.