* 1566049
* CRII: ACI: Algorithms and Tools to Facilitate the Development of High Fidelity Reactive Molecular Dynamics Models
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Hasan Metin Aktulga, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Atomistic simulations enable understanding, analysis, and design of complex
systems at spatio-temporal scales not easily accessible to experimental
observation. Conventional molecular dynamics techniques have been applied with
great success in application domains ranging from materials design to
biophysical systems. Recent developments in reactive molecular dynamics have
significantly extended the application scope of these techniques to systems that
involve chemical bond activity. The core of these reactive atomistic simulations
is a model for atomic interactions that describes the chemical structure of the
domain, as well as its time evolution. This project aims to build a
cyberinfrastructure to facilitate the development of highly resolved models of
atomic interactions, along with their associated parameterizations. It will
accomplish these goals through novel algorithms and software tools, reference
datasets, and comprehensive validation in diverse application domains. The
resulting infrastructure can enable computational scientists to develop high
fidelity reactive force fields in a time and cost effective way. As a result,
the accuracy and scope of reactive atomistic simulations have the potential to
be increased significantly. The intellectual contributions of the project are
complemented by education and outreach efforts that focus on interdisciplinary
education through development and dissemination of instructional modules,
publications, and presentations. Outreach efforts focus on recruitment of
underrepresented minorities at the graduate level, and integration of
undergraduate students into research efforts at an early stage. Therefore, this
research aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare.

This project focuses on algorithms and software for the development and
optimization of force fields for reactive molecular dynamics (MD) techniques.
The fidelity of these simulations is critically dependent on the functional
forms and parameterizations of the inter-atomic potentials. Traditionally, the
development of inter-atomic potentials has involved significant domain
expertise, and is highly time and labor-intensive. This project aims to design a
powerful new cyberinfrastructure that integrates extraction of reference
datasets, model selection and optimization algorithms, and comprehensive
validation, to enable rapid prototyping and deployment of complex reactive
atomistic models. In particular, reference datasets are selected for coverage as
well as their impact on the inter-atomic potential, using novel procedures to
minimize the requirements on quantum mechanical screenings. The process of
optimizing the force field leverages this reference set and introduces a
histogram based optimization technique for parameter sampling and selection.
Finally, a novel API is proposed to enable the translation of suitable force
fields from high-level mathematical descriptions into efficient parallel
software. By automating each labor-intensive step along the way, the proposed
framework aims to form a first-of-its-kind environment for development of high
fidelity reactive MD models. Given the applicability of reactive MD models from
materials modeling to biophysical simulations, the proposed cyberinfrastructure
can help advance the state-of-the-art in advance materials design and drug
discovery.