* 1566430
* Chemical Synthesis Using Carbon-Carbon Bond Activation/Cleavage of Carvone Derivatives
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Richmond Sarpong, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 04/30/2019
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Richmond Sarpong of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of California, Berkeley is developing new strategies to build complex
organic compounds called natural products. Many natural products possess
important biological activities that may be useful for developing treatments for
a variety of diseases, including cancer, and understanding biochemical
processes. Prof. Sarpong is studying how to start with an organic compound
called carvone, that is found in caraway seeds, spearmint, mandarin orange peels
and dill, and transform it into more complex, biologically-active compounds
phomactin and taxagifine. Phomactin has activity against the proteins that lead
to blood clotting, and taxagifine is closely related to the anticancer agent,
taxol. The chemical methods and strategies for molecule synthesis under
investigation provide new ways to make these two natural products that may be
applicable to preparing other natural product compounds. Professor Sarpong's
group has a continuing commitment to introducing the principles of green
chemistry to under-represented minority students at the middle school, high
school and college level.

Hydroxylated pinene derivatives that are easily accessed in two steps from
carvone can be applied in either rhodium- or palladium-catalyzed carbon-carbon
bond activation reactions. The products of these reactions are cyclohexenones
bearing an alpha quaternary center. These structural motifs map onto myriad
natural products including the phomactins and taxoids, taxinine and taxagifine.
Applications of this carbon-carbon bond activation methodology to the syntheses
of these molecules are being pursued. A plan for the synthesis of phomactin A is
being studied that utilizes a "carvone molding" strategy employing carbon-carbon
bond activation and carbon-hydrogen bond activation steps. A stereospecific
total synthesis of taxagifine from carvone is being developed that provides a
blueprint for the syntheses of other taxoids bearing unusual hydroxylation at
carbon atoms C16 and C17.