* 1566310
* Tailoring the Nanoenvironment of Diamond-Supported Noble Metal Nanoparticles for Control of Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Shumaker-Parry, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 458,000.00

Professors Jennifer Shumaker-Parry and Ilya Zharov of the University of Utah are
supported by the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of Chemistry
to develop a new strategy for the preparation of catalysts. This strategy
involves the formation of carefully and precisely structured polymers on diamond
surfaces and the use of this modified surface to support precious metal catalyst
particles. The low cost, chemical stability, and potential versatility of
synthetic diamond are attractive features relative to more common support
materials. It is further hypothesized that the structure and properties of the
polymer surface modifiers will enhance catalyst stability and allow for control
of catalyst reactivity. The knowledge gained from this research is applicable to
catalysts made from non-precious metals and support materials and to a wide
range of chemical reactions. The broader commercial impact is the potential to
create new products and technologies via chemical catalysis. The broader
educational impacts are the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
an interdisciplinary scientific environment. Specific outreach activities in
partnership with the ACCESS Program for women and with a MESA Club stimulate the
interest of middle and high school students from underrepresented groups in
pursuing science careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of
the project are: (1) to investigate synthetic nanodiamond as a versatile, robust
support for noble metal nanoparticle catalysts and study the growth of polymer
brushes on these supports; (2) to explore the effect of the nanoenvironment
created by polymer brushes with varying length, grafting density, polarity,
structure and chemical composition on nanoparticle stability and catalytic
performance, and (3) to study the use of responsive polymers to modify metal
nanocatalyst chemistry. In addition, judicial selection of polymer brush
architecture and its control of the catalyst nanoenvironment is investigated to
improve catalyst productivity (activity, turnover, life time) and minimize
catalyst particle aggregation.