* 1566435
* Electron Delocalization in Saturated Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2019
* USD 567,605.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism B Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Josef Michl in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Professor
Michl and his students are examining the nature of bonding in electronically
excited states of chains of silicon atoms. These studies have practical
implications for understanding fatigue in amorphous silicon solar cells exposed
to ultraviolet radiation as well as understanding conductivity in materials
comprised of silicon chains. The project is providing opportunities for the
training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
interested in lasers, in the interaction of light with matter, and in
international science. Emphasis is being placed on attracting students to STEM
fields, including those from groups that are presently underrepresented.

The current understanding of electron delocalization in saturated molecules such
as oligosilanes and polysilanes (silicon analogs of saturated hydrocarbons) lags
far behind that in conjugated pi-electron systems. Geometrical distortions
induced in peralkylated oligosilane chains by light absorption are particularly
intriguing. Fluorescence reveals that they are negligible in long chains and
very pronounced in chains containing fewer than about seven silicon atoms.
Calculations suggest that the distortions can be described as a transformation
of one or two of the silicon atoms from the normal tetrahedral to trigonal
bipyramidal geometry, in which silicon used five "valence" orbitals instead of
the usual four. Such expansion of the silicon valence shell would have
fundamental importance for bonding theory. Professor Michl's group is attempting
to verify the theoretical prediction experimentally, using vibrational
spectroscopy of the short-lived excited species. The same methods of transient
vibrational spectroscopy are useful for other photophysical problems, in
particular in the investigation of materials known to undergo efficient singlet
fission, such as the higher polyacenes and derivatives of isobenzofuran. The
work involves continuing international collaborations, providing undergraduate
students a research experience, and giving classroom demonstrations to high
school students.