* 1566041
* SusChEM: Molecular Information and Crystal Control in Solid State Photochemical Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2019
* USD 546,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Miguel A. Garcia-Garibay of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California-Los Angeles is
establishing new synthetic strategies to transform simple chemicals into more
complex, high value substances, by taking advantage of reactions that occur
under the high order and rigidity of the crystalline state. Their strategy
relies on the selection of structures that are known to form highly reactive
intermediates when activated by the absorption of ultraviolet light. By
executing those reactions in the crystalline state, instead of doing them in
liquids, they are able to obtain nearly pure solid products with no need for
solvents, catalysts or additional reagents. This project is in the SusChEM
portfolio as the reactions do not use solvent and require no energy for the
separation and removal of byproducts. This project provides an excellent
multidisciplinary training ground for several students. Graduate students and
summer undergraduates from three partnering Historically Black Colleges and
Universities institutions: Howard University, Clark Atlanta University, and
Spellman College, are involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having implemented robust
strategies to engineer reactions in crystals by selecting stable molecules that
generate highly reactive intermediates, this project addresses the solid state
photodecarbonylation of hexasubstituted ketones and the photodenitrogenation of
triazolines, pyrazolines, and selected aromatic azides. Radical pairs,
biradicals, and nitrenes are generated in the crystalline state in highly
exothermic processes from the excited state of the reactants, and their product
formation and kinetics are analyzed in detail. In the solid state, radical-
radical combination reactions with retention of stereochemistry, and selective
nitrene insertions occur. Photochemical reactions are carried out in well-
characterized crystalline phases and their transformations from the solid phase
of the reactant to the solid phase of the product are analyzed by thermal
analysis and spectroscopic means. This characterization is done in order to
determine the corresponding phase diagrams and the conditions required for clean
and efficient reactions. Detailed reaction mechanisms are explored by taking
advantage of structural information available from single crystals X-ray
diffraction and kinetic measurements obtained from laser flash photolysis
measurements using nanocrystals suspended in water.