* 1566361
* RUI: Mechanisms, Kinetics, and Dynamics of Carbene Additions to Diarylcyclooctynes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Dina Merrer, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2022
* USD 310,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Dina C. Merrer in the Department of
Chemistry at Barnard College. Professor Merrer and her students use a highly
collaborative approach to investigate the mechanism for addition of carbenes to
strained cyclooctynes. Carbenes are highly reactive groups with only two bonds
to carbon instead of the usual four. Cyclooctynes are the smallest cyclic
compounds which can accommodate a carbon-carbon triple bond yet still be stable
at room temperature. These substances have relevance to chemical biology and
materials science. The combination of carbenes with cyclooctynes produces
chemical reactions with unusual features of reactivity. The project involves
Barnard undergraduates in research activities at Barnard as well as at Colby
College, UCLA, and the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Under development is a
modular program on food chemistry for high school teacher professional
development. This teacher development program is aligned with New York State
K-12 science learning standards and partners with Barnard NSF-funded Noyes STEM
Teacher Scholars and Washington Heights Expeditionary Learning School (WHEELS).
This program serves as a model for a future science teacher professional
development academy at Barnard, coordinated by Barnard's Education Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Merrer group studies the influence of nonstatistical
dynamics on the mechanism of carbene additions to strained carbon-carbon pi
bonds. Both experiment and theory are used to investigate dichlorocarbene and
phenylchlorocarbene additions to dibenzocyclooctyne (DIBO) and
dinaphthocyclooctyne (DINO). The objectives of this research are to: (a)
investigate the effect of microwave heating in thermal bimolecular reactions of
carbenes; (b) probe dynamically affected systems experimentally by entering the
mechanistic sequence at a critical midway point; and (c) obtain spectroscopic
and nanosecond kinetics data on these systems. Synthesis, steady-state
photochemistry, product analysis, characterization, and calculations are carried
out by undergraduates at Barnard College. Collaborative studies on matrix
isolation spectroscopy, flash photolysis and quantum chemistry are carried out
at the University of Wisconsin, Colby College and UCLA, respectively. Outreach
activities to high-need New York City high school students and their teachers,
including the beginnings of a science teacher professional development academy,
are part of the funded project.