* 1566259
* CRII: ACI: Efficient Radiative Heat Transfer Modeling In Large-Scale Combustion Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Xinyu Zhao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 182,999.00

Thermal radiation is an important but less adequately understood heat transfer
process for large-scale thermal systems. Radiative heat transfer accounts for
more than 70% of the total heat transfer to the ambient environment in large-
scale fires. Pollutants that are produced by combustion systems, such as
particulate matters, NOx and SOx (main contributor to acid rain), are highly
sensitive to the thermal effects of radiative heat transfer. To correctly
predict fire propagation and pollutant emission, and to guide power plant
retrofit, high-fidelity radiation modeling for large-scale combustion systems is
needed. However, the expensive computational cost of high-fidelity radiation
models, their intensive memory requirements, and poor scaling performances have
traditionally prevented their applications beyond toy or small-scale problems.
Modern high performance computing systems have evolved to a stage where massive
parallelism can be harnessed but memory-per-core is decreasing. Therefore, new
modeling and parallelism strategies for thermal radiation prediction are
required to leverage the power of current and future cyber-infrastructure. To
advance the understanding of the thermal radiation processes, and to enable the
application of predictive models to practical engineering systems, this CRII
project aims at optimizing the solution algorithms and parallelism strategies of
high-fidelity radiation models for the modern heterogeneous many-core high
performance computing systems. Therefore, this research aligns with the NSF
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to break the barrier of applying high-fidelity radiation models to
practical large-scale systems, utilizing modern cyber-infrastructure. As a
result, the heat flux on the computational boundaries as well as pollutant
emissions can be better predicted, which can reduce the fire loss and alleviate
the environmental concerns with pollutions. Specifically, the project focuses on
enhancing the parallelism of a Monte Carlo based high-fidelity radiation model,
using the hybrid computing environment provided by the many-integrated-core
(MIC) co-processors. As proposed, the high-fidelity radiation model will be
coupled to an open-source fire simulator, and will be validated against well-
documented experimental data. By identifying the disparate time scales of
different physical processes, solution algorithm is first optimized to enhance
the overall efficiency of the proposed code. Hybrid parallelism with message
passing interface (MPI) and OpenMP is then proposed to achieve the desired
reduction in the "time to solution." Finally, the accuracy and efficiency of the
developed fire-radiation code will be demonstrated through a large-scale fire
simulation.