* 1566197
* Molecules in Non-Perturbative Fields: Improving Time-Dependent Density Functional Approximations and Electron-Ion Correlation Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Neepa Maitra, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2019
* USD 417,412.00

Neepa Maitra of CUNY Hunter College is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop theoretical and computational approaches for simulating the correlated
dynamics of electrons and ions. The Condensed Matter and Materials program in
the Division of Materials Research also contributes to this award. Understanding
the motion of electrons and ions is important for understanding and predicting
many phenomena that involve the interaction of matter with light. These
phenomena have both fundamental and technical importance, for example,
photovoltaic devices which convert light into electricity, photocatalysis, and
control of chemical processes using lasers. The equation that governs this
motion has been known for 90 years. For all but the simplest systems, however,
it is too difficult to solve this equation exactly. This difficulty arises
because of correlated motion. Each electron's motion affects every other
electron's motion as well as each ion's, and vice-versa. Time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT) is an efficient, approximate and popular approach to
solving this equation. In many cases, the particular approximations used today
are not adequate, causing unpredictable errors in the electron dynamics. Maitra
and her coworkers develop improved approximations based on rigorous theoretical
considerations. Both undergraduate and graduate students participate in this
cutting-edge research. Maitra organizes mini-workshops at CUNY open to
scientists in the wider New York area. She works with existing programs at
Hunter College to promote the development of underrepresented minority
scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Maitra and her coworkers develop improved,
robust approximations for electron dynamics by imposing exact conditions, so
that the theory can be used for real-time dynamics with as much confidence and
predictability as density functional theory is used for ground-state energies
and structures. The goals is to overcome several limitations of TDDFT that
currently prevent it from being used reliably for real-time electron dynamics in
the non-perturbative regime, as well as for excitation spectra. The dynamics of
the electrons and ions are coupled by using a method based on the recently-
introduced first-principles exact factorization approach. This includes
developing practical mixed quantum-(semi)classical schemes for correlated
electron-ion dynamics that include electronic decoherence and wave packet-
branching from first-principles.