* 1566200
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Integration of human behavior and perception into a risk-based microbial water quality management approach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Maryann Cairns, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2017
* USD 499,998.00

Exposure to wastewater-related pathogens results in millions of cases of illness
and an economic burden of 12 billion USD annually worldwide. Since 90 percent of
the world?s household wastewater enters the environment without being
disinfected, coastal beaches are often polluted by wastewater, which can greatly
impact the health of people that swim and play at the beach. Despite scientific
advancements, coastal water quality monitoring approaches rely on outdated
compliance practices that do not accurately identify public health risks. This
project will directly measure pathogen concentrations and identify behaviors
that put individuals at risk of illness from coastal water use. These risks will
be quantified and assessed from cultural and biological perspectives, and
subsequently used to recommend societal changes that promote benefits to human
health and the sustainability of coastal ecosystems. This innovative study will
advance the goals of the NSF Coastal SEES program by identifying practices that
might expose people to pathogens in wastewater, improving sustainable water
management approaches in the tropics, and recommending economically- and
socially-feasible interventions to minimize human health risks. This project
will engage many different stakeholders including community members, national
governments, and international organizations in order to effectively initiate
improvements in coastal water management. Community and K-12 education will be
promoted through the creation of bilingual, coastal water quality modules and
the interdisciplinary research community dedicated to improving water quality
will be expanded through the training of three graduate students, twelve
undergraduate students, and one postdoctoral researcher. This project is the
first to characterize microbial water quality and associated risk of illness
using a holistic water management approach (combination of sanitary surveys,
targeted water quality analyses, and quantitative microbial risk assessment),
which incorporates ethnographic and epidemiological studies to inform and
validate microbial risk assessments. Going beyond simple, end-point risk
assessments, the researchers will use exploratory quantitative microbial risk
assessment to demonstrate how advancing local understanding and building
knowledge regarding risk from coastal recreation can, when coupled with
appropriate technological and social interventions, improve microbial water
quality management and public health at a local, regional, and even global
level. In collaboration with identified governmental and non-governmental
stakeholders, the recommended societal changes will be strategically
communicated to individuals locally and regionally. Using the polluted Costa
Rican Jac√≥ beach as a model system, this project will provide strategies to
enhance coastal microbial water management worldwide by identifying improved
household-wastewater pollution indicators for tropical regions, implementing an
emerging holistic approach to water quality management, and incorporating the
critical roles that human activities and perception play in mitigating microbial
risk of illness.