* 1566348
* GOALI: SusChem: Fundamentals of Oxygen Electrocatalysis on Mixed-Metal Oxyhydroxides for Alkaline Membrane Electrolysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Kathy Ayers, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2020
* USD 462,908.00

GOALI/SusChem: Fundamentals of Oxygen Electrocatalysis on Mixed Metal
Oxyhydroxides for Alkaline Membrane Electrolysis

The development of clean and sustainable energy sources is critical for the
economic and environmental vitality of human civilization. Renewable energy,
such as sun and wind power, is intermittent and thus expensive to integrate with
traditional energy sources at the capacity needed to power the planet. Scalable,
inexpensive energy storage technologies are needed. In this project, Dr.
Boettcher (University of Oregon) is collaborating with Dr. Ayers at Proton
OnSite (Wallingford, Connecticut) to study catalysts for converting water into
hydrogen and oxygen gas using renewable electricity as the input. Hydrogen gas
is a sustainable, carbon-free, renewable fuel that can be used to replace fossil
fuels. It can be used in fuel cells to regenerate electricity on demand or
burned like natural gas, without carbon emission. This research addresses the
inefficiency of the oxygen production part of the overall reaction. The team
combines fundamental studies of how the oxygen production reaction occurs, with
more applied aspects of research within the industry-academic collaboration to
test optimized catalysts in commercially-relevant systems. The graduate student
working on the project completes an industry internship at Proton OnSite. The
Proton OnSite researchers visit the University of Oregon-Eugene. The team
conducts outreach activities with local middle school students. These activities
engage the students in hands-on energy storage and sustainability laboratory
activities on the University of Oregon campus, and introduces university
freshman to scientific research through research immersion laboratory courses.

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Assoc. Professor Shannon Boettcher from the University of Oregon (UO)
is: (1) synthesizing new multi-cation (oxy)hydroxide oxygen-evolution catalysts
to identify active-site motifs and enhance key performance criteria (intrinsic
activity, electrical conductivity, and stability), (2) employing in situ and ex
situ scattering, x-ray absorption, and photoelectron spectroscopy techniques to
correlate local electronic structure and bonding at iron sites to measured
intrinsic activities across different catalysts, and (3) applying the
fundamental knowledge obtained to design catalyst architectures that are
electronically and ionically wired into efficient and stable alkaline-membrane
electrolyzers operating at practical current densities > 1 A cm-2. The work is
carried out in collaboration with Dr. Kathy Ayers at Proton OnSite (Wallingford,
CT) and her team. In support of broader-impacts goals, the project integrates
research and education through programs developed by Prof. Boettcher including
hands-on middle school outreach events and research-immersion laboratories for
UO freshman. The industry-academic partnership is strengthened by UO PhD
students completing collaborative internships at Proton OnSite, and through
Proton team members visiting the UO.