* 1566127
* CRII: CPS: Designing Resilient Strategies and Information Structures for Team Games in Cyber-physical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Tyler Summers, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 183,131.00

This project will develop theoretical and computational tools to assess and
improve resilience in cyber-physical networks. Cyber-physical networks are
created by the accelerating integration of networked computers and communication
devices with physical systems, such as power grids and robotic systems. Although
this integration can enhance performance by allowing more sophisticated
monitoring and control, it also renders the network vulnerable by increasing the
number of access and influence points available to malicious attackers. Red
team-blue team scenarios have been used to qualitatively assess and improve
security in military and intelligence organizations. The defending (blue) team
seeks to operate the network efficiently and securely while the attacking (red)
team seeks to disrupt network operation. The research will yield methodology for
quantitative red team-blue team scenario analysis based on mathematical models,
along with illustrative scenarios arising from problems in power network
stability and distributed multi-robot systems. A foundational understanding of
resilience and comprehensive mitigation strategies will help to prevent severe
attack consequences and protect public health and safety in all application
drivers for cyber-physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant
recent research interest, a complete understanding of resilience in
cyberphysical networks remains limited. This project will explore a specific
game theoretic framework of two-team stochastic dynamic games that
mathematically captures crucial issues in red team-blue team scenarios.
Specifically, the research will determine how teams of devices in a cyber-
physical network can cooperate to make optimal use of information given that (1)
each device has only partial information about the state of the network and
actions of other devices; (2) the network dynamics and signal flows are subject
to random disturbances; and (3) the networks dynamics and signal flows are
subject to actions of adversarial teams, whose agents themselves have only
partial information about the network. The results will also include algorithms
for designing information structures who knows what and when to improve network
resiliency using combinatorial optimization and convex relaxation techniques.
The theoretical and computational results will be illustrated, validated, and
refined by the scenarios in power networks and distributed multi-robot networks,
which will be implemented in simulation software and on a multi-robot
experimental testbed.