* 1566035
* RUI: Studies of Condensed-Phase Effects on the Structural Properties of Molecular Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* James Phillips, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 269,187.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor James Phillips and his
undergraduate research students seek to understand how two interacting molecules
(a molecular complex) may change their structure or the nature of their
interaction depending on whether they are in the gas phase (i.e., surrounded by
essentially nothing), or in the condensed phase (surrounded by solvent molecules
or other molecular complexes). The Phillips' research group uses infrared
spectroscopy to probe the vibrational motions of molecular complexes in
different environments at low temperatures (5 to 100 Kelvin, or -450 to -280
Fahrenheit). The team is also performing theoretical calculations (quantum
chemistry models) to further understand the experimental observations. The
University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire is a low-cost, public institution with a
student body that is about 60% female and 50% low-income/first generation
students. This research program actively involves these underrepresented groups.
Moreover, the Chemistry Department at the University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire
has embarked upon an integrated effort to actively recruit students from
underrepresented groups, based in part on an NSF-Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual goals of the
project are twofold, and are pursued through a combination of experiments and
modeling. From a fundamental standpoint, the aim is to identify and characterize
systems prone to condensed-phase structural change, and thereby challenge long-
held, fundamental principles of chemical bonding. Specific systems that are
studied in this regard are imine-HCl complexes, which offer snapshots of an
acid-base reaction in progress; as well as carbon monoxide-BX3 complexes (X = F,
Cl, Br), for which theory predicts two distinct, stable structures with
different bond distances. Additional target systems have potential applications,
because the ability to manipulate a chemical structure via some external
stimulus is the key underlying design feature for any nanotechnology device.
Complexes involving nitrogen donors (e.g., pyridine, C5H5N) with Group IV metal
acceptors (MX3R: M = silicon, germanium; X = fluorine, chlorine; R = carbon-
based group) have the desired molecular architecture for such applications. The
first step towards gauging their suitability is to assess their tendency to
undergo structural change.