* 1566236
* CRII: III: Topology-Driven, Multi-Scale Tensor Field Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Yue Zhang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2020
* USD 206,977.00

Multi-dimensional modeling has enabled and is enabling breakthroughs in many
research fields such as science, engineering and art, and is constantly
producing high dimensional data that requires analyzing, mining and
visualization. The size of the data is often big as the fine resolution of the
modeling warrants accuracy in the theories developed. The stress and strain
tensors in fluid and solid mechanics, the diffusion tensor in medical imaging,
the curvature tensor in shape modeling, and the deformation gradient tensor in
earthquake engineering are just a few examples. These tensors appear in the form
of data arrays, and having the capability of visualizing the topological
structures and their dynamics can potentially empower domain scientists with new
insights and possibly new fundamental understandings of the physical and
biological phenomena. In addition to sharing the knowledge and tools created
through this research among scientific communities, the investigator will
incorporate the work into teaching materials for undergraduate and graduate
students and into summer programs for K-12 students.

Due to the complexity and extensiveness of the data, any visualization has to be
mindful of occlusion and cluttering. In particular, this project will
investigate theories and algorithms that support topology-driven, multi-scale
visualization of three-dimensional, second-order tensor fields. One focus will
be on the smooth transition of these tensor quantities from one scale to another
to ensure consistency in the topological structures and preservation of
topological features. The other focus is on defining all possible topologies and
developing visualization algorithms that represent the dynamics of the field
topology at one scale.