* 1566526
* CRII: SaTC: Re-Envisioning Contextual Services and Mobile Privacy in the Era of Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ting Wang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 06/30/2019
* USD 168,683.00

Deep Learning (DL)-powered personalization holds great promise to fundamentally
transform the way people live, work and travel, but poses high risk to people's
individual privacy. This project will address the privacy risks arising in DL-
powered contextual mobile services by developing solutions that facilitate the
use of personal information while maintaining explicit user control over use of
the information. The developed learning methods will enable learning from mobile
devices in a manner flexible enough to enable current and future DL-powered
contextual services, while maintaining explicit user control over how that
information is used by third-party service providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will design and implement PADLOCK, a Privacy-Aware Deep Learning Of
Contextual Knowledge engine. PADLOCK executes DL computation over users'
personal data in a sandbox environment, while performing lightweight static and
runtime analysis to ensure that mobile apps comply with users' privacy policies.
The design of PADLOCK explores the tradeoff among privacy protection,
communication cost, system overhead and service quality, providing solutions
with different provable privacy and efficiency features for a wide range of
contextual mobile services. For further information see the project web site at:
http://x-machine.github.io/project/padlock