* 1566289
* CRII: CHS: Facilitating Consumption and Re-expression of Scientific Information in a Journalism Context
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Jessica Hullman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2018
* USD 174,633.00

This research will result in software tools that help journalists, scientists,
and news readers write and read about scientific findings in more understandable
ways. Though it is important that non-scientific audiences are able understand
new advances in technological, biological, genetic, and other scientific fields,
much of science writing is difficult to understand due to the use of jargon. One
way to make scientific findings easier to understand is to re-express them using
simpler terms, such as using the term "butterfly" instead of "lepidtoperan." By
writing software to analyze collections of scientific publications and news
articles, we will discover more understandable expressions for scientific terms,
and develop user interface tools that allow an author or a reader to access
these terms while they write or read about science. In addition to supporting
science communication through the news, we expect our tools will help scientists
create and share more broadly understandable summaries of their work.

This work will contribute new software-based techniques to facilitate lexical
simplification of scientific terminology, which draws upon and contributes to
the fields of natural language processing and human-computer interaction. The
technical objective of this project is to investigate how to enable effective
re-expressions of scientific terms in tools through: 1) identifying strategies
that human authors like science journalists use to re-express complex scientific
content, and 2) developing user interfaces and algorithms that present
simplifications to an author like a journalist as she writes about science for a
general audience, or to a reader who lacks domain expertise. To build the
simplification algorithms that will be used in our interactive tools, we will
first learn mappings between scientific and simpler terms from corpora that
include scientific writing such as journal publications in PLOS or PubMed as
well as simpler summaries of this information written by the scientists or
written by news journalists. We will apply word embeddings and other word
association methods to such corpora to determine the effectiveness of different
methods for learning simplifications. We will apply these simplifications in
mixed initiative authoring and reading interfaces that enhance the capabilities
of a human author or reader by recommending and enabling easy application of
simplifications in various ways.