* 1566157
* Electron-Molecule Temporary States: Vibronic Coupling in Excited Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Richard Mabbs, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2020
* USD 440,000.00

Under this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms -
A (CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Richard Mabbs of
Washington University in St. Louis is studying what happens when molecules
collide with electrons and temporarily capture them. The Mabbs research group is
particularly interested in how molecules vibrate and rotate during the electron
capture process. The results are particularly important for a full understanding
of the electron transfer/collision induced chemistry which occurs in areas as
diverse as chemical reactions, catalysis, radiation damage in DNA, remediation
strategies for removing volatile organic air pollutants, and ionospheric
chemistry. This project serves as a vehicle for the education and training of
graduate students and undergraduate students who are directly involved in the
research. Professor Mabbs integrates some of the results of the research into
his formal chemistry courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metastable, excited
electronic states of anions represent free electrons interacting strongly with a
neutral molecule. This project probes vibronic coupling within such states using
high resolution velocity mapped photoelectron imaging and tunable
photoexcitation. Vibrationally resolved photodetachment spectra of small
molecular anions are recorded. Excitation to individual (ro)vibrational levels
of a metastable excited anion state is followed by electron loss via one of the
(ro)vibrational levels of the neutral molecule. The photon energy dependence of
a vibrational channel cross section represents an action spectrum for
autodetachment from a (ro)vibronic state of the excited anion, revealing which
vibrational levels are strongly coupled in the anion. The action spectra also
yield the energies of internal states of the excited anion and therefore provide
valuable benchmarks for state-of-the art calculations of highly correlated and
open shell, excess electron species.