* 1566403
* CRII: CSR: Efficient and Available Replication in Large-scale Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Yang Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Replication is widely used in the IT industry to protect users' data against
various kinds of errors, such as power loss, disk corruption, and network
partition. It is generally the case that we need to pay a higher cost for
stronger replication protocols that can tolerate more kinds of errors. This
presents a challenging trade-off to developers who will sometimes choose to use
weaker forms of replication, willing to take the risk of occasional data loss in
exchange for low cost. This project presents how to reduce the cost of Paxos, a
popular strong replication protocol in today's data centers, while preserving
its other properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While this topic has already drawn a
continuous effort in academia, existing approaches usually give up certain
useful properties of Paxos, such as availability, presenting a different but
equally hard question to the developers. This work presents ThriftyPaxos, a
replication protocol that can achieve the same properties as Paxos with lower
cost. To reduce cost, ThriftyPaxos incorporates the idea of on-demand
instantiation, which activates the minimal number of replicas when there are no
failures, and activates backup replicas when the active ones fail. To solve the
key limitation of on-demand instantiation, that the system is unavailable when
the backup is rebuilding its state, ThriftyPaxos incorporates the idea of
delayed recovery, which allows the system to proceed while recovering a backup
replica in the background. Such design is motivated by the observation that when
acceptors and learners, the two key components of Paxos, are decoupled, it is
possible to design separate mechanisms to delay their recovery without blocking
the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cheaper Paxos protocol will be appealing to
both existing Paxos users and to those who are still using weaker protocols,
because they will not have the same type of difficult choice between data
consistency and cost. To realize such impact, the PI will apply ThriftyPaxos to
popular open-source software, as well as publishing the source code of
ThriftyPaxos. This project has impact to education as well. The code will be
converted for use in a course project so that graduate and undergraduate
students can build a similar system with reasonable effort in a course project.