* 1566334
* Development and application of computational methods: from quantum statistical mechanics calculations to data processing in Fourier transform spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Vladimir Mandelshtam, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Vladimir Mandelshtam of the
University of California, Irvine, is conducting research in the area of
theoretical chemistry. He is developing new computational methods that take
advantage of advances in high performance computers. These methods are being
applied in the study of important and interesting properties of clusters of
molecules at the atomic level. Another major component of Professor
Mandelshtam's research is the development and application of computational
methods designed to process data from Magnetic Resonance experiments. These new
methods are providing ways to process the signals, reducing the time required
for experiments and making new experiments possible. These methods could also be
applied to other experimental studies. The development of new numerical
techniques and distribution of software allows a broader research community to
conduct their studies. The software resulting from this project is being made
available free of charge to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Mandelshtam's research in Quantum Statistical
Mechanics is concerned with the development of the Self-Consistent Phonons (SCP)
method. SCP was introduced several decades ago in solid-state physics. While
potentially very powerful, until recently SCP was essentially limited to systems
with simple pairwise interactions. The breakthrough algorithmic improvements
introduced in Professor Mandelshtam's group made it possible to reduce the
computational times by several orders of magnitude, thus, making SCP practical
for general systems. Further algorithmic improvements are being pursued that
should make SCP even more efficient, such as an algorithm that would replace an
iterative self-consistent solution of coupled non-linear equations by a
deterministic minimization procedure. SCP is being applied to compute the
spectra and other equilibrium properties of water and ion-water clusters.
Diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) is also being used to complement these studies and
to help assess the accuracy of SCP. The major focus associated with the
development of the Filter Diagonalization Method (FDM) is its implementation for
3D Diffusion Ordered SpectroscopY (DOSY), which is a unique and potentially very
powerful Nuclear Magnetic Resonance experiment designed to characterize mixtures
in solutions. DOSY is currently limited in its applications due to the lack of
an adequate inversion algorithm associated with the solution of the inverse
Laplace transform problem. The advantage of FDM is due to its multidimensional
nature that allows one to avoid the unfavorable factorization of the
3-dimensional inversion problem to 1-dimensional problems.