* 1566637
* CRII: SHF: Investigation of Effective On-chip Network Designs for GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Lizhong Chen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 02/28/2019
* USD 174,978.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have been proliferating at an extraordinary
speed in the past decade. Continuing innovations in related technologies allow
today?s GPUs to play critical roles in numerous disciplines and sectors as well
as many emerging fields that might not otherwise be possible. Examples include
processing ambient video inputs in automobiles for enhanced safety and
intelligent driving; powering graphics-based medical processing applications in
mobile devices for ubiquitous biometric monitoring and personalized healthcare;
supporting virtual reality headsets for transformative and immersive new
experiences in education, training, and entertainment; and providing energy-
efficient parallel computing in HPC systems and data-centers to facilitate a
myriad of scientific, economic, and social computing applications. Such
promising developments are enabled by the massively parallel computing capacity
of GPU architectures, which can integrate thousands of processing cores on a
single chip. To continue meeting growing performance expectations, on-chip
interconnect architectures must be developed to provide fast and efficient
communications among the vast number of processing cores in
GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates cross-cutting approaches
and techniques to improve the effectiveness of on-chip networks (or NoCs) in GPU
systems. The objective is to fully explore the challenges and develop framework
useful for GPU NoC designs that will meet the performance, energy, and resource
efficiency targets of current and future GPU systems. Among some of the specific
aspects investigated are the bottlenecks of NoCs in the GPU context, alternative
methods of enabling scale-up, sensitivity of NoCs to various types of GPU
applications, and the impact of NoCs on GPU system-level trade-offs. This
research also investigates opportunities in coordinated design among NoC
components as well as co-optimizations between NoCs and other GPU subsystems.
The objective is to enable on-chip networks to operate more consistently and
efficiently for the overall benefit of GPU systems by factoring in multiple
components and key application characteristics. Beyond its specific technical
contributions to fundamental advancements in computing, this research has
broader potential impact to society through its activities on research education
and outreach that aim to broaden participation for people from diverse
background, including groups underrepresented in engineering at various
education levels.