* 1566545
* Manufacturing Certifications for Rural High School Students through Community College Dual Enrollment
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Nancy Lillis, North Florida Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 187,267.00

North Florida, like other rural areas, must adequately prepare the next
generation of skilled technicians in the sector of advanced manufacturing
because local manufacturing companies require highly qualified and skilled
manufacturing and engineering technicians with appropriate soft skills to be
successful. Participants who secure high-paying jobs can support themselves and
contribute to the growth and prosperity of the community. This project at North
Florida Community College (NFCC) is designed to develop an advanced
manufacturing dual enrollment project with Madison County high school students.
The project will result in career pathways leading from two local high schools
to the community college to employment as technicians. This project will include
dual enrollment (DE), career and technical education (CTE), industry
partnerships, and soft skills development. This unique combination of project
components is designed to meet the specific needs of rural high school students
and rural manufacturing companies. Project findings will be widely disseminated
throughout Florida and can serve as a model for other rural communities
throughout the United States. A comprehensive evaluation will be conducted to
document successes and guide project development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to recruit and educate underrepresented (rural, first-
generation in college, minority) high school students who will graduate with
strong soft skills and successful completion of the Automation and Production
Technology (APT) course including the Manufacturing Skill Standards Council
(MSSC) Certified Production Technician (CPT) credential. The APT program is
comprised of four components and the project participants will complete each of
the four components during subsequent semesters.The college plans to use summer
hands-on workshops in robotics, 3D printing, and SolidWorks to introduce the
project to potential students. Central to the project will be the development of
employer-sought soft skills including team-building and problem-solving. Project
participants will be involved in scenarios that require them to solve unfamiliar
problems, communicate effectively, assume leadership or follower roles, work
collaboratively, and think critically. Industry partners will interact with
students through classroom visits and facility tours. NFCC has the commitment of
industry partners to provide program support including tours of manufacturing
facilities, guest speakers and content lecturers, mock interviews, and hiring
opportunities to students who successfully complete the program. Secondary-
postsecondary team teaching will provide professional development to expose all
instructors to both high school and college environments. The professional
development component, during which high school and college faculty team teach,
will strengthen the bond between these two sectors of the educational community
as well as model the skills essential for collaborative work. The MSSC CPT
certification will translate into 15 credit hours toward the newly developed AS
Degree in Engineering Technology at the college or elsewhere in the Florida
College System. This will provide a pathway to a baccalaureate degree and higher
skilled employment for students.