* 8452009
* Presidential Young Investigator:  Research in Quantum Elec- tronics, Gaseous Electronics and Material Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1985,07/31/1992
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 312,500.00

The research activities will be in two areas: study of new laser sources and
electron beam processing of microelectronic materials. Laser action is
investigated in negative glow discharges in which three body electron
recombination is the excitation mechanism of the laser upper levels. Electron
beam discharges are used to create dense plasmas having low electron
temperatures (KT =0.1-1 eV) in which large recombination rates can be obtained.
The goal of this project is to demonstrate both pulsed and true cw recombination
laser action in an electron beam excited plasma and to study the excitation
mechanism. In the second area of research, dc electron beams will be used to
demonstrate large area etching and recrystallization of microelectronic films.
The first experiments will focus on studying electron beam induced etching of
silicon and SiO;i2. Etch rates, selectivity, and anistropy of this new etching
technique will be investigated. Finally, a multikilowatt line source glow
discharge electron beam is being developed to recrystallize polysilicon films
over large areas for SOI applications. Polysilicon film will be recrystallized
and its properties evaluated and compared to those films recrystallized with
other techniques.