
* 0071202
* Research in Topology and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,08/05/2002
* Julius Shaneson,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 363,684.00

DMS-0071202 Julius L. Shaneson

Most of the proposal concerns applications of relations between continuous and
discrete summation in higher dimensions. Such a relation is called an Euler-
MacLaurin formula, and describes how to sum a function over a set of lattice
points in a geometric region in terms of integrals of the function and its
derivatives on the region and parts of the boundary. For polynomial functions
summed on lattice points of a polytope with lattice point vertices, there are
exact, closed formulae for doing this, due to the proposer and S. Cappell,
obtained as consequences of their results on characteristic classes of singular
varieties. For general (transcendental) functions, there are approximate
formulae of given length, together with remainder terms involving differential
operators whose coefficients are related to generalizations of the classical
Bernoulli polynomials on the real line. The capability to handle trascendental
functions makes possible the use Euler-MacLaurin formulae the study the growth
of the number of lattice points in smooth regions, such as circles or the
regions under a hyperboloid, as the figure expands.

A lattice point can be thought of as a vertex point in a multidimensional grid
or lattice-work. Results relating summation over such points to some continuous
summation process, i.e. some type of integration method, can impact numerous
applied mathematics problems, including rapid integration schemes, problems in
network capacity, and optimization issues in shipping and communications. In
addition, questions concerning the number of lattice points in smooth regions,
especially certain very symmetric ones like circles or parts of hyperboloids,
are well-known to arise in central parts of number theory, and good estimates on
these could lead to new results on the distribution of prime numbers and other
important questions. Finally, these counting methods might be good test cases
for the problems ("P = NP") of logic/computer science concerning the miminum
time needed to perform certain kinds of computations.
