
* 0071683
* Foliations, flows, and 3-manifolds: Topology and geometry
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2000,09/21/2001
* Sergio Fenley,MO,Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2002
* USD 98,793.00

Proposal: DMS-0071683 Project title: "Foliations, flows and 3-manifolds:
Topology and geometry" PI: Sergio R. Fenley

ABSTRACT: Reebless foliations are a basic and fundamental object in the study of
3-manifolds. They yield deep results on 3-manifold topology and are also related
to the geometrization conjecture for 3-manifolds. An important tool is the
universal circle associated to a foliation with hyperbolic leaves (the generic
case). Using this tool, the PI has recently proved that in the case of R-covered
foliations, then either the manifold is toroidal or there is a pseudo-Anosov
flow transverse to the foliation. Such a flow has excellent dynamical properties
and this gives a strong relationship with the topology of the manifold. One
objective of this project is to analyze the universal circle construction for
various families of foliations and to search for transverse pseudo-Anosov flows.
A second goal is to study foliation and transverse flows as dual objects and to
understand the deep consequences of their joint dynamical structure. The project
aims to study general pseudo-Anosov flows and the additional structure imposed
by a transverse foliation. A third goal of the project is to understand
geometric behavior of foliations and transverse flows in hyperbolic 3-manifolds
- the generic case. The focus will be on the large scale geometric behavior in
the universal cover. An important question to be analyzed is whether the pseudo-
Anosov flows transverse to foliations are quasigeodesic - that is, whether they
measure distances well. This property has been proved by the PI (and Lee Mosher)
in the case of a flow transverse to a Reebless finite depth foliation. One
objective of this study is to use the quasigeodesic property for flows to derive
information about the asymptotic geometric behavior of the foliation transverse
to the flow. This is specially promising in the case of general finite depth
foliations.

A 3-manifold is an object that locally has 3-dimensions, like 3-dimensional
Euclidean space. A 2-dimensional foliation of a3-manifold is a decomposition of
the manifold into 2-dimensional objects, much like the pages of a book. Good
foliations exist in large classes of 3-manifolds and they yield very useful
information about the manifold. The goal of the project is to understand the
relationship of the foliation with geometric and topological structures of the
manifold. Geometry measures distance and roughly topology measures the
structures of "holes" in the manifold. It is best to look at the universal cover
of the manifold: for example the universal cover of a cylinder is obtained by
unrolling it into an infinite carpet. Universal covers are unbounded objects but
they carry a lot of information about the manifold, contained in the "folding"
allowed to recover the manifold. One important goal of the project is to analyse
the foliation in the universal cover. Of particular interest is the large scale
properties of the "leaves" of the foliation. We will concentrate in the case
where the manifold is hyperbolic -this is the generic situation. Finally there
is a dual object to a foliation which is a transverse flow to the leaves of the
foliation. The flow and foliation jointly produce a rich dynamical structure in
the manifold with many deep consequences. There are many cases when there is a
"tightest" amongst all possible transverse flows. The tightest flow should give
information about the structure of the foliation and connections with the
manifold. The tightest flow is called a pseudo-Anosov flow.
