
* 0072212
* Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2000,03/11/2002
* Ronald Fintushel,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 162,248.00

Project Title: Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds PI: Ronald Fintushel Award:
0072212

Abstract: The theory of smooth 4-manifolds gains its importance both from its
central location between low and high-dimensional topology and from its close
interaction with high energy physics. The major problem in this field is the
classification of smooth simply connected 4-manifolds. The interaction between
topology and physics has stimulated the construction of invariants - at first
Donaldson's invariant, and then the invariant of Seiberg and Witten - which are
useful in distinguishing the diffeomorphism types of 4-manifolds. These have led
to major advances, and they have allowed workers to study new constructions of
4-manifolds. These have confused the issue of classification, but also have
invigorated the theory and reinforced its richness. The theory is now left
without even a conjectural classification. It seems that still further examples
are needed to identify a suitable classification scheme, and the proposer
intends to work on such constructions. One class of 4-manifolds which have
exceptionally close ties to theoretical physics are those with a symplectic
structure, and the last few years have also seen progress in the theory of
symplectic 4-manifolds; especially new constructions, and most notably,
Donaldson's work on Lefschetz fibrations. The proposer intends to continue work
on the explicit constructions of Lefschetz fibrations and related questions on
symplectic submanifolds. The ultimate goal of the proposer is to develop new
constructions of smooth 4 manifolds in the hope that a general picture will
begin to emerge.

The focus of this project will be to construct new types of examples of smooth
and symplectic 4-manifolds and to study the diversity of embedded symplectic
submanifolds (up to smooth isotopy) in a given homology class. In particular, is
every symplectic surface in the complex projective plane smoothly isotopic to a
holomorphic curve? If one allows enough blowups, this is not true. Another issue
is the geography problem for simply connected irreducible 4-manifolds. Each such
manifold can be assigned a lattice point in the plane corresponding to its
characteristic numbers. The problem is to study which points are realized. There
has been notable progress, but much work still remains, and the principal
investigator plans to seek new methods for constructing irreducible simply
connected 4-manifolds of positive signature. These techniques are related to a
kind of theory of minimal genus surfaces with constraints. Also he, along with
R. Stern, conjectures a replacement for the Noether inequality for symplectic
4-manifolds, and they have a promising technique for its proof, which they plan
to pursue.




