
* 0072133
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,07/26/2002
* R. James Milgram,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 667,998.00

Proposal: DMS-0072133

Abstract: This project consists of research programs in a broad range of topics
in Algebraic and Geometric Topology. The principal investigators, Professors
R.L. Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, and R.J. Milgram are senior topologists whose
research interests cover a large number of areas of topology and related fields.
The postdoctoral researchers on this grant also represent a broad range of
research interests. J. Brock works in low dimensional topology and dynamics, and
C. Schlictkrull works in homotopy theory and algebraic K-theory. Included in
these projects are the study of core topological questions such as the study of
3 - dimensional geometry, the study of the topology of complex and related
structures on manifolds, and topological invariants of finite groups. In
addition it includes applications of topological methods to engineering
questions in the field of Robotics.

The topology of 3-dimensional manifolds is intimately connected to differential
geometry, particularly to homogeneous structures like Euclidean, spherical, and
hyperbolic geometry. Of these, hyperbolic geometry is the most prevalent. On a
closed 3-manifold a hyperbolic structure, if it exists, is unique by the Mostow
Rigidity Theorem. Thus, any geometric invariant is a topological invariant and
can be used to distinguish different 3-manifolds. When the 3-manifold has
boundary, it can have a large parameter space of hyperbolic structures; in this
case, the qualitative properties of the structures as one varies over the
parameter space are of particular interest. Kerckhoff and Brock are studying
hyperbolic structures on 3-manifolds, trying to describe the behavior of these
geometric structures under a topological procedure, called Dehn surgery. For
manifolds with boundary, they are also trying to understand the limiting
behavior of the structures as one moves to the limits of the parameter space.
R.L. Cohen is pursuing several projects that involve studying algebraic
topological aspects of questons stemming from geometry. These projects lie under
the following general headings. 1. The topology of moduli spaces of holomorphic
curves in complex and symplectic manifolds. 2. The homotopy type of the stable
mapping class group and the Mumford Conjecture. 3. Properties and applications
of holomorphic K-theory. C. Schlichtkrull's project involves studying the
topology of the stable diffeomorphism groups Diff(X), when X is either a point
or the circle. To do this he will use techniques from Algebraic K - theory and
homotopy theory. R.J. Milgram will pursue questions involving the cohomology of
finite simple groups, as well as applications of the topology of configuration
spaces to questions in the design and behavior of robotic arms.




