
* 0072550
* Selfdual Sheaves on Singular Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2000,08/22/2000
* Markus Banagl,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 44,000.00

DMS-0072550 Marcus Banagl

Complexes of sheaves which are self-dual in the sense of Verdier have become
indispensable tools in studying the topology of singular spaces, a prime example
being the Goresky-MacPherson-Deligne intersection chain sheaf on a stratified
space with only even-codimensional strata. On spaces that include strata of odd
codimension as well, self-duality of the latter sheaf fails to hold in general.
In recent research, we have shown that "Lagrangian structures" can be employed
to construct self-dual intersection homology on such spaces. We propose to study
the variance of the associated characteristic classes as the Lagrangian
structure changes. In many situations, the effective manipulation of self-dual
sheaves places heavy demands on the stratification of the underlying space. We
propose to investigate the potential existence of a good "sheaf package" on
weakly stratified spaces (the homotopically stratified sets of Quinn), using the
technology of teardrop neighborhoods and manifold stratified approximate
fibrations. Further, in collaboration with Sylvain Cappell, we are interested in
developing characteristic class formulae for the signature of singular spaces in
the presence of non-trivial monodromy, via a synthesis of Atiyah's formula for
manifolds and the Cappell-Shaneson signature formula.

Topology is the study of geometrical objects focusing on the neighborhood
relations between points rather than on measurement of distances. In the last
century, considerable effort has been directed towards studying "manifolds" --
spaces that locally look uniform, at each point and in each direction. This
effort has been immensely successful; a central insight was that crucial
information about a manifold is carried by one number: its "signature,"
measuring intersections of geometric sub-objects within the manifold. In the
last two decades, topologists have studied "singular" spaces with increasing
interest, due to their numerous occurrences and applications within pure
mathematics (algebraic geometry, number theory) and outside pure mathematics
(mathematical physics). In contrast to a manifold, a singular space may locally
look different from point to point. The proposed research tries to define,
understand, and compute topological invariants for singular spaces.


