
* 0072264
* Lefschetz Fibrations of Symplectic 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2000,08/10/2000
* Terry Fuller,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2003
* USD 84,999.00

DMS-0072264 Terry Fuller

Recent results in 4-dimensional topology have shown that symplectic
4-dimensional manifolds can be characterized topologically by the property of
admitting a Lefschetz fibration. This proposal concerns constructions of
Lefschetz fibrations, and in particular focuses on constructions involving
branched coverings. We propose to develop and investigate applications for a
procedure that compares the Lefschetz fibrations obtained as branched covers of
deformations and resolutions of singular branch loci.

A 4-dimensional manifold is an object that on a small scale looks like Euclidean
4-dimensional space (such as our physical world, with time included). A
fundamental open problem in mathematics is to classify the large scale shapes of
4-dimensional manifolds. A particular variety of 4-dimensional manifold,
originally appearing in classical physics but now a central object in pure
mathematics, is known as a symplectic manifold. Recent techniques for studying
symplectic 4-dimensional manifolds involve viewing them as Lefschetz fibrations,
that is by particular sorts of cross-sections by 2-dimensional surfaces. This
project seeks to generalize previous work of the applicant involving
constructions of Lefschetz fibrations on symplectic 4-dimensional manifolds.


