
* 0072349
* The Isomorphism Conjectures for surgery L-groups, algebraic K-groups, and stable pseudo-isotopy spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2000,02/19/2002
* Lowell Jones,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2004
* USD 147,177.00

DMS-0072349 Lowell E. Jones

Let G be an arbitrary discrete group. Jones and Farrell have conjectured
("Isomorphism Conjectures") that the surgery L-groups of G, L(G), and the
algebraic K-groups of the integral group ring Z(G), K(Z(G)), should be
computable in a simple way from the collections of all the groups L(H), K(Z(H))
where H is any cyclic by finite subgroup of G. The truth of these conjecutures
would imply rigidity results for aspherical manifolds ("Borel Conjecture") and
also would yield much information about the spaces of homeomorphisms and
diffeomorphisms of aspherical manifolds. Jones,in collaboration with Farrell, is
trying to verify the isomorphism conjectures for any group G which acts properly
discontinuously via isometries on a complete Riemannian manifold having non-
positive curvature. Modern day geometers and topologists are concerned with
"spaces" and what they look like. The surface of a donut, the sphere and the
plane are examples of 2-dimensional spaces which are all different from one
another from both the perspective of geometry and topology. One way that
topologists study spaces (not just of dimension 2 but of higher dimension also)
is to associate to each space some algebraic gadgets. It is conjectured that for
many interesting spaces these algebraic gadgets act like a "genetic code" for
the space, in that they tell us most everything we want to know about the space.
Thus there are two fundamental problems here: to verify this "genetic code
conjecture"; and to decifer the genetic code for the spaces which are of
interest to geometers and topologists.


