
* 0072857
* Classical Topology Inside Quantum Invariants
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,07/17/2000
* Lev Rozansky,CT,Yale University
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 02/28/2001
* USD 31,200.00

Proposal: 0072857

An important problem of the 3d topology is how to establish a relation between
the old "classical" invariants of 3-manifold and knots such as the Casson-Walker
invariant and the Alexander polynomial, and the new "quantum" invariants such as
the Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant and the Jones polynomial. The existing evidence
suggests that quantum invariants can be disassembled into simpler pieces, the
first of which are known classical invariants, whereas the others are their
close cousins which may also have a nice direct interpretation in the framework
of classical topology. The invariants that appear in the decomposition of
quantum invariants, are the so-called Vassiliev or finite type invariants.
Therefore it turns out that Vassiliev invariants are a link between the quantum
and classical invariants. I propose to study the properties of Vassiliev
invariants appearing in the decomposition of quantum invariants and especially
their relation to classical topology. In particular, I propose to study the new
polynomial Vassiliev invariants that are hidden inside the colored Jones
polynomials. These new polynomial invariants of knots and links seem to be the
descendants of the Alexander polynomial and therefore, similarly to their
ancestor, they may have a direct topological interpretation. The first direct
descendant of the Alexander polynomial is a 2-variable polynomial with integer
coefficients. Path integral arguments suggest that it is a knot analog of the
Casson-Walker invariant of rational homology spheres.

The topological classification of 3-manifolds and knots is still an open
problem. A natural way to approach it is to construct as many invariants of
knots and 3-manifolds as one would need in order to distinguish between any non-
equivalent objects. In recent years we witnessed an outburst of new "quantum"
invariants (Jones polynomial and Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant in particular).
These invariants are more powerful than the old Alexander polynomial, yet they
are relatively easy to compute. However, their application towards the solution
of topological problems is impeded by the fact that their definition is purely
combinatorial and has no obvious connection to the well-established methods of
classical topology. Existing evidence suggests that quantum invariants are
packed up with an infinite number of simpler invariants the first of which are
well-known classical invariants. Therefore a study of quantum invariants
(especially in the semi-classical approximation when they unpack) may produce an
infinite number of new classical invariants which may be enough to distinguish
all 3-manifolds and knots. I propose to study the properties of new simple
invariants that come from the quantum ones. In particular, I will study the
decomposition of the colored Jones polynomial into an infinite sequence of
simpler polynomials which seem to be the descendants of the Alexander
polynomial.
