
* 0072639
* l_2-homology of right-angled Coxeter groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,06/21/2000
* Boris Okun,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2002
* USD 48,599.00

Proposal: DMS-0072639

PI: Boris Okun

Abstract

Okun proposes to calculate l_2-homology of right-angled Coxeter groups. In a
recent joint work (still in preparation) with M. Davis (the Ohio State
University) we calculated l_2-homology of some right-angled Coxeter groups and,
in particular, proved Singer's vanishing conjecture for right-angled Coxeter
group manifolds of dimension <5. As a corollary we get that Hopf's conjecture
about the sign of Euler characteristic of aspherical manifolds is true for non-
positively curved (in the sense of Aleksandrov) 4-dimensional cubical manifolds.
Our calculations in higher dimensions are consistent with Singer's vanishing
conjecture. Several conjectures, related to Singer's vanishing conjecture are
discussed.

Coxeter groups, also known as reflection groups, play an important role in
various branches of mathematics. The simplest examples of such groups come from
Escher type tilings - tilings of the hyperbolic plane by convex polygons. The
higher dimensional analogs of these give a large class of examples in topology
and geometry of manifolds. The proposed research concentrates on several
longstanding conjectures, as applied to these examples. A surprising corollary
of this research is an explicit estimate for the genus of a graph - the minimal
genus of the surface in which the graph can be embedded.
