
* 0072429
* Topology of 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,06/23/2000
* J. Robert Myers,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2003
* USD 72,240.00

Proposal: DMS-0072429 PI: Robert Myers.

Abstract:: Over the years a nice conjectural picture has emerged of the
structure of closed 3-manifolds. It has been shaped by the geometrization and
virtual bundle conjectures of Thurston and the compactification conjectures of
Simon and of Marden. These imply certain consequences for covering spaces of
such 3-manifolds. Closed, orientable, irreducible 3-manifolds with infinite
fundamental group ought to have universal covering space homeomorphic to
Euclidean 3-space. Professor Myers will continue his work on this problem by
ruling out classes of possible counterexamples through an analysis of group
actions on Whitehead manifolds; he will use a new result which promises to
extend his work on Whitehead manifolds which contain non-trivial planes to those
which do not. More generally, covering spaces with finitely generated
fundamental group ought to be homeomorphic to interiors of compact 3-manifolds.
He will continue his work on this problem and on the closely related problem of
showing that the same conclusion holds for hyperbolic 3-manifolds with finitely
generated fundamental group. Freedman has reduced the latter problem to a purely
topological problem which seems accessible. Hyperbolic 3-manifolds of finite
volume ought to be finitely covered by surface bundles over the circle, although
very few non-trivial examples of this phenomenon are known. Myers will attempt
to construct more such examples and will explore the extent to which the desired
conclusion is implied by the failure of the finitely generated intersection
property in the fundamental group. 3-manifolds with cubings of negative
curvature ought to be hyperbolic; Myers will investigate a method for trying to
build hyperbolic structures, trying to determine both its scope and limitations.
Finally, he will attempt to construct small knots in non-Haken 3-manifolds.

Manifolds are spaces which generalize the familiar curves and surfaces that live
in ordinary 3-dimensional space. An n-manifold locally looks like n-dimensional
space; thus a curve is a 1-manifold, and a surface is a 2-manifold. 3-manifolds
are difficult to visualize but can be described mathematically. Such spaces
arise as models of the universe in general relativity; in this role they come
equipped with geometries, i.e. ways of measuring distances, angles, and
curvature. Conjectures of Thurston, Simon, and Marden suggest that the members
of a large class of 3-manifolds have particularly nice geometries and can be
constructed from the members of a small set of standard 3-manifolds by
identifying their points in certain ways. Professor Myers will attempt to verify
various important special cases of this conjectural picture.
