
* 0072520
* Geometry and Topology of Moduli Spaces of Parabolic Bundles, Toric Varieties, and Partial Flag Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2000,07/17/2000
* Philip Foth,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2003
* USD 74,655.00

DMS-0072520 Philip Foth

The PI will study the topology of certain algebraic varieties by methods of
Poisson geometry. Many interesting varieties admit Poisson structures such that
the closures of the symplectic leaves for such structures additively generate
the homology. Moreover, one can ask for certain quite strong invariance and
asymptotic properties of those Poisson structures so that the complete
information about the (equivariant) cohomology of these varieties may be
obtained by studying the corresponding Poisson harmonic forms. In addition, if
the algebraic variety in question is smooth and has an invariant Kaehler
structure such that the Kaehler form is compatible in a certain sense with the
Poisson structure, then one can hope to find such Poisson structures on the GIT
quotients of the variety using the correspondence between the symplectic and GIT
quotients. In addition, one can hope to study the Chow quotients by similar
methods. One also hopes to obtain new integrable systems in this context or
throw a new light on already known ones. The varieties which fall into the scope
of interest of this project include (partial) flag manifolds, the moduli spaces
of parabolic bundles, toric varieties, and others. There is also a connection
between these topics and formal geometry and deformation quantization.

The PI would like to understand the topology (underlying structure) of certain
spaces that appear in different branches of science such as geometry and
theoretical physics. The results that PI intends to obtain are likely to have
applications to topological, conformal, and quantum field theories, as well as
strings and mirror symmetry. In these endeavors the PI plans to apply methods of
algebraic and differential geometry and the formal algebraic apparatus. The
spaces under investigation come naturally equipped with rich algebraic and
geometric structures. Some of these spaces appear as quite classical objects
(like grassmannians) and some of them are more sophisticated (like moduli
spaces). The PI is looking forward to further unveiling these structures and
relating them to known phenomena sometimes crossing interdisciplinary borders.
