
* 0072269
* Some Questions in Set-theoretic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2000,05/25/2000
* Gary Gruenhage,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 67,834.00

Proposal: DMS-0072269 PI: Gary Gruenhage

Abstract: The principle investigator proposes to focus on three well-known open
problems in set-theoretic topology: M. Husek's 1977 question of whether compact
spaces having a small diagonal are metrizable, J. Steprans' fifteen-year old
problem concerning the existence of uncountable non-discrete spaces which are
homeomorphic to each of their uncountable subspaces, and J. Ceder's forty year
old problem of whether stratifiable spaces have a sigma-closure preserving base.
All three questions involve fundamental topological properties and
constructions; they lie in the mainstream of set-theoretic topology and have
been worked on by many researchers. The principle investigator has significant
partial results on all of them which answer related questions and give hope for
further progress. In particular, he has settled the first question for countably
compact spaces, affirmatively answered a countable version of the second
question, and with respect to the third question has obtained several important
results including a positive answer to a closely related question of Ceder.

Set theory and general topology are fundamental mathematical disciplines with
common turn-of-the-century roots. General topology provides a framework for the
study of shapes, from ordinary structures in standard three-dimensional space to
much more abstract shapes, and the continuous deformations of these shapes.
Dramatic advances in set theory and logic during the past forty years have led
to the realization that many long-standing questions in the general topology of
abstract spaces rest on complicated set-theoreti combinatorics and often cannot
be solved assuming only the standard axioms of set theory. Thus began a fruitful
interaction between the set theory and general topology which continues today.
The principle investigator's proposed problems lie within the scope of this
interesting interaction. Proposed methods of solutions to the problems involve
an interweaving of topological methods with sophisticated set theoretic tools.
Solutions to these problems would deepen our understanding of fundamental
topological properties and relationships, and would likely require new set-
theoretical and topological techniques applicable to a variety of other
problems.




