
* 0083097
* 3-Manifolds and Applications to Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2000,07/10/2000
* Walter Neumann,NY,Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2002
* USD 51,011.00

Proposal: DMS-0083097 PI: Walter D. Neumann

Despite the venerable history of the algebraic geometry, many difficult problems
remain even in low dimensions. Methods of low dimensional topology have proved
very helpful here, and part of this project concerns a continuation of the
investigator's successful application of such methods to the study of
singularities of complex surfaces and the topology of plane affine curves. One
issue to be addressed is explicit analytic description of singularities with
given topology. The general question is notoriously difficult, but the
investigator and J. Wahl have recently made a series of conjectures on realising
rationally Gorenstein singularities with rational homology sphere links as
explicit quotients of complete intersections and are making significant progress
towards their resolution. 3-manifold topology is also being applied to the study
of the global topology and analytic classification issues for two-variable
polynomials. These issues are of intrinsic interest as well as having potential
to contribute to the resolution of the famous Jacobian Conjecture. In a rather
different direction, the investigator will study invariants of 3-dimensional
manifolds that relate to number theory and algebra, namely the so-called
character and eigenvalue varieties and the Bloch invariant. Connections are
emerging between these invariants that will inform both topology and
algebra/number theory.

Algebraic Geometry, which is essentially the study of the zero sets of families
of polynomials, has always been an important area of fundamental research, and
is also important in such diverse applications as control theory and
communications. The project will apply topological methods to algebraic
geometry, to obtain results on how to realise and classify families of
polynomials that lead to particular topologies. The methods of 3-dimensional
topology are of particular importance to this project, and there is also
feedback from algebra and number-theory to topology, as well as some interaction
with theoretical physics and cosmology. The project also studies new insights
that these connections bring to all these fields.
