
* 0090101
* Cascade Topology Seminar
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2001,08/29/2001
* Steven Bleiler,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2004
* USD 16,955.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0090101 Principal Investigator: Steven A. Bleiler

This award will provide partial support for speakers and others at semiannual
conferences in the series known as the ``Cascade Topology Seminar,'' over a
three-year period beginning in 2001. These conferences will be held at various
universities in the northwestern United States and southwestern Canada,
including the Universities of Oregon, Washington, and Puget Sound, and Boise,
Portland, and Oregon State Universities. Typically there will be half a dozen
principal speakers on topics ranging widely over geometry and topology, the
majority from outside the home institutions of the Seminar, and more than fifty
participants altogether, roughly half of them faculty and half of them graduate
students, as well as an occasional undergraduate student. Participation by
younger mathematicians, by women, and by underrepresented minorities is
encouraged.

The mathematics presented in meetings of the Cascade Topology Seminar ranges
widely over topology and geometry. Topological issues include algebraic and
geometric methods for describing and characterizing spatial problems such as the
challenge of recognizing whether two knotted curves in three-space are
essentially identical. Geometric topics addressed in the Seminar include
differential geometry, which emphasizes measures of the curvature of spaces and
the consequences of curvature for analytic problems, as well as algebraic
geometry, which has its roots in the study of families of solutions to
polynomial equations. Abstract

Award: DMS-0090101 Principal Investigator: Steven A. Bleiler

This award will provide partial support for speakers and others at semiannual
conferences in the series known as the ``Cascade Topology Seminar,'' over a
three-year period beginning in 2001. These conferences will be held at various
universities in the northwestern United States and southwestern Canada,
including the Universities of Oregon, Washington, and Puget Sound, and Boise,
Portland, and Oregon State Universities. Typically there will be half a dozen
principal speakers on topics ranging widely over geometry and topology, the
majority from outside the home institutions of the Seminar, and more than fifty
participants altogether, roughly half of them faculty and half of them graduate
students, as well as an occasional undergraduate student. Participation by
younger mathematicians, by women, and by underrepresented minorities is
encouraged.

The mathematics presented in meetings of the Cascade Topology Seminar ranges
widely over topology and geometry. Topological issues include algebraic and
geometric methods for describing and characterizing spatial problems such as the
challenge of recognizing whether two knotted curves in three-space are
essentially identical. Geometric topics addressed in the Seminar include
differential geometry, which emphasizes measures of the curvature of spaces and
the consequences of curvature for analytic problems, as well as algebraic
geometry, which has its roots in the study of families of solutions to
polynomial equations.
