
* 0100710
* Problems in Homotopy, K-theory, and Representation Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2001,05/12/2005
* Nicholas Kuhn,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 248,570.00

DMS-0100710 Nicholas J. Kuhn

Professor Kuhn has a long record of developing methods to solve interesting
problems in homotopy theory, K-theory, and representation theory. The goal of
the largest part of this project is to connect new 'polynomial' resolutions of
classic function spaces to other things: model categories of structured spectra,
equivariant stable homotopy, classial loop space theory, and periodic homotopy.
These connections will be used to calculate previously inaccessible
cohomological invariants of both such function spaces and infinite loop spaces.
A second part of the work is a continuation of the study of the generic
representation theory of finite fields. In particular, from his
homotopical/K-theoretic point of view, he is studying his newly discovered
lattices of generalized Schur algebras, with an eye towards gaining insight
about the modular representations of the finite permutation groups, and the
finite general linear matrix groups.

Homotopy theory, K-theory, and representation theory are mathematical subjects
in which one is trying to discover, and ultimately classify, fundamental
building blocks of various sorts of mathematical structure. (This is quite
analogous to a chemist studying simple molecular configurations, and how these
can be assembled in more complex ways.) Homotopy is concerned with deformations
of geometric objects such as higher dimensional surfaces. A sample hard problem
is to understand the `shape' of all continuous functions from a sphere (surface
of a ball) to itself. Representation theory is concerned with the algebraic
symmetries of more rigid and discrete objects such as configurations of lines
and planes. A sample hard problem is to understand all the basic ways in which
the set of n by n matrices of 0's and 1's can act on strings of 0's and 1's.
Finally K-theory is a sophisticated hybrid of the two. Professor Kuhn is
studying new connections relating these subjects, by developing and using a
variety of state-of-the-art algebraic and homotopy theoretic tools.
