
* 0101429
* FRG: Development of Geometrical and Statistical Models for Automated Object Recognition
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, STATISTICS
* 08/01/2001,05/06/2003
* Anuj Srivastava,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 522,037.00

Anuj Srivastava 0101429

Abstract

The proposed research will focus on developing methods for automated object
recognition using tools from statistics, differential geometry and computer
graphics. The main objective is to design algorithms for recognizing (3D)
objects from their (2D) camera images, with an emphasis on automated face
recognition. The biggest challenge comes from the variability manifested in the
images. How do we model it and what efficient procedures can be used to analyze
it? Many current methods seek dominant subspaces (e.g. PCA, ICA, Fisher
discriminant) of the observed images to capture and characterize this
variability. Although the hardware technology has advanced significantly for
both computing and imaging,the current mathematical techniques and algorithms
for computer vision remain limited in their ability to fundamentally handle the
image variability. Recent technological advances, such as 3D imaging, super fast
graphics, and high-performance computing, make this project both feasible and
timely.

Our approach builds upon the physical considerations that will lead to
representations in stochastic geometry. We highlight the physical factors behind
the image variability and propose methods to model them. A distinct advantage of
modeling the physical factors is the ability to incorporate the contextual
information in the resulting recognition algorithms. In particular, we will
develop (i) geometric models for facial shape variability, (ii) tools for
synthetic illumination and facial rendering, and (iii) algorithms for
statistical inference on these models/parameters. We use coordinate and
differential geometry to characterize object shapes, pose, motion, reflectance,
illumination, and their time variations, and show that these variables take
values on the Lie groups and their quotient spaces. Following the "analysis by
synthesis" paradigm, where the observed images are statistically compared to the
synthesized images, we propose inferences over the nuisance variables to seek
the best match, and thus perform recognition. In a Bayesian framework, the
contextual knowledge of these physical representations can be incorporated as a
prior model, to add to the observed information. The inference engine is based
on the Monte-Carlo methods particularized to these representations. These stated
goals require expertise from distant areas of statistics, geometry, computing,
and graphics. Through this FRG collaboration, we will create an atmosphere for
synergistic, multi-disciplinary research that will support many future
endeavors.


