
* 0102922
* Symplectic, Contact and Low-dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,03/03/2005
* Robert Gompf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 319,309.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0102922 Principal Investigator: Robert E. Gompf

This project focuses on constructing symplectic, contact and 4-dimensional
manifolds. The Principal Investigator has defined a topological structure called
a "hyperpencil" on an even-dimensional closed manifold, generalizing a linear
system of curves on a complex algebraic manifold. He has shown that any
hyperpencil canonically determines a symplectic structure on the manifold. In
dimensions less than 8, this correspondence maps the set of hyperpencils onto a
dense subset of all symplectic forms on the manifold (up to isotopy and scale).
A similar statement seems likely in higher dimensions, and would provide a
complete topological characterization of those manifolds admitting symplectic
structures. If the fibers of this correspondence can be topologically specified,
the result will be a purely topological description of a dense subset of all
symplectic structures on all closed manifolds. In addition to this
investigation, Stein surfaces and their contact 3-manifold boundaries will be
studied by methods such as Legendrian Kirby calculus. The topology of exotic
R^4's and other smooth 4-manifolds will also be investigated.

An n-manifold is a space that in small regions looks just like n-dimensional
Euclidean space. Points, curves and surfaces are manifolds of dimensions 0,1 and
2, respectively. The space in which we live is a 3-manifold, and the universe
(space-time) is a 4-manifold. Surprisingly, 3- and 4-manifolds are much less
well understood than their higher-dimensional counterparts, although major
progress has been made in recent years. Symplectic and contact structures on
manifolds were discovered through classical physics (Hamiltonian mechanics and
optics, respectively), but they are now seen to be important in such diverse
areas as quantum physics, complex analysis, differential geometry and topology.
For example, a rigid pendulum swinging in 3-dimensional space determines a
symplectic manifold. The bob moves on a spherical surface, so its position is
specified by 2 variables (latitude and longitude on this sphere). To completely
specify the state of the system, one must also include the momentum of the bob.
At any position, its momentum is tangent to the sphere and thus specified by two
more variables. Hence, the set of states of the system is a 4-manifold (locally
specified by 4 variables). This 4-manifold has a special symplectic structure
whose role is to link each position variable to the corresponding momentum
variable. This linkage ultimately results in Hamilton's equations describing the
motion of the pendulum under the influence of a specified force field. There are
many other situations in which manifolds and their symplectic and contact
structures arise. While our understanding of such structures has advanced
enormously in recent years, some of the most basic questions remain to be
answered. Which manifolds have symplectic or contact structures, and how many
such structures are there on a given manifold? How many 4-manifolds (if any) are
there satisfying a given description? Questions such as these form the basis of
this project.
