
* 0103435
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,08/02/2004
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2004
* USD 93,616.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0103435 Principal Investigator: Michael Handel

The proposal divides into four projects in the related fields of two dimensional
dynamical systems and geometric group theory. The goal of the first, which is a
collaboration with Mark Feighn, is to compute, in a transparent, geometric and
algorithmic way, the centralizer of an element of the outer automorphism group.
The second is to continue the principal investigator's study of the forcing
order on braid types in the four times punctured disk. This project has both an
experimental and theoretical part. Computer programs are used to generate
examples and to aid in the formation of conjectures. Once conjectures are made
that cannot be disproved by computer, rigorous proofs will be attempted. The
third project is a collaboration with John Franks with the long term goal of
proving that generic area preserving diffeomorphisms of the two dimensional
sphere have dense periodic orbits. The more immediate goal is to find analogs
for generic area preserving diffeomorphisms of the topological structure that is
known to exist for twist maps. The fourth is a collaboration with Lee Mosher.
The first steps in the project will be to identify and study quasi-lines that
can play the role in Culler Vogtmann space that Teichmuller geodesics play in
Teichmuller space.

This proposal is concerned with the interface between two areas of mathematics:
two dimensional dynamical systems and geometric group theory. The former studies
the long term behavior of systems that evolve over time, while the latter treats
algebraic objects by geometric means. The fields have been intertwined for more
than fifty years and have been the focus of a great deal of research in the past
twenty. Part of the proposal focuses on two long standing fundamental questions
in two dimensional dynamical systems. The first examines how simple systems
change into chaotic ones. The second concerns transformations of the sphere that
preserve area, and asks whether every piece of the sphere contains at least one
point that eventually (as the system evolves) returns to its original position.
There are two groups (in the technical algebraic sense) that are most closely
related to two dimensional dynamical systems. They are the mapping class group
and the outer automorphism group. To understand the geometry of a group one must
understand its geodesics; i.e. what the shortest paths are between any two
points. The geodesics of the mapping class group have been well understood for
some time. The principal investigator will generalize from what is known about
the geodesics of the mapping class group to identify and study geodesics for the
outer automorphism group.
