
* 0103208
* Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2001,06/25/2003
* Lee Mosher,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 104,961.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0103208 Principal Investigator: Lee Mosher

The motivating theme of geometric group theory is that finitely generated groups
can be studied using topological and geometric methods. Starting around 1980,
Gromov proposed classifying groups geometrically using the relation of quasi-
isometry. He demonstrated that the quasi-isometry class of a group G can often
be described explicitly in simple algebraic or geometric terms, a process now
referred to as ``quasi-isometric rigidity'' or ``QI-rigidity'' for the group G.
The first part of this project will be to investigate QI-rigidity problems for
graphs of surface groups and of abelian groups. An initial focus will be those
graphs of groups with the simplest algebraic structure, namely semidirect
products with free groups, determined by a homomorphism from a free group into
an appropriate automorphism group such as the mapping class group of a surface.
General graphs of surface groups are determined by homomorphisms into the
commensurability mapping class group, a much more mysterious object, and this
point of view will be used to investigate constructions of new and interesting
examples. Also, recent work on graphs of abelian groups has revealed a lot of
rich structure, suggesting a real possibility of obtaining QI-rigidity in many
new cases. In the second part of this project, the focus will be to study
geometric properties of free groups, motivated by analogies between surface
groups and free groups. In particular, Thurston's ending lamination conjecture,
an important goal in the study of surface groups, has an analogue in the study
of free groups, in terms of classifying certain group actions up to equivariant
quasi-isometry. Pursuing this issue will require generalizing many of the
standard tools of surface groups, such as geodesics in Teichmuller space, to the
setting of free groups.

Geometric group theory is the study of infinitely symmetric patterns. Popular
examples called ``surface groups'' are familiar from wallpaper symmetries and
from the symmetries of Escher's prints. Scientific examples occur in the
symmetry groups of crystalline arrays, and the symmetry groups of field theories
in particle physics. The development of topology starting in the late 19th
century, and the concomitant development of combinatorial group theory,
exhibited a direct link between abstract groups and geometry. The need for
deeper understanding of this link has been demonstrated again and again by
different threads within 20th century mathematical developments. Many of these
threads were pulled together around 1980 by Gromov, whose proposed unification
of geometric group theory using the relation of ``quasi-isometry'' has been very
fruitful in the intervening twenty years. The focus of this research project
will be to investigate quasi-isometric classification problems for several
different types of symmetry groups. In particular, by using a constructive
technique known as ``graphs of groups'', new symmetry groups can be constructed
out of familiar examples such as surface groups; these and closely related
constructions will be the subjects of this research project.
