
* 0103862
* Topology of Nonisolated Singularities and Scale-based Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,07/19/2001
* James Damon,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2004
* USD 84,507.00

DMS-0103862 James N. Damon

Professor Damon's research will apply infinitesimal and stratification methods
from singularity theory to investigate the topology and deformation properties
of a general class of highly nonisolated singular spaces. These spaces arise as
nonlinear sections of certain natural universal varieties. For instance,
geometric and deformation properties of mappings under various equivalences can
be captured by such universal varieties. The structure of the tangent vector
fields will be used to deduce algebraic formulae for certain fundamental
topological invariants. These will be given in terms of certain natural
algebraic and geometric multiplicities, measuring the singular behavior of
mappings relative to associated geometric structures such as foliations Second,
he will refine these ideas for questions in computer imaging by developing
geometric structures associated to objects and features in images in terms of
such highly singular spaces. The presence of discreteness, noise, and
distortions in images require a "scale-based geometry" which is applicable to
nondifferentiable functions, measures, and even distributions. Such a geometry
will apply to "almost all" objects in a given type, and will yield stable
geometric structures in scale space. This will allow the geometric analysis of
images using functions and measures discriminating various features in images.

The first part of Professor Damon's research will determine for specific types
of systems of nonlinear equations, the qualitative properties of the set of
solutions. These can be obtained from certain universal systems of equations. He
proposes to use certain infinitesimal symmetries of the equations to deduce
properties of the set of solutions in terms of algebraic invariants which
reflect both properties of the universal equations and how the specific
equations relate to the universal ones. Second, the research will be applied to
problems in computer imaging. To objects and features in images, one may
associate geometric structures capturing their properties for various imaging
purposes. Such structures are defined using systems of equations as above. The
presence of discreteness, noise and distortions in images interferes with
identifying geometric features. The research will refine the methods described
above via "scale-based" versions which introduce robust geometric structures
overcoming these difficulties, which can then be used for a variety of computer
imaging problems.




