
* 0103843
* Low-Dimensional Geometry and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2001,07/17/2001
* Feng Luo,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 77,130.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0103843 Principal Investigator: Feng Luo

The principal investigator will focus on two problems in the Teichmuller theory
and 3-manifold topology. In Teichmuller theory, the aim of the investigation is
to understand the complex structure on the Teichmuller space by constructing
holomorphic functions arising from flat singular metric uniformization of the
Riemann surface. We have produced many naturally defined complex valued
functions on the Teichmuller space. The goal is to show that they are
holomorphic. This will give us a better understanding of the complex structure
which is of vital importance to the Teichmuller theory. In 3-manifold topology,
we propose to show that any non-trivial 3-manifold group has a non-trivial
SL(2,F) representation for some field F. We have translated the existence
problem into a problem concerning how simple loops propagate in a surface. With
the recent advance of our knowledge on surfaces, one may eventually solve the
problem using surface topology. The existence of SL (2,F) representations will
have many important consequences in 3-manifold topology.

A 3-manifold is a space in which every point has a small surrounding similar to
our real world. It is an important mathematical problem to classify all
3-manifolds. One of the main tool developed in recent decades in 3-manifolds
theory is to use geometry. In particular, the geometry of surfaces has been used
very successfully in understanding the 3-dimensional spaces. The proposed work
addresses the topology of 3-manifolds and the geometry of surfaces. We attempt
to use the symmetry theory (SL(2) representation theory) to understand the
fundamental group of 3-manifolds which is a vital invariant of 3-manifolds. The
SL(2,C) representation theory has been used very successfully in recent years by
many topologists. Our approach seems to be new and uses simple loops on
surfaces. The second part of the proposed work addresses the geometry of
surfaces. One of the main problems on surface geometry is the moduli space
problem. The moduli space problem asks for, for instance, what is the shape of
the space of all convex polyhedrons which look like a cube. Many geometric
problems are best expressed in terms of the topology and geometry of the moduli
space. The corresponding object for high genus surface is the Teichmuller space.
In contrasts to the topology of the Teichmuller space which is well understood
for about 60 years, the geometry of it is much less understood. Our proposed
work is an attempt to understand explicitly the complex analytic geometry of the
Teichmuller space. The explicit description of the complex geometry of the
Teichmuller space will have applications not only in mathematics but also in
physics, for instance in string theory.
