
* 0103667
* The Topology, Geometry and Arithmetic of Moduli Spaces of Curves
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,02/25/2003
* Richard Hain,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 107,061.00

DMS-0103667 Richard M. Hain

The goal of this project is to better understand the structure of mapping class
groups and then to apply this knowledge to the problem of understanding motives
over the spectrum of the integers. The Principal Investigator hopes to compute
the stable highest weight decomposition of the graded quotients of the lower
central series of the Torelli groups (tensored with the reals) as modules over
the real symplectic group of rank g. This should be of interest to those
studying 3-manifold invariants. The Principal Investigator plans to use his
knowledge of this stable decomposition to study the image of the Galois group of
the rational numbers on appropriate completions of mapping class groups. In
particular, he (in joint work with Makoto Matsumoto) hopes to be able to
characterize the Zariski closure of the image of the Galois group in the group
of outer automorphisms of the relative unipotent completion of mapping class
groups of large genus. This should lead to improved understanding of the
connections between Hodge Theory and Galois Theory; in particular, to improved
understanding of the role of mixed zeta numbers in Galois theory. The Principal
Investigator also plans to study the pseudoconvexity of the moduli spaces of
curves. Looijenga has conjectured that there is a proper, non-negative,
(g-2)-pseudoconvex real-valued function defined on the moduli space of genus g
curves. Hain, in joint work with Looijenga, hopes to prove that the function
that he constructed with David Reed several years ago is such a function. This
result would lead to new vanishing results for coherent cohomology of moduli
spaces of curves as well as unified proofs of several results of Diaz and Harer
on the topology of these moduli spaces.

Topology is the study of those geometrical properties of surfaces and their
generalizations that remain unchanged under stretching (short of tearing) and
other continuous deformations. Geometry is the study of those properties of
surfaces and their generalizations that preserve geometric properties such as
distances and/or angles. There is a profound connection between the topological
symmetries of a surface (called the mapping class group of the surface), the
geometry of all of the different ways of measuring angles on such a surface (the
moduli space of conformal structures on the surface) and the arithmetical
properties of the surface when viewed as the graph of a polynomial. Questions
about mapping class groups and moduli spaces of conformal structures on surfaces
arise in many areas of mathematics (such as the study of numbers, and algebraic
geometry), and have applications to particle physics through string theory and
conformal field theory. There are also potential significant applications to
cryptography. The goal of this proposal is to further explore and understand the
intricate and deep connections between these topological, geometrical and
arithmetical aspects of surface theory, especially those aspects with
connections to number theory.
