
* 0104177
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,05/30/2003
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 213,325.00

We investigate the classification of compact topological and smooth manifolds,
as well as embedding problems - knot theory. We use both new and classical
homological, geometric and analytic techniques such as algebraic L-and K-theory,
controlled topology, operator theory and Von Neumann signatures. One problem
attacked, from differential geometry, is to determine whether almost flat
manifolds bound compact manifolds. New knot invariants, defined during the prior
grant, are continuing to reveal new and unexpected knotting phenomena and will
be used to further investigate the classification of topological four manifolds
within a fixed homology type. These invariants will also be applied to further
compute the topological concordance group of knots, and to the rich structure of
three manifolds as seen through descending series of the fundamental group.
Another problem is to compute and apply characteristic classes for combinatorial
vector bundles, an initial step in understanding a new category of manifolds -
the combinatorial differentiable manifolds of Gelfand-MacPherson. A final topic
is the computation of algebraic K- and L-theory using controlled topology and
applying these computations to manifolds with fixed fundamental group.

A n-dimensional manifold is a set of points which is locally modeled on an
n-dimensional linear space. For instance a surface is a locally 2-dimensional
linear space, such as a sphere, or the surface of a donut (torus). The principal
problem of geometric topology is the classification of manifolds. In
differential topology we also ask how many ways we may do calculus on a given
manifold, addressing the uniqueness question. The fundamental group of a
manifold gives an algebraic structure to the collection of all loops in the
manifold, thus providing a pathway to algebra. The researchers focus on both
high dimensional and low dimensional manifolds. Four dimensional manifolds are
of particular interest as the results and techniques in this dimension manifest
the harmony of the algebraic techniques which have found success in high
dimensional manifold topology and the geometric techniques which prevail in
dimension three. Investigating the foundations of manifold and knot theory
fundamentally underpins our understanding of geometry, algebra, physics and
differential equations. Additionally, knot theory plays a growing role in string
theory, quantum field theory and the study of DNA.

---------- Forwarded message ---------- Date: Fri, 11 May 2001 14:27:02 -0500
(EST) From: "James F. Davis" <jfdavis@indiana.edu> To: Christopher Stark
<cstark@nsf.gov> Cc: korr@indiana.edu Subject: Re: NSF proposal recommendation

Hi Chris,

Kent and I were very happy to here that you plan to recommend that our NSF
proposal be granted. However, some of circumstances have changed since we wrote
the proposal, so I thought I should discuss them with you in case the budget is
affected. Sorry for the delay getting back to you, I was visiting the University
of Chicago this week. We asked for summer money to support three graduate
students: Karl Bloch, Diarmuid Crowley, and Tae-Hee Kim. Well, I am happy to
report that Diarmuid Crowley has been named a Clay Mathematical Institute Lift-
Off Mathematician

http://www.claymath.org/researchers/index.htm

and will receive some money from them this summer (provided some visa problems
work out.) He is suggesting to Clay that they award him the money from June 13
to July 27. After Aug 1, I believe he will be supported by Max Planck Institute
in Bonn. However, he could still use NSF money, for example, he is attending the
3-week School on high-dimensional manifold topology in at the ICTP in Trieste,
Italy, mostly at his own expense. Please advise us if it is necessary to
rebudget and return the money allotted to Diarmuid.

The second change is with regard to my proposed REU student, Matt Cecil. Matt
Cecil worked with me as an REU student last summer (partially supported by NSF
funds), and continued throughout the academic year. He is attending UCSD as a
math graduate student in the fall. However, due to mathematical reasons and
personal reasons, he will not be an REU student with me this summer. So the
question again is - what to do with the money allotted to him? I talked to our
chair, Dan Maki, and he said that he could use the money to help undergraduate
research projects connected with industry. Dan has many industrial contacts
throughout the state of Indiana and had lead such projects for several years.
The money would primarily go to student travel expenses.

So, Chris, please advise on whether we should give some money back to the NSF
and rebudget, or just go with the modifications outlined above.

Jim




