
* 0104077
* Curvature and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2001,06/21/2005
* Stephan Stolz,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2007
* USD 343,888.00

DMS-0104077 Stephan Stolz The principal investigator proposes to study the
question which manifolds admit Riemannian metrics of positive scalar and Ricci
curvature, respectively. Concerning the first question, previous work of the
principal investigator shows that these questions boil down to computing abelian
groups which depend only on the dimension, the fundamental group and the first
two Stiefel-Whitney classes of the manifold these metrics live on. The role
these groups play in the existence/classification problem for positive scalar
curvature metrics is analogous of the role of Wall's surgery obstruction groups
in the existence/classification problem for smooth structures. The principal
investigator hopes to gain an algebraic/functorial understanding of these groups
by studying various maps that relate these groups with
homology/K-theory/connective K-theory of classifying spaces of groups, and with
the K-theory of the associated group C*-algebras. Concerning positive Ricci
curvature, the investigator is pursuing a proof of his conjecture that the
existence of a positive Ricci curvature metric on a spin manifold with vanishing
first Pontryagin class implies the vanishing of its Witten genus. This invariant
arose from considerations in string theory. Heuristically it is the index of a
yet to be rigorously defined "Dirac operator" on the free loop space of this
manifold. Mike Hopkins has described a homotopy theoretic way to define the
Witten genus of a family of such manifolds which lives in the elliptic
cohomology of the parameter space. It is a very interesting challenge to express
the elliptic cohomology and the family Witten genus in terms of the objects that
string theorists are analysing and thus to give a geometric interpretation of
Hopkins construction.

These projects fit in the general framework of trying to relate the topology of
a manifold (qualitative information about its global shape) and its geometry
(quantitative information about its local shape). For 2-dimensional manifolds
(like the surface of a ball or a tire), a nice classification has been known for
a long time: Two such surfaces have the same topology (that is, they can be
deformed into each other if we think of them as being made of thin rubber) if
and only if they have the same number of `holes' (the surface of a ball no
holes, the surface of a tire or a cup has one hole, and a pretzel has two
holes). Moreover, if a surface has `positive curvature' in the sense that the
angle sum in each triangle whose edges are geodesics (shortest curves) is larger
than 180 degrees, then this surface has the same topology as the surface of a
ball. It is a major goal of modern day mathematics to generalize these results
to higher dimensional manifolds. For example, our universe is a manifold of
dimension 3, Einstein's space-time has dimension 4, and manifolds of dimension
10, respectively, 26 play a crucial role in the theoretical physics of the
attempted unification of the four fundamental forces.
