
* 0104111
* RUI: Polygonal Knot Theory, Controlled Topology and Topology of Homology Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2001,08/02/2001
* Heather Johnston,NY,Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 93,588.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0104111 Principal Investigator: Heather M. Johnston

Polygonal knot theory studies the isotopy classes of embedded polygons in three
space where the number and length of edges are fixed throughout the isotopy. The
PI and co-author have found the first examples of polygons which are
topologically unknotted, but for which the isotopy class of embeddings is
nontrivial. The PI and student collaborators will investigate questions such as
whether or not there are any such examples for equilateral polygons. Surgery
theory studies the set of manifold structures within a given homotopy type. The
Bryant-Ferry-Mio-Weinberger surgery exact sequence for homology manifolds has
been used by the PI to prove that up to s-cobordism many of the geometric
properties of manifolds also hold for homology manifolds. The Novikov conjecture
and related coarse Novikov conjecture are keys to our understanding of surgery
theory. The PI has developed some techniques for attacking the coarse Novikov
conjecture for unusual non uniformly contractible spaces. Controlled and bounded
surgery theory will be used to further investigate homology manifolds and the
coarse Novikov conjecture.

Up to now, topologists have studied well-behaved spaces such as manifolds. Yet
singular spaces arise more and more frequently in subjects such as analysis,
algebraic geometry and physics. The non-resolvable homology manifolds studied in
this project are so singular that they have no points whatsoever with Euclidean
neighborhoods. Perhaps these strange spaces will someday account for the extra
dimensions of the universe predicted by string theory. Coarse geometry, and the
coarse homology of John Roe are ways of separating the large scale behavior of
spaces from the local information. The invariants of coarse geometry and
topology depend only on the large scale behavior of the space. Better
understanding of these objects and their invariants will help topologists to
classify the different types of singular spaces, which appear throughout modern
physics. In polygonal knot theory, a new twist on the classical study of knots,
a different type of singular spaces is studied. This new theory is modeled by
sticks joined end to end by universally flexible joints (rubber tubing perhaps)
to form a closed loop. The PI has produced the first examples of configurations
which are stuck (cannot be unraveled), but only because they are made of sticks.
If the same configurations were made of string they could be unraveled. Knot
theory of strings has been applied to the study of protein and DNA molecules.
For a small number of atoms each bond can be represented by a stick in the model
discussed here, This is a richer and more appropriate model for small molecules
than the string which has been used in the past.
