
* 0104162
* Representation of Galois groups and descent in algebraic K-theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,02/25/2003
* Gunnar Carlsson,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 305,007.00

DMS-0104162 Gunnar Carlsson

This project includes several different directions of research. Carlsson will
study a homotopy theoretic model he has constructed for the algebraic K-theory
spectrum of a field, which is built out of the representation theory of the
absolute Galois group of the field. He will try to prove that the model is
indeed equivalent to the K-theory of the field, as well as to work out the
consequences of this result for the Quillen-Lichtenbaum conjectures and the
relationship between this result and the Bloch-Kato conjecture. He will also
investigate potential applications of algebraic topology in high dimensional
data analysis. He expects to improve software which he and V. De Silva have
developed for homology computation, with the goal of identifying features such
as singular points as well as global topology for data sets of dimension greater
than three. He also plans to study homotopy theoretic issues which arise in
computational questions, relating to sampling subcomplexes from large simplicial
complexes. Kiem plans to compute intersection numbers for singular moduli spaces
of curves. This is an important problem since the intersection numbers in this
case are related to well-known geometric invariants, such as the Casson
invariant.

One of the great themes in mathematics over the last two centuries is the strong
relationship between arithmetic and geometry. The study of this theme was
initiated by Abel and Galois in the early 19th century, and in this century its
further development has resulted in our obtaining very precise information
concerning sets of integer or rational solutions to systems of equations. The
goal of this project is to explore another manifestation of this theme, in the
form of the so-called algebraic K-theory of fields. Algebraic K-theory is a
geometric construction attached to arithmetic objects, called fields. Fields are
arithmetic objects in which one can add, multiply, and divide. Algebraic
K-theory attaches geometric objects to these fields, and in such a way that
already well understood invariants of fields can be extracted easily. Algebraic
K-theory also contains many less well understood invariants as well, and the
goal of understanding these invariants has been one toward which topologists
have been striving since the early 1970's, when Quillen defined higher algebraic
K-theory. Two important conjectures have been formulated concerning algebraic
K-theory, the Quillen-Lichtenbaum and Bloch-Kato conjectures. They would relate
the algebraic K-theory of a field to properties of its "absolute Galois groups",
an object which incorporates all possible symmetries of sets of solutions of
sets of equations over the field in question. This project aims to understand
very clearly how algebraic K-theory is built out of information of this large
group of symmetries, and to use this understanding to approach the two central
conjectures mentioned above.
