
* 0104126
* Knots and 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,07/13/2001
* Abigail Thompson,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 58,700.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0104126 Principal Investigator: Abigail A. Thompson

The focus of the proposed research is the study of knots and 3-dimensional
spaces. We will examine questions about surgery on knots, knotting of graphs in
3-space dimensional spaces, and Heegaard decompositions of 3-manifolds. We
describe three specific goals and their connections to some of the basic
questions in the field. The first goal is to develop the tools and techniques of
multi-parameter thin position and sweep-outs so that they can be used to tackle
some of the long-standing problems in knot theory and 3-manifold theory. A
second is to extend work of the proposer and M. Scharlemann on unknotted planar
graphs in the 3-sphere to a more general setting. Finally, we aim to obtain a
clearer understanding of general questions about 3-manifolds by obtaining a
deeper understanding of 3-manifolds of Heegaard genus two. We will examine
specific questions about tunnel number one knots, special cases of larger
questions about what genus two manifolds can be obtained by surgery on a knot in
the 3-sphere, which of these manifolds contain immersed surfaces with injective
fundamental groups, and how information from the Heegaard diagrams of these
manifolds translates into geometric and algebraic information about the manifold
itself.

We live in what is apparently a universe with three spatial dimensions.
Exploring the possible forms that our universe might have is not only a deep
problem for physicists but also for mathematicians. Different mathematical
possibilities lead to very different expected physical properties. As an
example, we do do not know if, were we able to program a very fast rocket to go
"straight" into space, it would eventually return to its starting point, like a
ship on the surface of the earth, or if it would continue to travel away from us
forever. There are an infinite number of possibilities for the shape of the
universe. This project proposes to explore some of them using the techniques of
low-dimensional topology and knot theory.
