
* 0104039
* Topics in low-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,04/18/2003
* Darren Long,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 400,306.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0104039 Principal Investigator: Darren Long

The proposers plan to continue their work on a variety of problems bearing on
the understanding of the geometric and topological aspects of low dimensional
manifolds. On the topological side, the areas of study include Heegaard
splittings, unknotting tunnels and related topics; the geometric side deals with
issues related to orbifolds, the construction and melding of surface subgroups,
developing an understanding of higher dimensional hyperbolic manifolds, as well
as some interactions with other areas, for example algebraic number theory.

Manifolds play a central role in physics, mathematics and to some extent in
other sciences, since they are objects which on small scales look like Euclidean
space of dimension n. For example, the space that we live in is a three manifold
and space-time is a four manifold. For this and other reasons, these dimensions
have attracted a good deal of attention in mathematics and physics. One basic
unsolved problem is exactly which manifold is the correct model for the universe
- there has been some speculation that it falls into the class of so-called
hyperbolic manifolds, a certain class of three dimensional spaces which in some
sense appear to be generic. Cosmological theories about the origins of the
universe put constraints on the shape of space-time and hence constraints on
which manifolds could occur. One of the goals of this project is refine current
methods (which have already ruled out many possibilities) to narrow the search
down further. There are also other applications of geometric ideas which are
less obvious but still, in fact, directly important. It is no exaggeration to
say that almost any problem which can be formulated qualitatively can be studied
with geometric methods and as a result the powerful tools developed over the
last thirty years in low-dimensional topology can be brought to bear upon it.


