
* 0104275
* Non-Commutative Algebraic Phenomena in the Topology of Three- and Four-dimensional Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,05/15/2003
* Tim Cochran,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 259,857.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0104275 Principal Investigator: Tim Cochran

This project develops a new area of noncommutative algebraic topology and its
applications to low-dimensional topology. The success of algebraic topology in
knot theory, for example, has, until recently centered around abelian
invariants, that is to say, invariants associated to the universal abelian
covering space of the knot or link exterior. These invariants are the Alexander
module, which is the first homology of this cover as a module over a commutative
Laurent polynomial ring, and the Blanchfield pairing. These determine the
S-equivalence class of the knot as well as various other invariants. From the
perspective of the knot group G, the Alexander module is simply G'/G". Hence any
behavior associated to G" will be invisible to these abelian invariants. We
remedy this deficiency by studying the quotients of successive terms of the
higher derived series, or, put another way, study modules associated to more
general solvable covering spaces. These are modules over noncommutative rings
and thus are difficult to work with. We use techniques from noncommutative
algebra and C* algebras to define invariants. We find , for each integer n, an
entire theory which parallels the Alexander module and Blanchfield form and
signatures. There are applications to estimating genus, detecting fibered knots
and 3-manifolds, new invariants of concordance and representations of mapping
class groups.

The advent of quantum mechanics led scientists to many paradoxical, but now
accepted, facts about our universe. In particular, there came the realization
that "commutative mathematics" was inadequate to describe our physical world.
Recall that 2 times 3 equals 3 times 2 is the commutative law of multiplication
of numbers. Quantum mechanics showed that physical quantities are not mere
numbers but more like arrays or matrices of numbers. Since multiplication of
matrices is not commutative, this explains and models noncommutative phenomena
at the most fundamental levels of the physical world. This project studies the
shape of 3 and 4-dimensional spaces by using new noncommutative mathematics
arising from algebra.


