
* 0104318
* The Homotopy Theory of Classifying Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,05/11/2001
* Jesper Grodal,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2004
* USD 72,480.00

DMS-0104318 Jesper Grodal

The project consists of developing the homotopy theory of classifying spaces of
compact Lie groups (including finite groups) and their generalizations. The goal
of this is to solve central problems in homotopy theory involving classifying
spaces, as well as to discover new relations to problems in group theory and
representation theory. A further goal is to produce results in related fields
such as in the theory of group actions, equivariant cohomology, and group
cohomology. The project centers around developing the homotopy theoretic group
theory of the classifying space BG, or rather of its p-completion. This involves
examining the induction theory, p-local theory, representation theory as well as
the more general actions of these objects. The methods used come from modern
unstable homotopy theory, developed since the solution of the Sullivan
conjecture, combined with ideas and techniques from modern group theory.

Forming the classifying space BG of a group of symmetries G is a way of
geometrically or topologically encoding the "symmetries" present in G. Geometric
spaces of this form and generalizations thereof are ubiquitous in topology, and
hence form an important class of spaces to study. Furthermore, the less rigid
structure of the classifying space BG, compared to that of the group G, makes
certain techniques available in the study of the former which were not available
when dealing with the later directly. Hence, studying the group theory of BG
provides an interesting and useful way of studying the original group G.
