
* 0104030
* Asymptotic Properties of 3-Manifolds and Their Fundamental Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,04/11/2003
* James Cannon,UT,Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 105,036.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0104030 Principal Investigator: James W. Cannon

We attempt to resolve the hyperbolic case of Thurston's Geometrization
Conjecture for 3-dimensional manifolds. Among the many possible approaches, we
choose to study the asymptotic recursive properties of the fundamental group of
the manifold. We concentrate on the asymptotic shingling patterns at infinity
defined by the group and seek methods for proving that such patterns do or do
not satisfy the necessary and sufficient conformality axiom which we introduced
in our earlier studies. We study this problem in three contexts: (1) We study
closed 3-manifolds with Gromov-hyperbolic group, with emphasis on the
examination of concrete examples constructed by our new method of twisted-face-
pairings; (2) We study general subdivision or local-replacement rules in the
plane, where we have more freedom in constructing examples with special
properties; and (3) We study branched coverings of the 2-sphere by the 2-sphere,
where the corresponding problem is to some extent already solved by means of
Thurston's combinatorial characterization of rational maps. It is in the third
context that the connection with classical Teich- mueller theory becomes
apparent; we are seeking an appropriate version of Teichmueller theory for our
setting. In all of these contexts, we use the circle-packing programs of Ken
Stephenson, the automatic group programs of Epstein, Holt, and Rees, and the
program SnapPea of Jeff Weeks in conjunction with programs of the proposer and
his coworkers to construct, geometrically optimize, and explore the patterns
being studied.

William P. Thurston has supplied us with a powerful conjectural picture of the
spaces of 3-dimensional mathematics, the 3-dimensional manifolds. Thurston's
Geometrization Conjecture is the most important unresolved problem in low
dimensional topology, even if one sets aside the case of spherical geometry
where the conjecture implies the famous "million dollar" Poincare Conjecture.
Thurston suggests that every 3-manifold can be divided in an intrinsic manner
into pieces, each of which is modelled on one of eight natural geometries.
Within each piece, one can apply well-understood algebraic and geometric
techniques to derive properties of the manifold. This project seeks to resolve
the generic case of the Thurston Conjecture, namely the case of hyperbolic
geometry. The technique employed is to maximally unwind the manifold, that is,
take its universal cover, and study the asymptotic properties of this cover. The
cover can be studied combinatorially almost as a growing cellular organism as a
plant or animal might be studied by a cell biologist. The cover can be studied
computationally as a cellular automaton might be studied by a computer
scientist. The cover can be studied analytically by methods of discrete
dynamical systems or differential equations or conformal mapping.
