
* 0105342
* Topology of Hyperplane Arrangements
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,04/08/2002
* Alexandru Suciu,MA,Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 67,172.00

DMS-0105342 Alexandru I. Suciu This project is centered around a topological
study of complex hyperplane arrangements, with a view towards finding
effectively computable invariants of their complements. The goal is to decide
whether a given invariant is combinatorially determined, and, if it is, to
express it explicitly in terms of the intersection lattice of the arrangement.
An important role is played by the jumping loci for cohomology with coefficients
in local systems, and the related resonance varieties. These varieties have
emerged as a central object of study. They provide deep information about the
homotopy theory of the complement of an arrangement, as well as a bridge
relating various invariants, in often unexpected ways. Another key role is
played by the rational-homotopy notion of formality, which provides the
underlying explanation for many of the encountered phenomena. Whenever possible,
the study is done in a more general setting, which includes certain types of
subspace arrangements, both real and complex, as well as certain links in the
3-sphere. Such a point of view enlarges the range of applicability of the
results, and helps explain what is really peculiar to complex hyperplane
arrangements.

In its simplest manifestation, an arrangement is a finite collection of lines in
the plane. These lines cut the plane into components, and understanding the
topology of the complement amounts to counting those components. In the case of
lines in the complex plane (or, for that matter, hyperplanes in complex
n-space), the complement is connected, and its topology (as reflected, for
example, in its homotopy groups) is much more interesting. The theory of
arrangements is a relatively new branch of mathematics, started in the 1960's
with a study of the classifying space for the pure braid group. The theory has
developed at the interface between topology, algebra, algebraic geometry, and
combinatorics. Hyperplane arrangements, and the closely related configuration
spaces, are used in numerous areas, including robotics, multi-dimensional
billiards, graphics, molecular biology, computer vision, and databases for
representing the space of all possible states of a system characterized by many
degrees of freedom. There are also deep connections between hyperplane
arrangements, knot theory, hypergeometric functions, conformal field theory, and
quantum cohomology.
