
* 0116288
* TQFTs in Spectra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2001,12/13/2004
* Jack Morava,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 170,247.00

DMS-0116288 Jack Morava

The central idea of this proposal is a mathematical definition for the
physicists' notion of topological gravity (analogous to Segal's mathematical
definition of conformal field theory) as a representation of a monoidal category
with manifolds as objects, using the geometric realization of a category of
cobordisms between those objects as its morphism spaces; these spaces are unions
of classifying spaces for the diffeomorphism groups of the cobordisms. In two
dimensions, the resulting category is quite similar to that considered by Segal,
but it generalizes very naturally, e.g. to four dimensions, where it has close
connections with classical general relativity; but there is also a version for
topological (i.e, non-smooth) four-manifolds, lacking any clear classical
analog. Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten theory fit naturally into this framework,
which predicts that such invariants should have higer-order `gravitational
descendants', e.g. higher-codimension versions of the wall-crossing
obstructions. In dimension two, this formalism fits in well on the one hand with
work of Madsen and Tillmann on Mumford's conjecture, and on the other with the
theory of a `large' quantum cohomology studied by Kontsevich, Manin, Witten, and
others. One concrete goal of the project is to construct a cohomological theory
related to the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer eta-invariant of a three-manifold, as
Casson's invariant is related to Floer homology.

Classical mechanics studies the trajectories of point particles in a smooth
geometric background, and much recent work in string theory can be formulated in
similar terms, with the background replaced by the (infinite-dimensional) space
of smooth loops in some ambient manifold. However, the mathematics of these free
loopspaces is quite challenging, and their topology (not to mention their
geometry) is not yet well-understood. An added complication is that the models
studied in quantum field theory involve topology change in a conceptually
intrinsic way, and thus seem often to call, not for the free loopspace itself,
but for a suitable completion with nice properties -- whose nature is still
being worked out. This proposal suggests that the desired completion is an
analog, for free loopspaces, of the dual of a finite-dimensional smooth manifold
(as studied in the 1960's by Whitehead, Spanier, Atiyah, and others). This point
of view seems compatible with work of Chas and Sullivan on string topology, with
work of Cohen, Jones, and Segal on Floer homotopy type, and with work of Ando
and myself on the Witten genus.
