
* 0124600
* Topological Aspects of Chow Quotients and Moduli Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2001,07/16/2001
* Yi Hu,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 93,000.00

DMS-0104600 Yi Hu

The investigator proposes to give topological constructions of the Chow quotient
by introducing moduli spaces of stable orbits with prescribed momentum charges
and moduli spaces of stable action-manifolds, respectively. The introductions of
stable orbits and stable action-manifolds follow closely the idea of
investigator's earlier work on stable degeneration of polygons. Note that just
like a stable polygon is a collection of ordinary polygons, a stable orbit is a
collection of ordinary orbits. The connections from stable orbits and stable
action-manifolds to the corresponding Chow cycles are to be established by
moment map. Next, he also attempts to interpret the Uhlenbeck compactification
as a topological analogy of a Chow quotient. In the same vein, the investigator
proposes a moduli problem for stable tuples of homogeneous polynomials of a
fixed total degree in two variables. The investigator anticipates that the
resulting moduli space is the smooth compactification of the variety of
holomorphic maps from one-dimensional projective space to n-dimensional
projective space as constructed in his earlier work on blowups along
arrangements of subvarieties.

This proposal deals with the fruitful interaction between topology and algebraic
geometry. Algebraic Geometry as a field is both old and new. It is old because
of its long history, it is new because it is still vigorously developing as one
of the main stream mathematics. It has numerous beautiful connections and
applications to other subjects. Roughly speaking, Algebraic Geometry studies
spaces which are locally the set of solutions of some polynomial equations.
Topology is another amazing mathematical achievement of this century and is the
study of flexible geometrical properties of spaces. One of central problems in
algebraic geometry is the classification of spaces in algebraic geometry. A key
idea here is to treat every type of spaces as a point in a "master set" which is
technically called a moduli space. This paper focus on the topological and
geometrical aspects of moduli spaces. The proposal consists of some new ideas
and methods which are substantially based upon investigator's earlier papers,
among others.


