
* 0129227
* Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference 2002, at the University of Texas at Austin on March 21-23, 2002
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 02/01/2002,01/25/2002
* Cameron Gordon,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2004
* USD 31,500.00

DMS-0129227 Cameron M. Gordon

The Department of Mathematics at the University of Texas at Austin will host the
2002 Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference. Now in its 36th year, this is the
largest annual topology conference in the US. It has a broad scope that
encompasses set-theoretic and general topology, continuum theory and dynamical
systems, geometric group theory and geometric topology. It thus provides a
unique forum for researchers in a wide range of disciplines within topology.
There will be eight invited plenary one-hour lectures of a semi-expository
nature, given by leading researchers in the areas covered. There will also be
twenty invited half-hour lectures, together with 15-minute contributed talks,
held in four parallel sessions. The invited speakers have been selected with the
help of an advisory committee of experts in the various subfields.

Topology is one of the major subdisciplines of mathematics, and, at just over a
hundred years old, the youngest. It originated with Henri Poincare around 1900,
who introduced it as a means of describing the qualitative behavior of certain
physical systems (for example, our solar system), whose complexity renders a
precise quantitative analysis too difficult. The wide range covered by the
subject today is well represented by the Conference. General topology deals with
the abstract properties of topological spaces; set-theoretic topology impinges
upon the logical foundations of mathematics. The study of dynamical systems is
close to Poincare's original motivation, and deals with the behavior of various
iterative processes. These often give rise to complex objects, continua, which
are studied in their own right. Geometric topology deals with manifolds, objects
which are locally like n-dimensional Euclidean space, but whose global structure
might be quite complicated. For instance, there is a lot of current activity in
3-dimensional topology, whose goal is essentially to describe all theoretically
possible 3-dimensional universes. Rich connections have recently been discovered
between this subject and quantum physics, while on the other hand topological
techniques from the theory of knots in 3-dimensional space have recently been
applied to the study of DNA. Finally, geometric group theory, a relatively new
subject, studies groups, which are algebraic objects, from a topological point
of view; this is leading to deep connections between topology and algebra. The
interaction at the Conference between workers in all these different branches of
topology is expected to be very fruitful.
