
* 0134938
* CAREER: Realizing Derived Equivalences
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2002,02/25/2003
* Brooke Shipley,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 04/30/2004
* USD 86,464.00

DMS-0134938 Brooke E. Shipley

The research component of this proposal involves several questions which fall
into two overall projects. One project is to consider when an equivalence
between derived categories is induced by a more richly structured equivalence.
The goal here is to develop an obstruction theory for realizing derived
equivalences by underlying structured equivalences. In particular, this may have
applications to the question associated to Broue's Conjecture in representation
theory of which stable equivalences lift to derived equivalences. The second
project is to develop homotopy theoretic algebraic models. One piece of this
project is to continue work with John Greenlees on algebraic models for rational
equivariant cohomology theories. More generally, the investigator proposes to
develop algebraic models for various stable homotopy theories.

The proposed research projects involve the interplay beween the study of
algebraic structures and topology, the study of shapes or spaces. Algebraic
topologists use algebraic structures to describe and simplify topological
phenomena. In a project on realizing derived equivalences, the investigator
hopes to use techniques developed in algebraic topology to attack questions
which originate in algebra. These techniques include the use of a theory of
obstructions, which determines whether certain constructions are possible. In
another project the investigator plans on extending existing algebraic models to
include structures involving symmetries. The educational component of this
proposal also includes several parts. The investigator will be involved in the
summer research programs for undergraduates at the University of Chicago and
Purdue University. With Lucho Avramov, she will organize a workshop on topics
related to derived categories of interest to a broad range of algebraically
related fields. With Jim McClure and Guershon Harel, the investigator will
develop a new course for mathematics education majors based on Euler's
``Elements of Algebra". The goals of this course are to help mathematical
education students master skills in algebra, develop confidence for teaching
algebra, and understand the motivation for material contained in a standard
abstract algebra course. The investigator will also participate in several
aspects of the Women in Science Program at Purdue University.


