
* 0139986
* Geometric Methods in Automorphic Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,06/03/2002
* R. Mark Goresky,NJ,Goresky, R. Mark
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 84,298.00

The Langlands-Shelstad conjecture (and its special case, the so-called
fundamental lemma) has emerged as one of the most pressing and stubborn problems
in the modern approach to automorphic forms and representation theory. The
principal investigator, together with his colleagues Robert MacPherson and
Robert Kottwitz, have discovered that the kappa-orbital integrals which occur in
the fundamental lemma may be expressed as the trace of Frobenius acting on the
cohomology of an "affine Springer fiber". So the (conjectured) fundamental lemma
is equivalent to a (fairly complicated) statement concerning the structure of
the cohomology groups of affine Springer fibers. (An affine Springer fiber is
the fixed point set, on the flag manifold of a loop group, or of a Kac-Moody Lie
group, of the vectorfield which is determined by a semisimple element in the Lie
algebra of the group. These researchers have been able to prove the required
cohomological statement for affine Springer fibers which are associated to
elements in unramified tori in the loop group. They are addressing the many
technical problems associated with understanding the homology of affine Springer
fibers associated to elements of ramified tori.

In the 1970's, R. Langlands (of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton
N.J.) developed an elaborate theory, indicating that there should be deep and
hidden connections between several widely separated areas in mathematics: number
theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, and automorphic forms. He
showed, for example, how results from representation theory could be used to
deduce results in number theory. This vision was so far-reaching and broad in
scope that it became known as "Langlands' program", and it is perhaps the
mathematician's version of "grand unification". However, most of this program
was conjectural and to some degree, even speculative. Progress on these
conjectures was slow at first, as research in this subject demands an
understanding of several different, highly technical branches of mathematics.
Nevertheless, after decades of research by scores of dedicated and talented
mathematicians worldwide, enormous progress has been made on Langlands'
conjectures. For example, Andrew Wiles' celebrated proof of "Fermat's Last
Theorem" depends in an essential way on some of these results. However, one step
in this program, which was originally felt to be a relatively minor one, has
turned out to be one of the most difficult questions in the area: the so-called
"fundamental lemma" (and its generalization, the Langlands-Shelstad conjecture).
While the supporting evidence for this conjecture is overwhelming, the
conjecture has only been proven, after Herculean efforts, in a handful of
special cases. It is a stubborn obstacle which threatens to indefinitely delay
further progress in the area. The principal investigator and his colleagues
Robert MacPherson (Institute for Advanced Study) and Robert Kottwitz (University
of Chicago) have discovered that the Langlands-Shelstad conjecture may be
restated in terms of the geometrical properties of certain objects ("affine
Springer fibers") which have recently attracted the attention of mathematicians
for completely different reasons. Using these geometric techniques, the
investigator and his colleagues expect to outline a proof for the Langlands-
Shelstad conjecture in a broad class of cases, the so-called "unramified" cases.
They are also addressing the many difficulties involved with the remaining
"ramified" cases. It is expected that this exciting connection between
Langlands' program and "Springer theory" will lead to new developments in both
subjects.
