
* 0203902
* Subdivision Rules and 3-Manifold Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2002,07/12/2002
* William Floyd,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 89,016.00

DMS-0203902 William J. Floyd

This project is an attempt to resolve the hyperbolic case of Thurston's
Geometrization Conjecture. Specifically, the goal is to resolve the conjecture
that a Gromov-hyperbolic group with space at infinity a 2-sphere has a
cocompact, properly discontinuous action on hyperbolic 3-space. The investigator
and his collaborators are approaching the conjecture from the point of view of
proving conformality of certain recursive sequences of tilings on the space at
infinity of a Gromov-hyperbolic group. Previous work has indicated that
conformality of a recursive sequence of tilings might follow from finding an
invariant conformal structure for a branched surface associated to the recursive
structure. This possibility arose from a connection between the recursive
structures and rational maps, and Thurston's classification theorem for
critically finite branched maps of the 2-sphere gives insight into how the
theory might develop. Multiple approaches are planned for finding an invariant
conformal structure. Further work is also planned on twisted face-pairing
3-manifolds. Much of the basic theory of twisted face pairings has been
completed, but some questions remain which are central to further developments
of the theory. Significant progress here could help the main part of the
project, since twisted face pairings are a good source of test examples for the
conjecture stated above.

The immediate focus of this proposal is on sequences of planar tilings. Given an
initial tiling and a combinatorial rule for subdivision, one recursively obtains
a sequence of subdivisions of the initial tiling. The goal is to understand when
these combinatorial subdivisions can be realized geometrically so that the tiles
stay "almost round" at all stages of the sequence. This problem is interesting
in its own right, but it is being studied here as part of a deeper problem. It
is a key feature of a program of the investigator and his collaborators to
resolve the hyperbolic case of William P. Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture.
The Geometrization Conjecture, which is the central outstanding problem in low-
dimensional topology (it includes the Poincare conjecture as a special case),
states that every compact 3-manifold can be naturally subdivided into geometric
pieces. The techniques being developed for approaching this have potential
applications in other disciplines.


