
* 0203883
* Geometric Group Theory and the Topology of 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2002,04/21/2004
* G. Peter Scott,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 228,527.00

DMS-0203883 G. Peter Scott

Geometric Group Theory and the Topology of 3-Manifolds

The proposer plans to continue his joint work with Gadde Swarup on connections
between geometric group theory and the topology of 3-manifolds. In the 1970's,
the theory of the characteristic submanifold of a compact 3-manifold was
completed. Starting in the mid 1980's, it began to be apparent that there were
analogues of this topological result in the purely algebraic setting. Several
authors have worked on this in the last 15 years, but so far none of the results
have been truly analogous to the topological results except in very special
cases. Now the proposer and Swarup have produced the first true algebraic
analogues of the topological results and they plan to continue their
investigations in order to see how far their results can be carried. Their
arguments and results have already given new insights into the topology of
3-manifolds and led to new results in geometric group theory. The proposer
expects that further work in this area will have a significant impact on
geometric group theory.

The proposer plans to continue his joint work with Gadde Swarup on connections
between group theory and the theory of 3-dimensional manifolds. About 40 years
ago, some remarkable, and entirely unexpected, work of Stallings first
demonstrated the depth of these connections. More recently, work of several
authors continued this theme by showing that groups can be decomposed in a
fashion closely analogous to the way in which 3-dimensional manifolds can be
decomposed. The proposer and Swarup have given a new approach to this area and
they plan to continue their investigations in order to see how far their results
can be carried. Their arguments and results have already given new insights into
the theory of 3-dimensional manifolds and led to new results in group theory.
The proposer expects that further work in this area will have a significant
impact on group theory.
