
* 0204041
* The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,03/30/2004
* Ronald Stern,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 218,951.00

DMS-0204041 Ronald Stern

For the last 25 years it has been the goal of exciting and deep mathematics to
classify smooth 4-dimensional manifolds. An arsenal of techniques has been
thrown at this problem; it is the focus of dozens of research groups. The most
successful attempts have associated to each 4-dimensional manifold the solution
space to complex systems of equations that arise in particle physics: the Yang-
Mills equations and the monopole equations of Seiberg and Witten. These solution
spaces are useful in distinguishing cunningly constructed 4-dimensional
manifolds. The result of this assault is that 4-dimensional manifolds are more
complicated than we ever expected. As a result, it is impossible to predict a
classification scheme. It is the goal of this project to more systematically
approach the existence and uniqueness framework for a classification scheme. The
first goal is to understand why smooth structures on 4-manifolds are sensitive
to local topological change. This project describes the underpinnings of how the
smooth structures change in the known constructions. Log transformations on
null-homologous tori are shown to play a significant role. The first step is to
determine if two smooth structures on a fixed homeomorphism type of simply-
connected smooth 4-manifold are related by a sequence of log transformations on
null-homologous tori. The second step is to determine the characteristic numbers
of irreducible smooth 4-manifolds and to determine how these topological
invariants affect their Seiberg-Witten invariants. A notion of general-type
smooth 4-manifolds is given and a conjectured restriction on their Seiberg-
Witten invariants is proposed. This project outlines new constructions that show
that there are general-type manifolds that fill out the regions determined by
these restrictions. Careful investigation of these constructions should indicate
why they are best possible. Other questions related to potential restrictions on
the characteristic classes of irreducible simply-connected smooth 4-manifolds
will be investigated.

Excitement has been generated by the idea that the puniest of all forces,
gravity, may in fact be a strong as nature's other three fundamental forces: the
strong force which binds protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei; the
weak force which governs radioactive decay; and the forces that govern
electricity and magnetism. The perceived mismatch between these three forces and
gravity creates a theoretical nightmare; it's the principle reason we have yet
to find a grand unified theory. However, it has recently been hypothesized that
this weakness is a mirage; the force of gravity only appears weak because its
force is diluted in our own universe and most of gravity's force radiates out
into extra dimensions. All other forces remain trapped in our 3-dimensional
world, while gravity is free to roam other dimensions. With this hypothesis,
there could be other worlds that are parallel to our own; they all neatly stack
up, each oblivious of the other, with gravity the only force that moves between
them. This would also account for the missing dark matter of our universe; it
actually resides in other parallel universes. New mathematics will be generated
in this project to further explore these ideas. Much of the relevant mathematics
has already exposed the special nature of dimensions three and four. These
parallel universes may be explained by the theory of (singular) foliations. The
proposed study of singular foliations may structure the way in which we view our
own universe -how we stack up with possible parallel universes. These singular
foliations will also provide new insight into the classification of 4-
dimensional manifolds. At bottom, the goal of this project is to develop more
systematic constructions of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds with the hope that a
general picture begins to emerge that will at least suggest a classification
scheme.
