
* 0204169
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2002,09/03/2003
* Laurence Taylor,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 178,800.00

DMS-0204169 Laurence R. Taylor William G. Dwyer E. Bruce Williams

This is a proposal in algebraic topology, and deals primarily with questions in
stable and unstable homotopy theory. The stable side has to do with the study of
ring spectra. One goal is to study duality in stable homotopy theory and relate
it to classical types of duality for commutative rings; a possible outcome is a
clearer understanding of Gross-Hopkins duality. Another goal is to study spaces
of associative ring structures from a general deformation theory point of view.
On the unstable side, the proposal envisages a conceptual classification of
p-compact groups (especially at the prime 2), a comprehensive theory of spaces
of natural transformations between various familiar functors, and a study of the
homology of homotopy limits. There are also geometric topology components
involving smoothings of four-space, L-group calculations, and questions related
to Riemann-Roch theorems for Waldhausen K-theory.

In a general sense, the proposal deals with the problem of understanding
geometric shapes, especially shapes with more than three dimensions. These
shapes (called spaces) can arise, for instance, as the collection of all states
of a physical system, or the collection of all configurations of a complicated
mechanical device. The basic goal is to develop a method for describing spaces
in terms of numbers and other algebraic objects, in the expectation that this
will make it possible to quantify the subtle geometric characteristics of
spaces, and allow for the study of relationships betweens spaces of various
types. Some spaces, called manifolds, are particularly symmetrical, and among
other things the proposal involves studying the associated symmetry properties
of their algebraic invariants.
