
* 0204535
* Topics on Low-Dimensional Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2002,09/20/2006
* Shuguang Wang,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 88,706.00

DMS-0204535 Shuguang Wang

The project will study several issues in Topology and Geometry. The central
theme is that of real structures which can be defined on symplectic and contact
manifolds. With the presence of such structures, the proposal aims to introduce
new versions of Gromov-Witten theory, Seiberg-Witten-Floer theory, and to apply
the resulting invariants to String Theory as well as Real Algebraic Geometry.
Another aspect of the project will study related analytical problems on
manifolds that possess open conical singularities.

Real Algebraic Geometry concerns the real solutions of real polynomials which
arise naturally in many real-life applications. Despite the fact that this is
one of oldest Mathematical branches, we have so far made very little progress in
understanding it. Our project will attempt to fill the gap partially by using
new machinery following from the pioneer work of Donaldson, Floer, Taubes etc.
It was Einstein's dream to unify all four fundamental forces in the nature.
Through Quantum Mechanics, it is possible to unify the strong force, the weak
force and the electro-magnetic force. However the unification with the fourth
force, the gravity, has eluded some of the greatest thinkers of our time.
Nowadays it is commonly believed that String Theory offers the best hope to
achieve this last unification. Complex manifolds with real structure are called
orientifolds in String Theory. These are popular but still poorly-understood
objects for Physicists. A purpose in the project is to lay down a rigorous
mathematical foundation for Gromov-Witten
