
* 0204386
* Geometry and Topology of Knots and Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,07/10/2006
* Daniel Ruberman,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 149,644.00

DMS-0204386 Daniel Ruberman, Jerome Levine, and Kiyoshi Igusa

The topology group at Brandeis University proposes research on knot theory and
3-manifolds, gauge-theory and 4-manifolds, and on higher Reidemeister torsion of
families of manifolds. Jerome Levine plans to continue his study of finite type
invariants of 3-manifolds. In particular, he plans to investigate a graphical
interpretation of a new surgery-theoretic theory proposed in a recent paper. He
also will investigate various questions concerning boundary link invariants such
as the signature-type invariant and the relationship between the Farber
invariant and non-commutative Reidemeister torsion. Daniel Ruberman's research
uses gauge theory to investigate the geometry and topology of 4-dimensional
manifolds. He will extend his program of using Seiberg-Witten theory and Yang-
Mills theory to explore families of diffeomorphisms of 4-manifolds and positive
scalar curvature metrics on a 4-manifold. Further work explores whether
finiteness theorems of Riemannian geometry hold in dimension 4. Seiberg-Witten
and Donaldson theory will also be used to investigate a simple but important
class of non-simply-connected 4-manifolds. Kiyoshi Igusa's work extends his
study of higher Franz-Reidemeister torsion to the complex case and to various
new spaces of graphs. He will use this to interpret the Miller-Morita-Mumford
classes in terms of the higher Franz-Reidemeister (FR) torsion.

Our research encompasses a number of themes in geometry and topology. One of
these is the interplay between topology and algebra, and another is the
interplay between topology and theoretical physics. To study spaces or other
topological objects such as knots, we encode some aspects of the space into
familiar algebraic objects such as matrices or polynomials. Some of the algebra
used to study 3-dimensional objects is connected with ideas developed by
physicists to understand quantum field theory, especially the Feynmann integral.
Investigating this interplay contributes to our understanding of the
3-dimensional world in which we live. Part of our work is concerned with the
evolution of spaces--the study of the way in which they change as some parameter
is varied. Some of the research in this direction develops algebraic tools which
apply in the case when there are many independent parameters. Another component
studies the evolution of 4-dimensional spaces and geometries, using techniques
arising in gauge theory, a fundamental geometrical tool in theoretical physics.


