
* 0204080
* Geometric Aspects of Algebraic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,06/13/2002
* Po Hu,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 11/30/2002
* USD 89,222.00

DMS-0204080 Po Hu

In this project, the investigator intends to consider a circle of ideas in
algebraic topology and its interactions with other areas of mathematics. One
point of entry to these ideas is Real-oriented homotopy theory, which uses the
complex conjugation action on the complex cobordism spectrum to approach
homotopy groups of spheres. The method used here is a case of descent, which
appears also in Voevodsky's homotopy theory of algebraic varieties. In this
direction, the investigator is interested in algebraic cobordism, the algebro-
geometric analogue of complex cobordism. Another closely related idea is that of
Verdier and Grothendieck dualities, both in algebraic geometry and in
equivariant homotopy theory. Yet another related but different kind of duality
is Koszul duality. Using this duality, the investigator, jointly with
collaborators, proved a version of Kontsevich's conjecture on Hochschild
cohomology of k-algebras. This in turn is related to the question of deformation
quantazation in mathematcial physics. Another area into which Koszul duality
enters is the string topology of Chas and Sullivan, which gives another
connection between algebra and homotopy theory. The investigator is also
involved with another project related to physics, namely constructing geometric
models of elliptic cohomology.

Topology is the study of spaces that can be deformed continuously. In part, this
proposal seeks to better understand maps between such objects by ``stable''
methods, i. e. considering a sequence of objects of all higher dimensions at
once, and by using certain summetries upon them. Similar methods can also be
used to study more rigid geometric objects, for example in algebraic geometry
the solution sets of systems of algebraic equations. This leads in turn to the
study of algebraic structures on an abstract level. Finally, the related idea of
string topology considers not just a space itself, but structures on the space
consisting of loops in it. In particular, this is important to string theory in
physics, which sees the universe as composed not of point-like particles but of
loop-like ``strings''.
