
* 0204576
* Large Scale Geometry and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2002,03/28/2002
* Kevin Whyte,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2005
* USD 95,179.00

DMS-0204576 Kevin M. Whyte

This project is concerned with several aspects of large scale geometry and
topology. One of the main points of study is the problem of producing actions
from quasi-actions, along the lines of the classical theorems of Sullivan and
Tukia. Such results have significant implications in the quasi-isometric
classification of groups, especially for groups with natural splittings as a
complex of groups. A second area of study is large scale versions of rigidity
phenomena in the geometry of symmetric spaces, and specifically the
classification of quasi-isometric embeddings between symmetric spaces, giving a
geometric analogue of superrigidity. A third and independant project involves
coarse versions of topological rigidity, including the coarse Borel, Novikov,
and Baum-Connes conjectures.

Roughly speaking, large scale (or coarse) geometry is the study of geometric
properties of objects "seen from far away". From this perspective, any bounded
object is indistinguishable from a point, and a line of dots is
indistinguishable from a solid line. This sort of geometry has been influencial
recently in many areas of mathematics, notably group theory, topology, and
geometric analysis. This research will explore the large scale geometry of
several classes of mathematical objects, both classical geometric spaces and
objects only now being viewed in a geometric manner.


