
* 0204615
* Group proposal in topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2002,06/23/2004
* J. Peter May,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 530,514.00

DMS-0204615 J. Peter May

This project deals with research in a wide range of topics in topology,
geometry, and related areas of mathematics. May studies a variety of categorical
and homotopical structures in stable homotopy theory, equivariant algebraic
topology, and other fields. Although his current work is primarily foundational,
his students and collaborators, among others, make extensive calculational
applications of it. He and his collaborators have recently unified the
foundations of stable homotopy theory by proving that all of the new highly
structured categories of spectra are Quillen equivalent model categories, via
structure-preserving functors. The analogous, and deeper, unification of the
foundations of equivariant stable homotopy has also been carried out. Within
algebraic topology, May has been working on various other projects in
equivariant and non-equivariant homotopy theory. He has also been working on
various topics that have roots in algebraic topology but are of a more general
nature. In particular, he has recently obtained a new definition of enriched
weak $n$-categories and has spearheaded a very large scale unification project
in higher category theory. Weinberger studies various areas of geometric
topology and differential geometry. He has a longstanding interest in
transformation groups, especially surgery theory on manifolds with group
actions. In particular, he studies problems concerned with removing the ``gap
hypothesis'' that obstructs the direct generalization of the nonequivariant
theory. Weinberger also has a longstanding interest in the Novikov, Borel, and
Baum-Connes conjectures, and he has made recent progress on them. In a new
direction, Weinberger has been engaged in a large scale collaboration with
Nabutovsky that concerns applications of logic to Riemannian variational
problems and to the large scale geometry of moduli spaces. Some of his recent
results defy easy characterization. For one example, he has applied an old
theorem of Browder about finite H-spaces to obtain a theorem about the "social
choice problem". For another, in recent work with Farb he has shown that "hidden
symmetries" on a locally symmetric manifold force it to be arithmetic.

Besides May, the algebraic topology group at Chicago includes four nontenured
faculty and eight graduate students. The geometry group includes Weinberger and
four other tenured faculty, six nontenured faculty, and fifteen graduate
students. There is considerable interaction between these groups, and between
them and other groups at Chicago, such as the geometric Langlands group and the
algebraic geometry group. The research funded by this grant is part of a web of
research projects in progress at the University of Chicago.
