
* 0204368
* Symplectic Topology via Lagrangian Fibrations
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2002
* Margaret Symington,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 95,034.00

DMS-0204368 Margaret F. Symington

The Principal Investigator proposes to use singular Lagrangian fibrations to
gain insight into the topology of symplectic manifolds. The ultimate goal is to
develop an effective language for constructing and analyzing symplectic four-
manifolds, analogous to Kirby calculus for smooth four-manifolds. This work lies
at the intersection of toric geometry, integrable systems and smooth four-
manifold topology. Progress on this project will allow the presentation of
symplectic four-manifolds as generalized sums of well-understood manifolds. For
instance, this approach has allowed the Principal Investigator to specialize a
smooth surgery to the symplectic category and thereby determine the existence of
symplectic structures on an infinite family of four-manifolds with exotic smooth
structures. Further work will include extensions to dimension six where such
fibrations arise in the ground-breaking theory of mirror symmetry.

A manifold is the generalization of a surface to other dimensions. For a
manifold to be symplectic it must have an internal structure akin to the space
of positions and velocities of a mechanical system such as a pendulum.
Symplectic manifolds are ubiquitous in topology, geometry and physics. Recently
great progress has been made in understanding symplectic manifolds, especially
of dimension four, but many basic questions remain unanswered. For instance,
given a manifold there is no general way to determine if it permits the internal
structure required for it to be symplectic. One way to attack such a question is
to require some additional structure on the manifold. The Principal Investigator
proposes to deepen our understanding of these manifolds by appealing to a
higher-dimensional analog of topographic maps for measuring elevation. The
additional structure could be thought of as the analog of lines of constant
elevation. In essence, the Principal Investigator plans to develop two-
dimensional maps that yield enough information to completely determine the
terrain (the four-dimensional manifold) and a legend that make these maps
interpretable.


