
* 0207030
* Quantum Invariants and Representations of 3-Manifold Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,04/29/2002
* Charles Frohman,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 114,957.00

DMS-0207030 Charles D. Frohman

The PI will work on a number of projects in low dimensional topology and its
applications. These projects include investigating various properties of the
Turaev-Viro invariants including the construction of universal polynomials
relating the representation theory of the fundamental groups of manifolds to
these invariants and the extension of these invariants away from the unit
circle. In addition, the PI will consider, given a tetrahedral decomposition of
a knot, how one may define a rigorous path integral over the space of cross
ratios of the tetrahedra to compute the Turaev-Viro invariant of an integral
surgery on the knot. The PI will also investigate the structure of the Kauffman
bracket skein module in terms of the geometry of character varieties,and, more
generally, use quantum invariants in the study of Dehn surgery on knots.
Finally, this award provides support for the PI's graduate students to assist
him in this research.

Topology is a kind of geometry where the congruence transformations do not
preserve metric properties such as distance and angle. The objects the PI
studies are given as the result of gluing together polyhedra along faces. To
know when two such objects are different topologically one needs to make
measurements that are unchanged by topological congruence transformations. An
example of such a measurement is the Euler characteristic of a surface, which is
the number of vertices minus the number of edges plus the number of faces. If
two surfaces are topologically equivalent they have the same Euler
characteristic. One of the most celebrated theorems of geometry is the Gauss-
Bonnet theorem which relates the Euler characteristic of any surface to a
quantity computed metrically. Quantum invariants of three manifolds are like
Euler characteristic, but more delicate. They are constructed statistically from
a probability space made up of "states" which come from the description of how
polyhedra are glued together to form the object. The PI's work is about relating
these invariants to metric quantities derived from the geometry of the
underlying object. To this end, the PI shows that the space of states can be
replaced by spaces of geometric measurements made on the object. The goal of the
project is to see how the geometry and topology of the object are determined by
its combinatorial description in terms of polyhedra.
