
* 0227974
* Algebraic Structures in Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/28/2002,10/28/2002
* Alexander Voronov,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 41,607.00

DMS-0104004 Alexander A. Voronov

The goal of the project is to discover and study new algebraic structures in
topology suggested or motivated by mathematical physics, in particular, quantum
field theory and string theory. More specifically, the project aims at
discovering a new algebraic structure on the homology of an n-sphere space, by
which we mean the space of continuous maps from the n-dimensional sphere to a
given manifold. This part of the project, joint with Dennis Sullivan,
generalizes the work pioneered by Chas and Sullivan in the case n=1, i.e., that
of a usual free loop space. Another goal is to establish connection between
Chas-Sullivan's work and Gromov-Witten invariants, which we believe to be a
holomorphic version of Chas-Sullivan's algebraic structure. Gromov-Witten
invariants come from sigma model of quantum field theory, and Chas-Sullivan's
work "String Topology" may be regarded as a topological version of the physical
construction. This part of the project is suggested to be completed by
developing a fusion intersection theory of semi-infinite cycles in infinite
dimensional manifolds. Finally, part of the project is dedicated to relating the
above to Kontsevich's Conjecture, which generalizes Deligne's Conjecture and
unravels a deep relation between deformation theory of abstract n-algebras and
the topology of configuration spaces of points in an (n+1)-dimensional Euclidean
space.

The main idea of Algebraic Topology is to be able to recognize topological
properties of a geometric object by associating algebraic data or structure to
the geometric object. Sometimes the geometry is too complicated to allow
immediate understanding and work with the object, while the algebraic
information is usually simpler by its nature. This project suggests some new
algebraic structure for a sphere space, the space of maps from an n-dimensional
sphere to a manifold. Such spaces are quite complicated and the classical work
of Chen, Segal, Jones, Getzler, Burghelea, Fedorowicz, Goodwillie, and others,
produced not only the computation of the homology of loop spaces, which are the
particular case of sphere spaces for n=1, but also revealed amazing connections
with algebra (Hochschild complex). Also, recent progress in string theory
emphasized the importance of invariants associated to holomorphic maps from the
2-sphere to a manifold (Gromov-Witten invariants). In this project we undertake
an analogous study of continuous maps from the n-sphere to a manifold, which for
n=1 has already enabled significant progress in topology.
