
* 0229035
* The Topology of Manifolds of Dimensions 3 and 4
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2003,02/09/2005
* Cameron Gordon,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2005
* USD 23,500.00

Abstract Award: DMS 0229035 Principal Investigator: Cameron Gordon

The project is a conference in 3- and 4-dimensional topology. Satisfactory
accounts of manifolds of dimension greater than or equal to 5 were achieved by
the late 1960's. Since then, attention has naturally focused on dimensions 3 and
4. Despite dramatic advances (Thurston, Freedman, Donaldson, Jones, Witten...),
many major problems in these low dimensions remain unsolved, for example the
classical 3-dimensional Poincare Conjecture and its smooth 4-dimensional analog.
The topological classification of 1-connected 4-manifolds was achieved by
Freedman in the early 1980's, but in the smooth case there is not even a
conjectural picture. By contrast, Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture provides
a beautiful and coherent description of all 3-manifolds, but is far from
established. In the mid 1980's, Jones' discovery of his polynomial link
invariant, together with work of Witten, led to the introduction into
3-dimensional topology of methods from quantum physics. The current situation in
low-dimensional topology is that there are many different directions and
methods, but little understanding of the relations between them. Thus in
dimension 3 we have hyperbolic geometry, foliations and laminations, normal
surfaces, combinatorial geometric methods, quantum invariants, finite type
invariants, Floer homology,..., while in dimension 4 there are the Donaldson and
Seiberg-Witten theories, symplectic structures,.... The aim of the conference is
to address these topics, and the connections between them, and to provide a
forum for interaction and exchange of ideas between experts in the different
areas.

Geometric topology aims to understand n-dimensional manifolds, which are objects
that locally look like ordinary n-dimensional Euclidean space (whose points are
described by n co-ordinates), but whose global structure might be quite
complicated. The cases of dimensions 3 and 4 are particularly interesting, being
the dimensions of our spatial and spatial-temporal universes, and it is a
striking fact that it is precisely these dimensions that are mathematically
anomalous. There have been many developments and considerable progress in the
fields of 3- and 4-dimensional topology over the last twenty-five years, but, in
both dimensions, a complete picture is still lacking. One of the aims of the
conference is to encourage interaction and collaboration between experts in the
several different aspects and techniques that are currently being pursued in
low-dimensional topology, and in particular between those people working in
dimension 3 and those in dimension 4, where the methods in the two areas tend to
be quite different, but where there are several hints of connections between
them. The current disparate state of the subject makes it difficult for people
beginning research in low-dimensional topology to get a good overview of the
area, and so by encouraging the participation of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, we intend that the conference should also provide an
opportunity for young researchers to get a broad perspective of the present
state of knowledge, directions begin pursued, and the main open problems. The
invited speakers include some of the world's leading 3- and 4-dimensional
topologists, whose expertise together covers all the major aspects of the two
fields.
