
* 0234540
* Spaces of Kleinian Groups and Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2003,01/06/2003
* Yair Minsky,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2003
* USD 30,000.00

DMS-0234540 Yair N. Minsky

The proposer is co-organizing a workshop at the Newton Institute in Cambridge,
UK, on the subject of ``Spaces of Kleinian groups and hyperbolic 3-manifolds'',
for the summer of 2003. The 4-week workshop, including a 1-week conference, will
bring together researchers active on a number of foundational topics in the
field: relationships between the analytic, combinatorial and geometric structure
of hyperbolic 3-manifolds; topology of deformation spaces and the arrangement of
their components; classification of hyperbolic 3-manifolds by asymptotic
invariants; complex projective structures; convex hull boundaries; cone
manifolds, orbifolds and knot groups; the combinatorial structure of Teichmuller
spaces, mapping class groups, and spaces of curves on surfaces. Recent years
have seen substantial progress on longstanding foundational conjectures such as
the Bers/Sullivan/Thurston Density Conjecture, Ahlfors' Measure Conjecture,
Thurston's Ending Lamination Conjecture and Marden's Tameness Conjecture. The
time is therefore ripe for a conference on these topics.

In the study of low-dimensional geometry, topology and dynamics, there is a
remarkable depth of interconnection between fields of mathematics. Henri
Poincare, who studied both celestial dynamics and complex analysis (among many
other things), observed in the 19th century that the standard round sphere, the
setting of classical analysis and geometry, functioned also as a "horizon at
infinity" for an exotic non-Euclidean geometry that we now call Hyperbolic
Space. Dynamical properties of transformations of the sphere translate to
geometric properties of rigid motions of this space, and give rise to families
of symmetric tilings whose structure we can study by geometric and topological
methods. The properties of these tilings, and the way in which they change when
the tilings are varied through families (or "parameter spaces"), are still
linked to some of the motivating questions about physical systems of which
Poincare was aware a hundred years ago. Issues such as classification of
systems, mapping out regions of stability and instability, deformation and
bifurcation of families of systems, and probabilistic properties such as
ergodicity, all have significance in both pure and applied mathematics. In the
setting of hyperbolic geometry, recent years have seen significant progress on
these issues, with both theoretical advances and computational approaches
playing a role. This conference will bring together leading researchers in this
area and promising young mathematicians, to disseminate recent advances and
continue work on open problems.


