
* 0244844
* Approximately holomorphic techniques and monodromy invariants in symplectic topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2003,03/24/2005
* Denis Auroux,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 130,622.00

DMS-0244844 Denis Auroux

This project aims to study the topology of symplectic manifolds using
approximately holomorphic techniques (introduced by Donaldson and further
developped by Auroux) and the corresponding monodromy invariants. Approximately
holomorphic linear systems on symplectic manifolds give rise to structures such
as Lefschetz pencils and maps to the complex projective plane, whose monodromy
is described by morphisms with values in mapping class groups or braid groups.
By studying the monodromy invariants of symplectic manifolds, new insight will
be obtained into the relationships between symplectic manifolds and complex
projective manifolds: symplectic versus complex deformation equivalence, isotopy
and non-isotopy phenomena, topological constraints on symplectic manifolds. In
addition, relating monodromy invariants with Gromov-Witten invariants or Floer
homology should help to understand mirror symmetry, while the more combinatorial
aspects of the project are closely related to the algorithmics and computational
complexity of mapping class and braid groups.

Symplectic manifolds are geometric spaces with special structures, which first
arose in the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics. Mathematicians have
recently become very interested in their geometry and topology (intrinsic
structure), in part due to motivating questions from theoretical physics (string
theory). This project aims to study the topology of symplectic manifolds using
an approach developped first by S. Donaldson and subsequently by Auroux, which
makes it possible to obtain a complete description by combinatorial invariants
involving braid groups (a concept closely related to knots). One of the main
goals of the project is to relate the topological features of symplectic
manifolds with those of complex algebraic manifolds (a more special, much better
understood class of geometric spaces). In addition, some applications to other
domains such as mathematical physics (the "mirror symmetry" duality in string
theory) and cryptography (the computational complexity of combinatorial problems
involving braid groups) will be explored.
