
* 0244361
* Cornell Topology Festival Support; 2003-2005
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/15/2003,03/26/2003
* Peter Kahn,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2007
* USD 66,982.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0244361 Principal Investigator: Peter J. Kahn

The topology/geometry group in the Department of Mathematics at Cornell
University requests funding to continue support for three years for the Cornell
Topology Festival, which this group has hosted each year since 1963. The
Festival provides a significant arena for the dissemination and development of
important, new results from a wide array of areas within the realms of
algebraic, differential, and geometric topology, and allied subjects. While it
is planned to continue the broad, interdisciplinary flavor and collaboration-
friendly format that have characterized the Festival over the years, it is also
proposed to extend the Festival by a day to accommodate specific annual areas of
emphasis. In this way the Festival can be responsive to the dominant trends of
this era: namely, the simultaneous flourishing of both subspecializations and
cross-disciplinary activity. An active outreach program, which includes some
travel support, will be initiated to broaden participation in the Festival. For
our initial conference under this grant (May 1-4, 2003), we will have as area of
emphasis the very active field of geometric group theory.

The Topology Festival was conceived and initiated in the 1960's both as an
annual celebration of the burgeoning field of topology and as an annual
conference/workshop for topologists in the northeastern United States. While
topology has deep roots in early European mathematical investigations of space
and geometry, it is in the mid-twentieth century that topology came of age, with
American mathematicians providing a large array of seminal discoveries. American
topology has been a key element in America's world leadership in mathematics.
Topology is a broad subject, which overlaps with areas of `discrete' mathematics
(e.g., algebra, combinatorics), as well as with `continuous' or `smooth'
mathematics (e.g., differential geometry, dynamical systems, mathematical
physics). Indeed, a large part of contemporary mathematics has been profoundly
affected by topological results and methods. As a foundational subject, the
applications of topology are very widespread. A few examples are: genetics (the
study of knotting of DNA molecules), neuroscience and robotics (dynamical
systems modeling), computer science ( in geometric modeling and simulation),
mathematical economics (in smooth equilibrium theory), physics (the theory of
gauge fields), and neighboring fields in mathematics (e.g., geometric group
theory). Although many of the basic questions that powered early efforts in
topology have been answered, new problems are constantly being generated as
science moves forward, and important classical problems remain. An example of
the latter is the Poincare Conjecture, which has been the subject of several
notable talks at past Topology Festivals and remains one of the premier unsolved
problems of mathematics today---one of the Clay Institute's seven `millenium
problems'--- and the focus of intense research. The topologists and geometers at
Cornell are proud of the useful role that the Topology Festival has played and
will continue to play in the contemporary development of this dynamic area of
mathematics.
