
* 0244100
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces and String Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2003,07/11/2006
* Dennis Sullivan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 356,125.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0244550 and DMS-0244100 Principal Investigator: Ralph L. Cohen, Jun
Li, and Dennis P. Sullivan

This project investigates the topology of moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces,
their applications to string topology, and certain mathematical questions
arising from string theory in physics. It is a collaborative project involving
algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, and Riemann surface theory. It will
pursue significant new research opportunities arising from three recent
important developments: The Madsen-Weiss proof of the famous conjecture of
Mumford on the stable cohomology of moduli spaces, the discovery by Chas and
Sullivan of the new structures on the topology of loop spaces of manifolds, and
recent advances in open string theory in physics. One of the goals of this
project is to understand the implications of Madsen and Weiss' theorem on the
Chas-Sullivan "String topology" theory. Another aspect of this project is to
study the relationship between string topology and Gromov-Witten theory in
algebraic geometry. A longer term goal of this project is to investigate how
this theory can help to give a mathematical framework for analyzing certain
specific questions motivated by open string theory in physics.

Geometric questions have long been motivated by the attempt to understand
physical theories. Einstein's general theory of relativity, and the attempt to
place it in firm mathematical foundations, motivated much of the development of
differential geometry throughout the 20th century. During the last 20 years of
the century generalizations of the famous Maxwell's equations for electricity
and magnetism led to new techniques for studying geometry and topology in
dimensions three and four. String theory is a relatively new quantum theory of
gravity. Placing it in firm mathematical foundations is quite challenging, and
has motivated quite a bit of new research in geometry. For example the
techniques of string theory predicted the answers to some classical questions in
enumerative geometry, many of which were later verified using a new theory in
algebraic geometry due to the mathematician M. Gromov, and the physicist, E.
Witten. String theory involves understanding how vibrating strings evolve
through time. As a string evolves, it maps out a two dimensional "world sheet".
So the mathematics behind string theory must study spaces of "strings", or
curves and loops, as well as spaces of two dimensional surfaces in an ambient
space. This project has been motivated by recent advances in understanding the
topological structure of spaces of strings, ("string topology"), as well as a
separate breakthrough in understanding the space of two dimensional surfaces.
The goal of this project is to understand the implications of this breakthrough
on "string topology", understand how this topological theory is related to the
geometric theory of Gromov and Witten, and to apply these theories to certain
specific questions arising from string theory in physics. This award supports a
Focused Research Group based at Stanford University and SUNY at Stony Brook.
