
* 0245588
* Virtual Knot Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2003,08/17/2004
* Louis Kauffman,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2007
* USD 159,182.00

DMS-0245588 Louis Kauffman

This project takes a broad approach to virtual knot theory. Knot theory studies
the embeddings of curves in three-dimensional space. Equivalently knot theory
studies the embeddings of curves in a thickened two dimensional sphere. Virtual
knot theory studies the embeddings of curves in thickened surfaces of arbitrary
genus, up to the addition and removal of empty handles from the surface. From
the point of view of classical knot theory a virtual knot will appear as the
trajectory of a particle that sometimes abruptly disappears from three
dimensional space and reappears later at another point in space. An example of
such a trajectory would be a superstring moving in three dimensional space, but
occasionally taking a detour into higher dimensions. Virtual knots have a
special diagrammatic theory that makes handling them very similar to the
handling of classical knot diagrams. With this approach, one can generalize many
structures in classical knot theory to the virtual domain, and use the virtual
knots to test the limits of classical problems such as the question whether the
Jones polynomial detects knots and the classical Poincare conjecture.
Counterexamples to these conjectures exist in the virtual domain, and it is an
open problem whether any of these counterexamples are equivalent (by addition
and subtraction of empty handles) to classical knots and links. Virtual knot
theory is an important domain to be investigated for its own sake and for a
deeper understanding of classical knot theory.

The principal investigator hopes that the above analog relationship with string
theory will bear fruit. Virtual braids are being used by the principal
investigator to establish relationships among quantum computing, quantum
entanglement and topological entanglement. It is a long-standing goal of this
project to work with knots, physics and other natural sciences such as molecular
biology. Generalizations such as the virtual knot theory have potential for use
in a wide variety of applications where there is a combination of topology, and
combinatorially modeled physicality. In such applications, the topology is only
part of the picture. One is dealing with systems that can be modeled in a
discrete way so that certain specified changes are allowed in the forms of the
models. The question that a topologist asks is: What is invariant under the
changes? This question is significant in applications because it corresponds to
the stable properties of molecular structures and to conserved quantities in the
physics. The approaches used in combinatorial topology can be generalized for
use in a wide variety of contexts. A good example of this is seen in the use of
knot theory in molecular biology where the allowed changes are a combination of
what the topologist regards as continuous deformations coupled with discontinous
changes corresponding to enzymatic action and recombination. This has led to a
vigorous interplay between knot theory and molecular biology. By asking these
questions about topological relationship and the nature of knot theory, new
insights and applications in molecular biology, physics and quantum computing
are coming forth.
