
* 0245047
* Arkansas Spring Lecture Series 2003: On the Andrews-Curtis and Poincare Conjectures; April 10-12, 2003; Fayetteville, AR
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/15/2003,03/03/2003
* Yoav Rieck,AR,University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/29/2004
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0245047 Principal Investigator: Yoav Rieck

At the center of the proposed conference will be a series of lecture by
Professor Andrew Casson of Yale University. These lecture will focus on two of
the most important open questions in the fields of topology and group theory.
The first question, the Poincare Conjecture, was posed by Henri Poincare almost
100 years ago. It is concerned with the basic structure of very simple
3-dimensional spaces; while the Andrews-Curtis Conjecture is about algebraic
structures, and is very relevant to the Poincare Conjecture. In addition to a
survey of existing approaches, partial results and open questions related to
these conjectures, these talks will attempt to describe some intriguing
similarities and differences between the two conjectures. In addition, 10
leading experts from around the world will deliver talks about their own work.

This conference will be the 28th annual Arkansas Spring Lecture Series. The
format of the lecture series is 5 one hour talks by a world leading
mathematician, accompanied by about 10 lectures of invited experts, and several
shorter talks by a variety of people, including graduate students. This
structure is valuable, particularly for younger researchers, that get an
excellent learning opportunity. This year's Lecture Series is about
3-dimensional topology. The importance of low dimensional topology has been
growing in recent tears, with numerous applications starting at robotics and
control, and ending with theoretical physics and cosmology. For example, one
intriguing question is what the shape of the Universe is. The spherical shape of
the earth was discovered two millennia ago, and yet we have no clue as to the
shape of the Universe. The work of Professor Casson as well as other leading
mathematician, may help answer this question by leading astronomers is the right
direction, and helping design the right experiments to answer these questions.
Jeff Weeks, a McArthur Fellow, will discuss such experiments in a lecture open
to the public and using a language accessible to all. This will give the public
an opportunity to understand the work of world leading mathematicians. Jeff
Weeks talk should have great educational value in motivating younger students to
enjoy basic research.
