
* 0245323
* 3-manifolds and Floer homologies
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2003,05/15/2003
* Weiping Li,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 64,755.00

The problems addressed in this project are in the area of Topology. The main
theme is to study the fundamental and important properties of the gauge-
theoretic/symplectic Floer homology, using invariants and methods from
3-manifold topology and symplectic topology. The investigator studied the semi-
infinity of the instanton (gauge theoretic) Floer homology and the intrinsic
dependence of the monopole(Seiberg-Witten-Floer) homology of (homology) three-
spheres. The major part of the project is to study the interactive relation
between the symplectic Floer homology and the classical 3-manifolds, and the
relation between the Floer cohomology and the semi-infinite cohomology, and the
Seiberg-Witten-Floer theory intertwining the instanton and monopole results. The
other part of this project is to study intrinsic properties for the invariants
of larger classes of three-spheres.It is a fundamental aim to investigate the
change of the new invariants under certain topological operations. The project
will integrate the interactions among the instanton theory, the monopole theory,
the symplectic Floer theory and the semi-infinite cohomology of infinite-
dimensional Lie algebras.

A three-dimensional manifold is a space where a nearsighted person sees a
standard three-dimensional space everywhere.(Homology) three-spheres are those
three-manifolds that one cannot tell from the standard three-sphere by using the
usual topological tools. A symplectic manifold is an even-dimensional space with
a special(symplectic) structure. For instance, the phase space of a mechanical
system is a symplectic space. Such a symplectic structure is rich in mathematics
and physics, and is canonical from any nearby region. This shows the subtlety
and the complexity of the world we live in. Any local information is no longer
useful, the global behavior and the global (topological) invariants are the
pivot. The refined invariants studied in this project are intended to
distinguish manifolds from the aspects of mathematical physics, and to
intertwine various quantum field theories from the aspect of mathematics. Thus
it is extremely valuable to investigate the relation between the symplectic
Floer cohomology and the semi-infinite cohomology, as well as the interactive
link between the instanton homology and the monopole homology. This project
addresses some of the most fundamental problems in this subject.
