
* 0301220
* Summer School and Conferenceon the Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of Algebraic Cycles; June 15-July 7, 2003; Morelia, Mexico
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY, AMERICAS PROGRAM
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2003
* Charles Weibel,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

From June 15 to July 7, 2003, there will be a Summer School and Conference in
Morelia, Mexico on ``The Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of Algebraic
Cycles.'' The first two weeks will consist of a series of introductory lectures,
covering recent developments in the study of algebraic cycles and motives from
the algebraic, geometric, and topological points of view. The status of the main
problems in the field (Hodge conjecture, Tate conjecture, motivic problems) will
also be covered. The final week will be a research level conference centered
around the latest developments in the subject. The primary purpose of this grant
is to provide travel and subsistence support for graduate students and young
postdoctoral people, especially women and underrepresented minorities. A second
priority is to support U.S. participants without other grant support.

From June 15 to July 7, 2003, there will be a Summer School and Conference in
Morelia, Mexico on ``The Arithmetic, Geometry and Topology of Algebraic
Cycles.'' This is an interdisciplinary branch of mathematics which has seen
substantial development in the last few years. The first two weeks will consist
of a series of introductory lectures, primarily aimed at training young
researchers. To reinforce the ideas and methods presented in these lectures, the
third week will be a research level conference centered around the latest
developments in the subject. The primary purpose of this grant is to provide
travel and subsistence support for graduate students and young postdoctoral
people, especially women and underrepresented minorities. A second priority is
to support U.S. participants without other grant support. This grant is
supported jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.
