
* 0302516
* 2003 Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications; July 9-12, 2003; Washington, DC
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2003,04/30/2003
* Neil Hindman,DC,Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2004
* USD 19,885.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0302516 Principal Investigator: Neil Hindman

The 2003 Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications will be held July
9-12, 2003, at Howard University, Washington, DC. It will be the 18th in a
series of conferences begun at City College of New York in 1984 and held
recently at Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, in 2000, at City College of New York
in 2001, and at the University of Auckland, New Zealand, in 2002. There will be
six invited plenary speakers: Vitaly Bergelson of Ohio State, W. Wistar Comfort
of Wesleyan University, Niky Kamran of McGill University, Jan van Mill of Vrije
Universitaat, Peter Olver of the University of Minnesota, and Alex Simpson of
the University of Edinburgh. There will be a workshop in Set Theoretic Topology
led by Stevo Todorcevic of the University of Toronto. All of the plenary
speakers are recognized authorities in their fields, and Todorcevic is widely
recognized as one of the two best set theorists in the world. In addition, six
special sessions are planned: Set Theoretic Topology, Topological Dynamics and
Ergodic Theory, Topological Groupoids and Their Applications, Topological Groups
and Semigroups, Topology and Computer Science, and a session in honor of W.
Wistar Comfort.

The goals of this conference, and of the entire series are: (1) bring to the
participants the leading researchers and the latest developments in topology and
related areas; (2) foster applications of topology to these related areas; (3)
expose graduate students to the excitement and intense research activity of such
a conference and help train them to do work in applications of topology; and (4)
facilitate communication and collaboration among topologists from a wide
geographic area, both from this country and overseas, at a time of year which is
convenient to many faculty members. As is witnessed by the special session on
Topology and Computer Science, applications of general topology have been
growing in recent years. A particular benefit of this conference series has been
the extent to which it has successfully encouraged the participation of women
and underrepresented minorities. (Three of the most recent Ph.D. graduates from
Howard university, all black females, each attended and presented talks at at
least one of the conferences in the series.) The location of this conference at
Howard University will make it convenient for the active participation of
several black graduate students.
