
* 0305946
* Casson-type invariants in dimension four
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2003,05/08/2003
* Nikolai Saveliev,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 103,719.00

The principal investigator applies gauge theoretic methods to the little studied
class of 4-dimensional manifolds, namely, smooth manifolds having integral
homology of the 3--sphere times the circle. These manifolds arise naturally as
the doubles of homology cobordisms of integral homology spheres. They remain
rather elusive, mainly because the conventional approach via Donaldson
polynomials and Seiberg--Witten invariants fails due to the lack of second
homology. Instead, the investigator studies the flat moduli spaces on such
manifolds. A creative count of flat connections leads to an invariant
reminiscent of the Casson invariant for homology 3--spheres. The investigator
works on developing a torus surgery theory modeled after Casson's surgery
formula and Fintushel--Stern's knot surgery on 4--manifolds, with the view of
using it to relate the above Casson--type invariant to the classical Rohlin
invariant. This approach is expected to lead to solution of some old and
difficult problems concerning homology cobordisms of integral homology 3--
spheres, smoothing of topological 4--manifolds, and triangulation of topological
manifolds in higher dimensions. A part of the above program is a calculation of
the degree zero Donaldson polynomial, which is of great interest in its own
right. For mapping tori of integral homology spheres, the Donaldson polynomial
is identified with the equivariant Casson invariant. For homology 4--tori, it is
equal to the Seiberg--Witten invariant, at least modulo 2, thus partially
confirming the Seiberg--Witten conjecture.

The proposed research is an investigation of various properties of manifolds in
dimensions three and four by methods of gauge theory. These methods, rooted in
theoretical physics, have revolutionized low dimensional topology. In the past
twenty years, they have been actively used to solve many difficult problems.
Nevertheless, their potential is far from being exhausted: the researcher
initiates application of gauge theoretic methods to a special class of manifolds
which was overlooked until recently but which is crucial for understanding
several fundamental questions of topology and topological field theory. In
addition to advancing knowledge in these specific areas, the research has a
broader educational impact. The principal investigator's teaching experience
shows that the graduate classes based on the above topics are of great interest
to students in both mathematics and physics, thus promoting closer cooperation
between the two sciences. The researcher intends to develop further topics
courses, and offer parts of his program as independent research projects for
graduate students. The research results will be broadly disseminated at
scientific conferences, in professional journals, and on the internet.
