
* 0305818
* Topics in Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2003,03/27/2007
* Ronald Fintushel,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 279,486.00

DMS-0305818 Ronald Fintushel

One of the central problems of low-dimensional topology is the classification of
smooth simply connected 4-manifolds. New constructions have confused the issue
of classification, but also have invigorated the theory and reinforced its
richness and diversity. Still further examples are needed to identify a suitable
classification scheme, and the proposer intends to work on such constructions.
The ultimate goal of the proposer is to develop enough techniques for new
constructions of smooth and symplectic 4-manifolds that a general picture for
classification will begin to emerge. The broader impact of this proposal will
address the relationship between mathematics and theoretical physics,
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in topology, and career
development of postdoctoral fellows. The proposer will study geography problems
for symplectic manifolds which have been shown to impact physics via the notion
of 'superconformal simple type'. Another basic goal of this proposal is the
development of problems which are accessible to graduate and advanced
undergraduate students. This proposal presents problems which will be suitable
thesis problems for the proposer's future students. It also discusses
computational problems which the proposer plans to give to advanced
undergraduate students. The proposer will also support graduate and
undergraduate students during summers and encourage their participation in
conferences. Problems posed in this proposal will also be useful for
postdoctoral fellows at Michigan State.

The theory of 4-dimensional manifolds is important for both mathematical and
physical reasons. In mathematics, topology of 4 dimensions lies at a crossroad,
where one can try to apply well-developed techniques of low-dimensional (3 and
fewer dimensions) topology, and also one might hope to utilize powerful
techniques of high dimensional topology, such as surgery theory. In many ways,
the most interesting techniques come from neither of these approaches, but
rather from analogies with complex surface theory and input from high energy
physics, where for obvious reasons 4-dimensional theory is central. This
proposal, takes this latter view. Its key techniques revolve around the Seiberg-
Witten equations arising in quantum field theory. --
