
* 0305313
* Laminations, Foliations and Flows in 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2003,03/28/2006
* Sergio Fenley,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 289,695.00

Abstract.

"Laminations, foliations and flows in 3-manifolds"

Essential laminations and Reebless foliations are a basic and fundamental tool
in the study of 3-manifolds. Their use yields deep results concerning 3-manifold
topology and they are also related to the geometrization conjecture for
3-manifolds. One goal is to analyse the existence question for laminations in
3-manifolds, particulary for hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The PI has recently shown
there are infinitely many hyperbolic 3-manifolds which do not admit essential
laminations. A natural question is how common are essential laminations. The
project will investigate Dehn surgery on torus bundles over the circle and
general surface bundles and also special types of laminations/foliations. The
project will also consider more general structures, such as loosesse laminations
and which properties they have. Another part of the project is to understand the
geometric behavior of foliations and transverse pseudo-Anosov flows in
hyperbolic 3-manifolds - which is a very large class of manifolds. The focus
will be on the large scale geometric behavior in the universal cover, which is
fundamental for such manifolds. An important question is whether such flows are
quasigeodesic - this is true in certain cases by previous work of the PI and Lee
Mosher. One goal is to use the quasigeodesic property for the flows to derive
information about the asymptotic behavior of the foliation transverse to the
flow. This is specially promising in the case of general finite depth
foliations. Another goal is to connect these properties with the universal
circle of the foliation - establishing a link between the global structure of
the foliation and the global geometry of the universal cover. Another project is
to study properties of limit sets of leaves of foliations in hyperbolic
manifolds.

The project aims to better understand 3-manifolds. 3-manifolds are widely used
in the sciences: for example knots and their properties are very relevant to DNA
research. 3-manifolds are also used to get mappings of the brain and in other
visualization techniques. Understanding 3-manifolds can lead to progres in these
other areas. The project focuses on laminations and foliations, which are an
essential and currently extremely dynamic area in low dimensional topology. The
proposed projects will have an effect on some main research directions in the
area. One important goal is to attract students and postdoctoral researchers in
this exciting area.


