
* 0305712
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2003,12/02/2004
* Ralph Cohen,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2007
* USD 295,596.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0305712 Principal Investigator: R.L. Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, R.J.
Milgram

This project consists of research programs in a broad range of topics in
Algebraic and Geometric Topology. The principal investigators, Professors R.L.
Cohen, S.P. Kerckhoff, and R.J. Milgram are senior topologists whose research
interests cover a large number of areas of topology and related fields. Included
in these projects are the study of core topological questions such as the study
of 3 - dimensional geometry, the study of the topology of complex and related
structures on manifolds, and topological invariants of finite groups. In
addition it includes applications of topological methods to engineering
questions in the field of Robotics.

The topology of 3-dimensional manifolds is intimately connected to differential
geometry, particularly to homogeneous structures like Euclidean, spherical, and
hyperbolic geometry. Of these, hyperbolic geometry is the most prevalent. On a
closed 3-manifold a hyperbolic structure, if it exists, is unique by the Mostow
Rigidity Theorem. Thus, any geometric invariant is a topological invariant and
can be used to distinguish different 3-manifolds. When the 3-manifold has
boundary, it can have a large parameter space of hyperbolic structures; in this
case, the qualitativeq properties of the structures as one varies over the
parameter space are of particular interest. Kerckhoff studies hyperbolic
structures on 3-manifolds, trying to describe the behavior of these geometric
structures under a topological procedure, called Dehn surgery, and in the
presence of singularities modeled on a cone. R.L. Cohen is pursuing several
projects that involve studying algebraic topological aspects of questons
stemming from geometry. These projects lie under the following general headings.
1. The topology of moduli spaces of holomorphic curves in complex and symplectic
manifolds. 2. The homotopy type of the stable mapping class group and the
Mumford Conjecture. 3. Properties and applications of holomorphic K-theory. R.J.
Milgram will pursue questions involving the cohomology of finite simple groups,
as well as applications of the topology of configuration spaces to questions in
the design and behavior of robotic arms.
