
* 0305846
* 3-dimensional manifolds and related topic
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2003,09/04/2003
* Cameron Gordon,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0305846 Principal Investigator: Cameron Gordon

(1) The goal of the project is to investigate several problems in and around
3-dimensional topology. A major focus will be the Cabling Conjecture, which
asserts that Dehn surgery on a hyperbolic knot in the 3-sphere always yields a
prime 3-manifold. This is part of the program to completely describe all non-
hyperbolic Dehn surgeries on hyperbolic knots. Recently, John Luecke and the
principal investigator showed that the hyperbolic knots with non-integral
toroidal Dehn surgeries are precisely those described by Eudave-Munoz, and some
of the techniques developed there may be applicable to the Cabling Conjecture.
Another part of the general program that will be addressed is the conjecture
that any Seifert fiber space surgery on a hyperbolic knot must be integral. The
project will also consider various geometric group theoretic topics that are
related to the theory of 3-manifolds, such as surface subgroups of Coxeter and
Artin groups, and Gromov's question as to whether or not a 1-ended word
hyperbolic group always has a surface subgroup. Another question concerning
surfaces and 3-manifolds that will be investigated is the Simple Loop
Conjecture, which asserts that if a map from a closed orientable surface to a
closed orientable 3-manifold is not injective on fundamental group, then there
is an embedded essential loop in the surface whose image is null-homotopic in
the 3-manifold.

(2) The project is part of the general goal to understand the structure of
3-dimensional manifolds. These are objects that are locally like ordinary
3-dimensional space, but whose global structure may be quite complicated. Since
we live in a 3-manifold, one might say that 3-dimensional topology aims to
describe what the mathematical possibilities are for our spatial universe. One
important aspect of 3-dimensional topology is the theory of knots - a knot being
a closed loop embedded somehow in space. A wide variety of mathematical methods
can be applied to the study of knots, leading to new information about
3-manifolds. Recently, deep connections between 3-dimensional topology and
quantum physics were discovered in this way. Knot theory is related to the
general theory of 3-manifolds through a construction known as Dehn surgery, in
which a solid tube around the knot is removed and sewn back in differently. We
note that a theorem about Dehn surgery, the Cyclic Surgery Theorem, has been
used to determine the topological nature of the action of certain enzymes on
strands of DNA. Many aspects of Dehn surgery are now quite well understood. One
of the main remaining questions, which is a major focus of the project, is to
show that (except in an obvious degenerate situation) the 3-manifold resulting
from a Dehn surgery on a knot never decomposes as a "sum" of two simpler
manifolds. Another important tool in 3-dimensional topology is the study of
(2-dimensional) surfaces in 3-manifolds, and the project will also address
various questions in this area. Finally, the project will enable the principal
investigator to continue his involvement in the education and training of
graduate students in topology at the University of Texas at Austin.
