
* 0306995
* Knot and 3-manifold invariants and Dehn surgery
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2003,03/29/2007
* Efstratia Kalfagianni,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2007
* USD 95,879.00

The PI proposes to explore the applicability of classical 3-dimensional
topology techniques in the study of the ``finite type" invariants of knots and
3-manifolds. She would like to investigate the relation between intrinsic
invariants (e.g. knot genus, satellite structures) of knots that cannot be
distinguished by their finite type invariants. For this she proposes to use the
general machinery that has been developed over the years to understand how the
topology of 3-manifolds changes under surgery. The resulting work will shed some
light on how the finite type knot invariants relate to the topology of the knot
complement and could lead to progress on the open question of whether these
invariants distinguish all knots. She would also like to search for relations
between the Jones polynomial of knots and the fundamental group of the
3-manifolds obtained by Dehn surgery on knots.

The research of the project lies in the area of 3-dimensional topology the
central objects of study of which are spaces called 3-manifolds. A 3-manifold is
an object that locally looks like the ordinary 3-dimensional space but whose
global structure can be complicated. A main goal of 3-dimensional topology is to
understand these structures and achieve a classification of 3-manifolds. An
important part of 3-dimensional topology is also the study of knots (loops
embedded in some tangled way in 3-manifolds) and their classification. One of
the ways that topologists have been approaching these problems is through the
use of ``invariants". In the recent years, ideas originated in physics, lead
mathematicians to the discovery of a variety of invariants of knots and
3-manifolds. The central theme of the PI's project is to understand the
properties of these invariants, using ideas from traditional 3-dimensional
topology and from physics, and investigate the extent to which they distinguish
knots and 3-manifolds.


