
* 0306519
* Homotopy Theory and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2003,06/21/2007
* Michael Hopkins,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,375,000.00

DMS-0306519 Michael J. Hopkins, Lars Hesselhot, and Haynes R. Miller

Professor Hesselholt, working with Ib Madsen and Thomas Geisser, has made deep
advances in understanding the cyclotomic trace spaces associated to a ring.
These spaces were invented to describing the diffeomorphism groups of high
dimensional manifolds, and Hesselholt's work is a significant step in that
program. Central to Hesselholt's work is a connection he descovered between the
cyclotomic trace spaces and the de Rham-Witt complex of p-adic arithmetic
algebraic geometry. This has led to a generalization of the de Rham-Witt complex
to a mixed characteristic situation, where it is related to the sheaf of p-adic
vanishing cycles. This relationship further suggests the existence of a motivic
theory behind the cyclotomic trace spaces. Under the support of this grant,
Hesselholt will pursue this striking relationship between p-adic arithmetic
algebraic geometry and the computations in topology relevant to understanding
diffeomorphism groups. Professor Hopkins, working with Matthew Ando and Charles
Rezk has recently uncovered a new approach to congruences between modular forms
using algebraic topology, which he plans to pursue with an eye on several open
problems in the area. In another collaborative effort, Professors Hopkins, Dan
Freed and Constantin Teleman discovered a topological expression for the
Verlinde algebra--an algebraic structure arising in mathematical physics and in
the theory of representations of loop groups. The three of them plan to explore
this connection more deeply, with the long term ambition of discovering the
topological sources of topological quantum field theories. Hopkins will also
continue his work with Isadore Singer on their theory of ``differential function
spaces,'' which offers a refinement of algebraic topology especially suited for
meeting the demands of mathematical physics. Professor Miller will continue his
work on Landweber exact and elliptic cohomology theories, his work with Bill
Dwyer on topological Hochschild homology and the geometry of free loop spaces,
and his study of the homotopy theory of algebraic structures arising in knot
theory and the modern theory of Hopf algebras.

The field of algebraic topology arose in the late 19th century as mathematicians
noticed deep similarities between very different looking areas of research. By
the beginning of the 20th century, the basic theory of algebraic topology was in
place, and it was being used to explain, codify and reveal many qualitative
aspects of geometry. During the next hundred years algebraic topology advanced
at an amazing pace, and by now it seems as if every branch of contemporary
mathematics draws on some form of algebraic topology when undertaking to
articulate its qualitative aspects. The algebraic topology group at MIT runs a
large and diverse program emphasizing the many connections between algebraic
topology, algebraic geometry, geometry, and mathematical physics.


