
* 0306211
* RUI:Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds and Knots
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2003,08/14/2003
* Colin Adams,MA,Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 144,219.00

In 1978, William Thurston revolutionized low-dimensional topology by
demonstrating that many 3-manifolds have hyperbolic metrics. The Mostow Rigidity
Theorem then implies that these metrics can be used to generate interesting
invariants to distinguish hyperbolic 3-manifolds. A tremendous number of results
have come out of these ideas. The goal of this proposal is to further understand
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In particular, there are a set of invariants that come
out of the cusps of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and hyperbolic knots, including the
cusp volume, the meridian length and the longitude length. The plan is to
continue to work on these invariants, delineating better their possible range of
values and determining their implications for the rest of the hyperbolic
structure. Moreover, recent work has demonstrated the existence of totally
geodesic surfaces in hyperbolic knot complements. Their existence is suprising
and exciting. It is hoped that a determination can be made as to which knots
possess such surfaces.

Understanding hyperbolic 3-manifolds has implications for determining the shape
of the spatial universe. These invariants will be the kind that cosmologists may
use to empirically identify the universe. Although recent measurements of the
cosmic background radiation point to a curvature very close to flat, this could
mean that the universe is hyperbolic, but very large. Then more subtle
hyperbolic invariants will be necessary to determine its topological shape.
