
* 0306774
* Three-Manifold Invariants: Towards the Property P Quest
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 06/15/2003,06/12/2003
* Oliver Dasbach,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2006
* USD 58,007.00

DMS-0306774 Oliver Dasbach

It became an important question in low dimensional topology whether one can use
finite type invariants of knots and homology 3-spheres to get more insights into
classical problems like the determination of the hyperbolic volume or the
Property P quest. One of the goals of this research project is to apply and
extend ideas and methods which are used in the theory of 3-manifold invariants,
mainly quantum invariants for knots and homology spheres, towards progress in
the Property P quest. Furthermore, these methods are combined with tools coming
from the theory of Legendrian and Transversal knots. The aim is to get
combinatorial obstructions, that are structurally new, ensuring Property P for a
knot. In turn, tools that are natural from a more classical topological point of
view are applied to the study of quantum invariants.

It has been a huge step in the history of mankind to realize that the earth has
the shape of a sphere, i.e. the surface of a ball, rather than it being a disk.
Another possibility, for example, would have been that the earth has the shape
of the surface of a doughnut. Surfaces are 2-dimensional objects, called
2-manifolds. One dimension higher, one has to deal with similar problems. The
understanding of how our 3-dimensional universe could look like is much less
developed. The aim of three-dimensional topology is to study and classify the
possibilities how the whole universe might be shaped. One way to generate these,
infinitely many, possible 3-manifolds is through knotted circles. One gets a new
3-manifold by taking out a small neighborhood of a knot in a 3-manifold and
inserting it in a different way. The problem remains, how to distinguish two
different 3-manifolds that arise that way. The work in this proposal studies the
effect that combinatorial and geometric properties of the knot have on the
structure of the resulting 3-manifold. Topology has been shown to be a natural
and very fruitful source for applications in fields outside of mathematics. For
example, knot theory has applications in the study of DNA functions, in
cryptography and in the development of models for quantum computing.
