
* 0306506
* Surfaces in low-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 06/01/2003,05/17/2007
* Mark Brittenham,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2008
* USD 104,180.00

The investigator proposes to study the topology of 3-dimensional manifolds,
using 2-dimensional laminations and foliations as the basic tools. The main goal
is to show how these objects can be used to attack several long-standing
conjectures in low-dimensional topology. In particular, he proposes to use
constructions of essential laminations, due to the investigator and others, to
classify the exceptional Dehn surgeries on alternating knots. He plans to use
laminations to show that some large classes of 3-manifolds satisfy the Virtual
Haken Conjecture. He will also continue work aimed at providing a better
understanding of the structure of sutured manifold decompositions, a fundamental
technique in building and using taut foliations, by developing examples of
hyperbolic knots with large depth.

We live in and move through a 3-dimensional universe, which we perceive as
extending infinitely in all directions. But recent observations hint at the
possibility that space may instead wrap around itself, so that we live in a
finite universe. It is this very idea of a space wrapping around itself that
lies at the heart of geometric topology, whose goal is to understand the global
structure of objects which locally look like ordinary Euclidean space. The
investigator plans to study several questions aimed at uncovering patterns in
the global structure of 3-dimensional spaces, by using 2-dimensional surfaces to
study the spaces in which they can be found. The main idea is to use surfaces as
a way of cutting the space into pieces; by studying the resulting pieces, we can
gain insight into the large-scale structure of the 3-dimensional space.


