
* 0309480
* Research in geometric topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2003,05/14/2003
* Kiyoshi Igusa,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 124,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0309480 Principal Investigator: Kiyoshi Igusa

The principal investigator proposes to develop and use his three new formulas
for the Miller-Morita-Mumford classes on the cohomology of the mapping class
group to investigate some of the main problems in geometric topology, in
particular the question of whether these invariants are nontrivial on the
Torelli group. Igusa also plans to integrate the basic ideas into the first year
graduate topology course at Brandeis. The fundamental concept being used is that
of an A-infinity functor. Since ordinary homology and cohomology have intrinsic
A-infinity structures and since A-infinity functors give an alternative approach
to spectral sequences, it would be both feasible and appropriate to introduce
this concept at an early stage and to engage beginning graduate students and
gifted undergraduates into research related topics at an early stage. The
lecture notes would be made available online and expository papers would also be
posted on preprint servers to explain and disseminate the current uses of this
old concept.

This research is about graphs and surfaces. The study of the space of all graphs
and the space of surfaces is an active area of research in Topology and
Algebraic Geometry which has captured the attention of mathematicians and
theoretical physicists in recent years because of the work of Ed Witten and
Maxim Kontsevich both of whom received Fields Medals for their influential work.
Igusa brings an innovative approach to this field by apply new methods in high
dimensional Algebraic Topology to the study of these one and two dimensional
objects. Igusa's methods have already solved several previously unanswered
questions, both theoretical and computational. In this project Igusa plans to
tackle some of the fundamental theoretical problems in this field which his
preliminary research has found to be amenable to his methods. He also proposed
to educate the Mathematical public to demonstrate the accessibility of these
exotic methods. The impact of this research will be to accelerate the expansion
of this important area of research and to make basic Topology more exciting to
the students who study it by incorporating topics of current research.
