
* 0309788
* Conference Travel Funding: "Invariant Theory and its Interactions with Related Fields"
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2003,03/04/2003
* Kathryn Lesh,NY,Union College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/29/2004
* USD 9,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0309788 Principal Investigator: Kathryn Lesh

This award will provide funding to partially defray travel expenses of
U.S.-based mathematicians attending the conference "Invariant Theory and its
Interactions with Related Fields" (Ingo2003), to be held in Goettingen, Germany,
March 23-29, 2003. Invariant theory, with roots in the 17th century, has proven
to be a robust area of mathematical endeavor. Over the course of the last 50
years, it has found new applications in algebraic topology, representation
theory, algebraic geometry, as well as many traditional areas such as number
theory and commutative algebra. Professor Lesh is on the scientific organizing
committee for Ingo2003, which is an initiative of research groups in Aberdeen,
Manchester, and Goettingen working in the areas of algebraic topology,
representation theory, and commutative algebra. These scientists have found that
communication across narrow specialty boundaries can bring great scientific
benefits. A central theme of the conference will be the many connections of
invariant theory to other fields. In the past, conferences organized around the
topic of invariant theory have tended to be rather specialized, for example,
concentrating on computational aspects, or emphasizing interaction with at most
one other subject area, such as algebraic topology. Ingo2003 is being organized
with a much broader scientific base and will be interdisciplinary in a global
sense, as well as having a specific focus on younger researchers. Some of the
topics represented in discussions will be modular representation theory,
coinvariants and the "hit problem," algebraic topology, and Hasse-Schmidt
differentials and differential Galois theory.

One aspect of invariant theory is studying the question of what elements of a
changing situation must in fact remain fixed. For example, the points along the
axis of a spinning globe remain in the same position as the globe turns. The
point at the center of the spindle of a tape player stays fixed while other
points on the spindle turn around it. More surprisingly, rotating a circle
around its center and then flipping the circle over any line through its center
must leave a different line in a fixed position. The search for such "invariant"
or "fixed" elements of a situation can be very subtle, and it arises in a wide
variety of mathematical problems and physical applications. The goal of the
Ingo2003 conference is to allow mathematicians from differing mathematical
disciplines to learn techniques from each other, and to disseminate sets of
mathematical tools developed in one discipline to other disciplines that might
find them useful.
