
* 0353717
* EMSW21-RTG Research Training in Geometry and Topology at Michigan State University
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Ronald Fintushel,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 640,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0353717 Principal Investigators: Ronald A. Fintushel, Efstratia
Kalfagianni, Thomas H. Parker, Jon G. wolfson

The goal of this proposal is the enhancement of the research training
environment in geometry and topology at Michigan State University. Our goal is
to use increased resources to improve: 1. Recruitment at all levels ---
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral. 2. Graduate training, especially in
terms of the diversity of seminars, course offerings, and reducing the time to
obtain a Ph.D. 3. The experience of postdoctoral fellows and their preparation
for a tenure-track position. 4. Undergraduate participation with the
Geometry/Topology research group. 5. Interaction among students and faculty at
all levels. 6. The research environment at all levels with a regular program of
seminars and visiting mathematicians. The graduate students and postdoctoral
assistants who will be mentored under this proposal will contribute to research
on our main focus, low-dimensional manifolds, using a wide variety of techniques
including gauge theory, geometric analysis, pseudoholomorphic maps, knot
invariants, surgery techniques, and mapping class groups. Faculty at Michigan
State University as well as former students and postdoctoral assistants have
taken part in important advances in this rapidly progressing area, and it is
expected that future students and postdoctoral fellows will continue in this
direction.

To further stimulate research, the MSU Geometry/Topology Group will initiate new
programs for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The
key to these seminars is the atmosphere of collaborative learning that has been
fostered by the Geometry/Topology Group over the last fifteen years. The broader
impact of this proposal will address the production of research mathematicians
and teachers of mathematics who are interested in geometry and topology. The aim
is to create an environment which encourages all involved to become better
teachers, better expositors, and better researchers, and encourages those
entering mathematics to stay in the field.
