
* 0354772
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Topological Quantum Field Theory and its Application to Quantum Computing
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2004,06/17/2009
* Michael Larsen,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2010
* USD 669,945.00

The investigators plan to classify topological quantum field theories (TQFTs)
with less than six labels, prove that there are only finitely many TQFTs with a
fixed number of labels, and identify the closed images of certain TQFT
representations of the mapping class groups of surfaces. For applications to
quantum computing the investigators aim to understand how TQFTs would arise from
microscopic many-body quantum physics. The proposed program is based on work of
Turaev and Moore-Seiberg-Walker which essentially establish a one-one
correspondence of TQFTs with modular tensor categories.

Topological quantum field theory emerged in the 1980s from the study of three
distinct riddles: the relation of the Jones polynomials of knots to
3-dimensional topology, the fractional Quantum Hall effect (FQHE) in condensed
matter physics, and the infrared limit of 2-dimensional conformal field theory
in string theory. The connection between topological quantum field theory and
quantum computing was first explored by Freedman and Kitaev in late 1990s. Their
work opened up the possibility of building an inherently fault-tolerant quantum
computer---a topological quantum computer. Such a computer would exploit new
states of matter closely related to TQFT. Examples of such "topological states
of matter" include electron gases confined between the interface of two semi-
conductors which exhibit the FQHE. The extreme physical conditions for
fractional quantum Hall electron gases make it impractical to build a
topological quantum computer from such materials. To discover or fabricate new
materials capable of universal quantum computation under practical physical
conditions is a goal of the proposed program. The problem of classifying TQFTs
(or equivalently topological states of matter) is analogous to the problem of
classifying the chemical elements, and can be used to identify appropriate
candidates for quantum computing. The proper characterization of materials
capable of universal quantum computing, not to speak of their actual
fabrication, could open up a new chapter in many-body quantum physics. The
possible applications of such new materials are hard to predict, but would
definitely not to be limited to quantum computing.


