
* 0354538
* Workshop on n-Categories: Foundations and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2004,04/19/2004
* J. Peter May,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0354538 Principal Investigator: J. Peter May and John C. Baez

The 2004 Summer Program of the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications is
on "n-Categories: Foundations and Applications," to be held in Minneapolis,
Minnesota at the Institute's facilities at the University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities. This award provides participant support to augment the summer program's
membership and to make it possible for a group of workshop participants to join
the lead organizer and his students in a post-workshop working session at the
University of Chicago. The proposal describes the emerging theory of
n-categories as an area of international attention but of relatively little
presence in the U.S. The Institute's summer program and the subsequent working
session particularly aim to expose U.S. students and junior researchers to the
variety of ideas on n-categories being pursued internationally. The post-
workshop working group is an attempt to focus heightened energies resulting from
the workshop onto problems of greatest promise, as identified during the
workshop, and is an innovation whose progress will be watched with interest.

The mathematical idea of a "category" is a versatile notion defined in the
mid-20th century to encapsulate the common features of a large variety of
mathematical objects. Although abstract, the ideas of category theory are widely
useful because they facilitate knowledge transfer from one domain to another,
for example, from algebra to theoretical computer science. At the end of the
20th century several complicated notions of "n-category" had come into play to
meet the needs of several areas of algebra, geometry, and physical theory, but
we do not have a definition yet of "n-category" that is as broadly applicable as
the original idea. The expository and research work of the leaders of this
summer program aims to achieve that missing synthesis.
