
* 0404991
* Collaborative Research: Generic Properties of Groups, Geometric Invariants and Algorithms
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2004,05/17/2007
* Paul Schupp,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 117,180.00

The idea of genericity in geometric group theory was introduced by Gromov and
Ol'shanskii and is now the subject of very active research. Genericity exhibits
itself on many different levels in algebraic, geometric and algorithmic
properties of ``random'' algebraic objects and in the generic-case behavior of
their natural geometric invariants and decision problems. As already
demonstrated by the proposers' work, a generic approach often leads to the
discovery of objects with genuinely new and interesting properties. For example,
genericity provides a totally new source of group-theoretic rigidity, quite
different from the standard source provided by lattices in semi-simple Lie
groups. Much of the prior research on probabilistic aspects of infinite groups
has concentrated on mostly analytic questions, such as amenability, asymptotic
properties of random walks, Poisson boundary, and so on. This project will focus
on understanding the algebraic and algorithmic properties of random group-
theoretic objects as well as probabilistic properties of various traditionally
studied geometric invariants of groups. Specific topics, where the proposers
have already made substantial inroads, will include: the isomorphism rigidity of
generic groups, analysis of ``random'' van Kampen diagrams and generic Dehn
functions, generic subgroup distortion and generic stretching factors of
automorphisms, and the action of the outer automorphism group of a free group on
the ``frequency space'' of a free group.

With the rapid development of modern computers, understanding the practical
behavior of the performance of various algorithms is becoming increasingly
important. Yet most of theoretical research thus far deals with the worst-case
analysis of algorithms, which often has little to do with their practical
performance. On the other hand, in many real-life applications, in particular,
to public key cryptography, there is a great deal of experimental data on the
practical performance of algorithms that has not been adequately explained
theoretically. The current project should provide a number of new benchmark
ideas and theoretical tools for studying and explaining probabilistic properties
and practical behavior of algorithms both in group theory and in the broad field
of computational complexity.


