
* 0404767
* The geometry, topology and asymptotics of the word problem
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2004,07/26/2004
* Timothy Riley,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 107,999.00

The proposed research is in Geometric Group Theory, specifically on problems
pertaining to the geometry, topology and asymptotics of the word problem,
particularly along avenues initiated by Gromov in his seminal book "Asymptotic
Invariants of Infinite Groups." A first direction concerns isoperimetric and
filling length functions, a meeting point of geometry and algorithmic
complexity. Examples of problems for attack here are whether Cohen's Double
Exponential Theorem is sharp, and to establish long standing claims of Thurston
about isoperimetric functions of the Special Linear Groups. Also addressed in
the proposal is a question of Gromov about the uniqueness of a limit of a group
viewed from increasingly distant vantage points (an asymptotic cone); a line of
attack is being pursued in collaboration with M.R. Bridson. Another area is the
"grammar of the Word Problem", where geometry meets linguistic complexity. The
P.I. proposes to investigate the combings of nilpotent groups as well as
applications to the Andrews-Curtis Conjecture. The proposal includes
collaborative work and it is anticipated that the inter-disciplinary nature of
the work will enable additional collaborative efforts both in the United States
and abroad.

The Word Problem was posed by Max Dehn in 1912, who presciently described it as
a "fundamental problem whose solution is very difficult and which will not be
possible without a penetrating study of the subject." The Word Problem for a
group (a fundamental algebraic object capturing symmetries) asks for a
systematic method (in modern terms, an algorithm) which, given a finite list (a
"word") of basic symmetries (distinguished group elements known as
"generators"), declares whether or not their product is the identity (the
trivial symmetry that moves nothing). One of the crowning achievements of 20th
century mathematics was the construction by Boone and Novikov of groups for
which no such algorithm can exist. However, that is by no means the end of the
story. The Word Problem transcends its origins in algebra, decidability and
complexity theory, and turns out to be a bridge to geometry and topology, as
well as to linguistic complexity. To a group we can associate a topological
space and vice versa. Recognising a word to be trivial amounts to spanning a
loop with a disc in a corresponding space, and geometrical features of this disc
(such as area) translate to algorithmic complexity measures (such as time) of
the Word Problem. Moreover, words over a group form grammars whose linguistic
features relate to the ease of navigating around the corresponding space. Thus
there are tantalising links between minimal surfaces (soap films) and
algorithmic complexity, and between geometry of spaces and grammars. These are
the connections the P.I. proposes to develop and exploit.


