
* 0404511
* Studies of Knots, Links, and Other Spatial Configurations
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2004,07/27/2004
* Xiao-Song Lin,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2007
* USD 121,753.00

The subject of this proposal is to study the topology, geometry, combinatorics,
and statistics of such spatial configurations as knots, links, braids, and
polygonal simple spatial curves. Five specific topics and related research
projects are proposed. They range from the knot classfication problem, a folding
problem of polygonal simple curves in the 3-space, a possible statistic pattern
of the roots of the Jones polynomial, some problems about representations of
braid groups, and the study of higher order knot signatures. Some of the
problems addressed in this proposal are major open problems in the field of low
dimensional topology. The folding problem of polygonal simple spatial curves
addressed in this proposal aims at showing that there is essentially no
topological obstruction for the protein folding problem in molecular biology.

The phenomena of knotting and braiding are fundamental in 3-dimensional spatial
structure. A mathematical description and understanding of such phenomena is
essential to our knowledge of the natural world, and is the major goal of the
study of low dimensional topology. The discrete methods of analyzing
3-dimensional spatial structures developed in the study of low dimensional
topology are proven to be significant to many other branches of science and
applied research, particularly physics, molecular biology, and computer
graphics. In this proposal, a major effort will be spent on solving an abstract
version of the protein folding problem, which is a central problem in modern
molecular biology, using these methods. These methods are also fundamental in
the development of a student's ability to visualize and analyze 3-dimensional
configurations.


