
* 0405814
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2004,06/16/2006
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 111,552.00

The proposal divides into three projects in the related fields of two
dimensional dynamical systems and geometric group theory. The first is a
collaboration with John Franks to study smooth group actions on surfaces. One
goal is to understand when an action by an abelian group must have a global
fixed point. Another is to prove that certain lattices have essentially no non-
trivial actions on the two dimensional sphere. The second project is joint work
with Benson Farb. One part of this project is to study lifts of the mapping
class group of a surface to the diffeomorphism group of that surface. The third
project continues joint work with Lee Mosher. The action of the mapping class
group on Teichmuller space is paralleled by the action of the outer automorphism
group on Outer Space. The goal of this collaboration is to formulate an analogue
in Outer Space of Teichmuller geodesics.

The mapping class group of a surface, the diffeomorphism group of a surface and
the outer automorphism group of the free group are related in fundamental ways.
Classification theorems for elements of the mapping class group yield
information about the algebraic properties of subgroups of the diffeomorphism
group and so yield restrictions on the kinds of groups that can act on surfaces
and on the ways in which groups can act. One of the main motivations for
studying the outer automorphism group is its very close connection to mapping
class groups. One part of the proposal focuses on finding global fixed points of
actions; i.e. points that are stationary for every diffeomorphism associated to
the group. Another is to understand actions of the mapping class group of a
surface on that surface. To understand the geometry of a group one must
understand its geodesics; i.e. what the shortest paths are between any two
points. The geodesics of the mapping class group have been well understood for
some time. A third goal of the project is to generalize from what is known about
the geodesics of the mapping class group to identify and study geodesics for the
outer automorphism group.




