
* 0405216
* Topics in Set-theoretic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2004,08/28/2007
* Gary Gruenhage,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 141,556.00

The principle investigator will explore open problems in several areas of set-
theoretic topology. Convergence properties have important implications in a
number of fields, yet are not well-understood. For example, it is not known if
it is consistent that a space which is Frechet-Urysohn for finite sets must be
first-countable. Settling this question is likely to lead to a solution of
Malychin's well-known problem whether it is consistent that separable Frechet-
Urysohn topological groups must be metrizable. Two other themes of this proposal
involve function spaces with the compact-open topology. Settling one of them
would solve a 40 year old problem of J. Ceder, and settling the other would
yield a useful way of determining when these function spaces are Baire spaces.
Another goal of this proposal is to apply Balogh's magnificent technique for
constructing ZFC examples , which he used to settle several long-standing
conjectures, to other problems, and in the process attempt to simplify and
codify the technique to make it easier to use. Finally, there have been a number
of recent advances on the D-space property, a property with interesting but not
well-understood relationships with covering properties, which indicate that the
time may be ripe for settling the D-space questions of van Douwen that have
stumped researchers for more than 20 years.

Set theory and general topology are fundamental mathematical disciplines, with
common historical roots, and they serve as essential tools in many areas of
mathematics. General topology provides a framework for the study of shapes, from
ordinary shapes in real three-dimensional space to much more abstract shapes and
structures. For example, continuous real-valued functions are a staple of
mathematics, and hence the topological structure of spaces of continuous
functions, which is one of the topics that this proposal centers on, has
important implications in many fields. The same can be said about the notion of
sequential convergence and its variants, another topic of this proposal. The
principle investigator's proposed problems lie within the scope of what has been
a fruitful interaction between general topology and set theory, an interaction
spurred by dramatic advances in set theory and logic in the last forty years or
so and the realization that many long-standing questions in the general topology
of abstract spaces rest on complicated set-theoretic combinatorics. Solutions to
the proposed problems would deepen our understanding of the fundamental
topological properties to be explored, and would likely require new set-
theoretical and topological techniques applicable to a variety of other
problems.




