
* 0405586
* Braids and Knots
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2004,06/23/2008
* Joan Birman,NY,Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2009
* USD 61,908.00

The main focus of this proposal is the conjugacy problem in braid groups, and
ultimately in Garside and Artin groups and also in surface mapping class groups.
To begin, we propose to investigate the interface between two known approaches
to the conjugacy problem in the braid groups: (a) the combinatorial solution
that originated with the work of Frank Garside in 1968; and (b) the dynamic
approach which was first studied by Jakob Nielsen in 1932 and later given new
meaning, in 1982, by William Thurston. We note that (a) gives a definitive test
for when two braids are conjugate, whereas (b) gives less than that. On the
other hand (a) is exponential in both word length and braid index, whereas (b)
suggests the possible existence of a polynomial solution. The moment seems to be
ripe for an investigation which combines aspects of both. The new work of
Gebhardt on (a) shows that the `Super Summit Set', a complete class invariant,
can be replaced by the smaller `Ultra Summit Set' (USS). Our hope is to use the
known dynamic classification to study the USS. We will begin with a study of
reducing curves for reducible braids, and go on to study finite order (FO) and
pseudo-Anosov (PA) braids. We conjecture that for braids in the USS the reducing
curves can be chosen to be round circles which meet a line containing the
punctures in 2 points. We conjecture further that PA braids have `rigid powers
whose combinatorics is particularly simple. Looking at the braid group as a
special case of mapping class groups, one then expects further that the
associated train tracks will be special and interesting. If all this goes well,
there will be further problems to investigate, including related combinatorics
in more general mapping class groups, and related dynamics in more general
Garside and Artin groups.

In recent years there has been great interest in certain codes, in `Public Key
Cryptography, which are based upon the use of braid groups. The underlying idea
has been that the so-called `word problem in the braid groups is known to have a
solution which is fast. That is, the time required to check whether two words
represent the same element in the braid group is known to be polynomial as a
function of word length L and braid index N. On the other hand, the conjugacy
problem, which is more difficult, has been thought to be fundamentally
exponential in L and N. Like most such problems in complexity theory (e.g. the
factorization of numbers into primes) the possibility always exists that a
particular problem which was thought to be exponential will turn out to be
polynomial if a more ingenious solution can be found. The PI has been a leading
expert in the study of braid groups for many years. She now proposes to
investigate the conjugacy problem in the braid groups from a new point of view
which she hopes will show it to be polynomial, like the word problem, in both L
and N. The underlying idea is to look at two very different approaches to the
conjugacy problem, one based on `combinatorics and the other on `dynamics, and
to apply ideas from the second approach to simplify the first. If successful,
this research would have implications in Public Key Cryptography as regards the
security of codes based upon braid groups. It should also have many applications
in mathematics because of the central role played by the braid groups.


