
* 0405783
* Geometric Group Theory via Geometric Combinatorics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2004,07/15/2004
* Jon McCammond,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 115,329.00

The goal of this project is to bring various classes of groups commonly studied
by geometric group theorists (such as Artin groups, one-relator groups, small
cancellation groups, word-hyperbolic groups, fundmental groups of ample twisted
face pairing 3-manifolds, etc.) within range of one of the standard general
theories (such as piecewise Euclidean spaces of nonpositive curvature, conformal
nonpositive curvature, or Garside structures) by constructing appropriate
complexes on which they act. For example, there are emerging strategies for
constructing high-dimensional nonpositively curved cube complexes for metric
small cancellation groups as well as for fundamental groups of ample twisted
face pairing 3-manifolds, for constructing 2-dimensional conformally CAT(0)
complexes for one-relator groups, and for constructing Garside-like structures
for arbitrary Artin groups. Geometric and enumerative combinatorics play a
prominent role in the constructions themselves as well as in the establishment
of their major properties. In each case, the complexes constructed and the
approaches themselves are new and innovative and their key properties are in the
process of being established. Early indications are that these complexes carry
geometric and combinatorial structures which would resolve such longstanding
conjectures as the coherence of one-relator groups, and the solution of the word
problem for Artin groups.

This project lies at the interface between geometric/combinatorial group theory
and geometric/enumerative combinatorics. The former studies algebraic structures
associated with geometric objects (such as their group of symmetries) while the
latter can be roughly defined as the study of things which can be described
using only a finite amount of data. This is precisely the type of mathematics
that computers can do. Computational mathematics might seem far removed from
geometric considerations, but there is a growing collection of combinatorial
phenomena which can best be viewed as finite analogues of facts about the
curvature of smooth spaces. The primary goal of this project is to use these
computationally discovered combinatorial phenomena to construct complexes which
carry a geometric/topological structure which then explain the observed
algebraic behavior of the original groups.


