
* 0405867
* RUI: Noncommutative Geometry: Curvature and Rigidity of Noncompact Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2004,08/24/2004
* Stanley Chang,MA,Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 94,463.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0405867 Principal Investigator: Stanley S. Chang

The main projects funded by this award explore the existence problem for
Riemannian metrics of positive scalar curvature on noncompact manifolds. The
work of Gromov and Lawson on the compact case of this problem has stimulated
important parts of the development of noncommutative geometry and controlled
topology and these projects are formulated within the context of the stable
Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture. The principal investigator and collaborators
aim to construct an appropriate assembly map in the noncompact case, to test
that theory in natural examples, and to study with the generalized Roe algebra
the coarse quasi-isometry type of manifolds that do admit complete metrics of
positive scalar curvature. Noncompact manifolds obtained by deleting
submanifolds from larger compact manifolds and non-Galois or irregular covering
spaces of compact manifolds are promising sources of examples for study, and
noncompact manifolds of finite asymptotic dimension will receive particular
attention. Other directions of investigation include the zero-in-the-spectrum
conjecture and expander graphs.

Noncommutative geometry is an approach to the study of geometric objects through
algebras of natural functions and operators. For example, much of the geometry
of a sphere is captured in solutions to equations that model vibration, and by
the differential operators that appear in those equations. Round spheres are
examples of manifolds of positive curvature, the flat plane has curvature zero,
and the saddle point in a mountain pass is a model for space of negative
curvature. Mathematicians have found a number of tests that must be passed by
any space that would be a candidate to carry a geometry of positive curvature,
and these projects will advance that effort. Another line of work described in
the proposal concerns expander graphs, which were originally introduced in
computer science as models of large networks with good communication properties
but have also turned out to be a source of potential counterexamples for
geometric questions. These will be the subject of seminars involving students
and faculty from Wellesley College and nearby institutions.


