
* 0405723
* Thom Polynomials for Group Actions and Singularities
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2004,08/06/2004
* Richard Rimanyi,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 91,946.00

Associated with an invariant subvariety of a representation we consider its
cohomology class in equivariant cohomology, and call it the Thom polynomial of
the variety (``singularity''). Thus, the Thom polynomial is a G-equivariant
characteristic class. Tracing back the definition of equivariant cohomology we
obtain that the knowledge of the Thom polynomial of singularities reduces global
singularity theoretic problems to homotopy theory (namely, to the computation of
the characteristic classes of the underlying topological situation). Thom
polynomials compute the cohomology class of the locus in a parameter space over
which an object (map germ, differential form, arrangement, a bundle, a digaram
of linear maps, etc) degenerates. A promising direction is the search for the
corresponding good notion in extraordinary cohomology theories, the computation
of these extraordinary Thom polynomials and finding topological applications.
Another important direction is working out global singularity theory of
geometrically or physically relevant representations, such as Dynkin quiver
representations, surface bundles, multisingualrity loci over the complex and the
real numbers, hyperplane arrangements, as well as their connections to degree,
resultant and discriminant formulas. In many of these cases one expects
different positivity properties of the Thom polynomials, which can contribute to
the newly emerging bridge between geometry and combinatorics. The third goal is
to explore the indirect usage of Thom polynomials in Geometric Invariant Theory.
Here Thom polynomials can compute various non- stability loci of
representations, hence they give natural, geometrically defined relations in the
cohomology ring of the G.I.T. quotients.

In various geometric and topological situations singularities occur for global
reasons. That is, the global topology of a space, a manifold, a variety or a map
forces some singularities to occur. (A trivial example is the global topology of
the Klein bottle which forces double points when mapped into 3-space.) This
global behaviour of singularities is governed by their Thom polynomials. If we
substitute global topological invariants into the Thom polynomial we obtain the
number of singularities forced by topology. This general point of view contains
several mathematical areas as special cases, among others ``degeneracy loci
formulas'' of algebraic geometry, immersion and general multiple point formulas
of differentaial topology, and the theory of Schur, Schubert and quiver
polynomials of algebraic combinatorics. Thom polynomials, however, are
notoriously hard to compute. Although some powerful methods are known, some by
the author, no universal method has beed found. We propose to study the basics
of Thom polynomial theory, including possible generalizations to other
cohomology theories. Another challenge is the understanding of the interior
structure of natural infinite series of Thom polynomials. This direction
promises to establish connections between the different areas that play roles in
different computational approaches, e.g. algebraic topology, symmetric
functions, interpolation theory, localizations, Groebner basis theory. Another
main goal is to find applications of computed Thom polynomials in topology,
geometry and invariant theory.
