
* 0406563
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2004,05/16/2006
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 221,376.00

Davis and Orr investigate several issues concerning the classification of
manifolds, as well as the classification of embeddings of manifolds in
manifolds, i.e. knot theory. A variety of tools are used: surgery theory,
localization and completion of groups, rings and spaces, index theory, von
Neumann algebras, Whitney disks techniques, algebraic K- and L-theory, and
controlled topology. Some problems of interest are the study of connected sums
of manifolds and corresponding Nil and UNil phenomena, the concordance
classification of knots, actions on a product of spheres, and the ribbon/slice
problem. The goal, as usual in geometric topology, is to use a variety of
algebraic, geometric, and analytic techniques to find and compute invariants for
classification.

Geometric topology is the study of manifolds. An n-dimensional manifold is a set
of points locally modeled on n-dimensional Euclidean space. For instance, a
2-manifold is a surface and looks like a plane near each point. Many physical
phenomenon are represented by manifolds, and as such, understanding the global
structure of a manifold, and what possible manifolds exist, is fundamental to
the sciences, as well as to mathematics. Additionally, one asks how manifolds
can sit within manifolds, a subject known as knot theory. Knot theory has been
used to model genetic structures and chemical bonds.
