
* 0406992
* Homotopy Theoretic Investigations in Higher K-theory, High-dimensional Data Analysis, and High Dimensional Manifold Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2004,05/30/2008
* Gunnar Carlsson,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 550,000.00

DMS-0406992 Gunnar E. Carlsson

This project concerns the descent problem in higher algebraic K-theory. There
has been much recent progress in identifying the initial term of a spectral
sequence converging to the K-groups of a field, notably by V. Voevodsky and A.
Suslin. This project is an attempt to prove that the algebraic K-theory
spectrum, not just its homotopy groups, can be described purely in terms of the
absolute Galois group of the field in question, and the algebraic K-theory
spectrum of an algebraically closed field. The key ingredients are the
equivariant K-theory spectrum attached to complex representations of the
absolute Galois group, which can be regarded as a highly structured ring
spectrum, and a derived version of a completion construction at an augmentation
ideal. The model has already been developed, and what remains is to prove the
agreement of the model with algebraic K-theory of the field in general. The
validity of these results should give striking connections between, on the one
hand, the derived completion of the representation ring of the absolute Galois
group, and on the other the Milnor K-groups of the field, which are groups
defined directly from the arithmetic of the field.

This project seeks to connect the behavior of the arithmetic in a field (an
algebraic object which generalizes our usual notions of real, complex, and
rational numbers) and the behavior of so-called complex representations of a
group of symmetries of a larger field containing all possible solutions to
algebraic equations of the original field. These representations contain a great
deal of geometric information, and drawing this kind of connection (between
geometric and arithmetic information) has been a longstanding theme in
mathematics. The relationship between such seemingly distinct kinds of ideas has
been responsible for many of the recent striking developments in arithmetic and
algebraic geometry, including Delinge's proof of the so-called Weil conjectures
as well as the recent work on the Geometric Langlands program. The present
project represents another facet of this circle of ideas.
