
* 0406021
* The Topology of Smooth 4- -manifolds, with Applications to the Topology of Symplectic 4- -Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2004,05/12/2004
* Scott Baldridge,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2005
* USD 75,207.00

In this proposal Baldridge investigates the topology of smooth 4-manifolds using
gauge theory techniques. The goals of the proposer are to find easier ways to
calculate the Seiberg-Witten invariants of 4-manifolds, to provide new examples
of symplectic 4-manifolds, and to better understand the topology of 4-manifolds
which admit a circle action and symplectic form. The first project involves
studying the moduli space of solutions to the Seiberg-Witten equations of a
smooth 4-manifold when the Dirac operator is conjugated by the exponential of a
Morse function. In a collaborative project with Li, the proposer also plans to
extend the geography problem for symplectic 4-manifolds to nonsimply connected
manifolds and fill out this geography for symplectic manifolds with Kodaira
dimension 1. In the third and fourth projects the proposer explores ideas
related to Taubes's question, that is: If a 4-manifold is symplectic and
diffeomorphic to the product of a three manifold with a circle, does that three
manifold fiber over a circle?

A 3-manifold is a space that locally looks like the familiar space we live in.
If one imagines replacing every point in the 3-manifold with a circle of points
in a nice way, one gets an example of a 4-manifold with a circle action. Here
`action' means a rotation of the space along each circle. Four manifolds with
circle actions have many nice periodic and symmetry properties, which makes them
particularly suitable for modeling and testing physical theories. (For example,
the space-time universe we live in is an example of a general 4-manifold which
may have a circle action.) These manifolds are especially useful for modeling if
they also have a symplectic structure --- a key ingredient in almost all the
equations of classical and quantum physics. Work in this proposal investigates
what shapes symplectic 4-manifolds with circle actions can have, and the shapes
of 4-manifolds in general. This is done by relating invariant features of a
4-manifold to the number of solutions of certain systems of nonlinear partial
differential equations on that manifold.


