
* 0406254
* Classification problems in foliation theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 12/01/2004,12/21/2004
* Steven Hurder,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2008
* USD 105,000.00

A foliation F of a manifold M is a regular decomposition of the space into
connected submanifolds, usually with some assumptions that the decomposition is
smooth, and the decomposition is uniform -- either there are no singular strata,
or the singular strata themselves have a foliated structure. The breadth of the
study of foliations includes all dynamical systems, an immensely broad topic in
itself, so truly classifying all foliations is quite impossible. The goal of
this project is to investigate three approaches to classification: 1) classify
foliations via categorical (in the sense of Lusternik and Schnirelmann)
decompositions and other "foliated cell" structures; 2) classify foliations up
to homotopy of their transverse Haefliger structure; 3) classify foliations in
terms of the ergodic theory and asymptotic properties of their leaves. The PI's
study of the relations between the second and third of these topics -- dynamical
systems and ergodic theory, and geometric and topological invariants of group
actions and foliations -- has been ongoing for more than 20 years with support
of the NSF, and resulted in many publications and advances in the field. In the
past three years, there have been further decisive advances in each topic. The
study of Lusternik and Schnirelmann category of foliations, and its related
ideas, is a very new field, with great potential for advances. The fundamental
connections between LS category theory and Morse theory, motivate the study of
the connections between their foliated versions, and the classification of
transverse Haefliger structures. Success with this part of the proposed research
would result in truly fundamental new understanding of the structure of
foliations.

The study of foliations of manifolds began as a subject approximately fifty
years ago. The concept arises very naturally in many geometric and topological
problems, so it is not surprising that understanding properties of foliations
has become a fundamental aspect of the study of many other subjects in geometry,
topology, dynamical systems, analysis and various areas of applied and
theoretical physics. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes
advancing our understanding of the structure of foliations, and developing new
techniques with broad applications in many fields. Success with this research
project will not just be measured by solving the proposed problems, but also in
opening the field up with new questions. The broader impact resulting from the
proposed activity includes enhanced training of undergraduate and graduate
students in mathematics, collaborative research projects with postdoctoral
investigators, and international collaborations promoting research in
mathematics. The PI intends to continue working with graduate students and
postdocs on projects related to this proposal, and to promote the field via
conference talks and via the internet.
