
* 0435099
* Geometry and Topology of Symplectic Four Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2004,05/11/2004
* Tian-Jun Li,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 51,637.00

DMS-0207488 Tian-Jun Li

The focus of this project is to apply methods from differential topology,
geometric analysis and algebraic geometry to study symplectic four manifolds.
Symplectic four manifolds can be divided into four categories according to their
Kodaira dimensions, which take values -1, 0, 1 and 2. The classification of
those with Kodaira dimenision -1 has been achieved, to which the investigator
has made essential contribution. Tian-Jun Li proposes to classify those with
Kodaira dimension 0. Fiber sum is the most powerful construction of symplectic
four manifolds, and one would like manifolds constructed this way to be minimal.
Tian-Jun Li has shown that a large class of fiber sums are indeed minimal. The
investigator believes that he can prove it for all fiber sums using his work on
the minimal genus problem for rational surfaces.

An n manifold is a space that locally looks like the Euclidean space of
dimension n. For example, the space-time universe we live in is a four manifold.
A symplectic four manifold is a four manifold with a symplectic structure, a
very basic structure that underlies almost all the equations of classical and
quantum physics. Thus symplectic four manifolds play a central role in
mathematics and physics. The investigator aims to gain some understanding of the
fundamental problem: classifying symplectic four manifolds.






