
* 0443791
* 2005 Summer Conference on Topology and Its Applications; July 10-13, 2005; Granville, OH
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2005,12/01/2004
* Lewis Ludwig,OH,Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2006
* USD 13,825.00

The 2005 Summer Conference on Topology and Its Applications will be held July
10-13, 2005, at Denison University in Granville, Ohio. This conference is the
20th in a series that began at City College of CUNY in 1984 and held most
recently at the University of Cape Town, South Africa in 2004. This conference
generally draws over 125 graduate students and researchers from across the
United States and over 25 other countries. It is offered at a time when most
researchers are free from teaching obligations and can travel to conferences.
The diverse offering of special sessions was intentionally designed to impact a
broader range of mathematics and related fields, beyond the traditional areas of
topology. This diversity should also promote the collaboration between
researchers in different fields.

The goals of this conference are to: 1. Present the participants with the
leading researchers and latest developments in topology and related fields 2.
Encourage and promote applications of topology in these related fields 3. To
provide an opportunity for mathematicians from across the country and around the
world to communicate and collaborate at a time that is convenient to most 4.
Expose graduate students to a high level of research activity and prepare them
for research in applications of topology

There will be six invited plenary speakers: Marcy Barge of Montana State
University, Jose Bonet of the Politechnical University of Valencia, Todd
Eisworth of Ohio University, Jan van Mill of Vrije Universiteit, Dona Strauss of
the University of Hull, and Dana Scott of Carnegie Mellon University. There will
be two workshops: Interactions between topology and computer science by Achim
Jung of the University of Nottingham, England and Convergence in Topology by
Gary Gruenhage of Auburn University. All of these plenary speakers are leaders
in his or her field. Achim Jung is known for his ability to identify
relationships among the fields of topology, domain theory, and denotational
semantics Gary Gruenhage is arguable the most productive point-set topologist in
North America. Five special sessions are planned: Topology and Set Theory,
Topology and Set Theory, Topological Groups, Topology in Functional Analysis,
Topology in Computer Science, and Topology in Dynamical Systems.
