
* 0444085
* Geometry and Combinatorics of Hyperbolic 3-manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2004,08/28/2004
* Yair Minsky,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2006
* USD 116,836.00

DMS-0203976 Yair Minsky

In this project Minsky will study connections between the geometric structure of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and the combinatorial structure of surfaces. The main
focus of the project is a program to solve Thurston's Ending Lamination
Conjecture, which states that a hyperbolic 3-manifold is uniquely determined by
its topological type and a list of invariants describing the asymptotic geometry
of its ends. This conjecture is central in the field and would settle a number
of outstanding questions about the structure of the deformation space of all
hyperbolic structures on a given manifold. The principal tool in this approach
is the Complex of Curves, a combinatorial object which describes the set of all
essential homotopy classes of simple loops on a given surface. Such a complex,
viewed as a metric space, is hyperbolic in the sense of Cannon and Gromov, and
the invariants which describe the geometry of a 3-manifold turn out to be
"points at infinity" for the complex. A study of geodesics within the complex of
curves then allows us to construct a model for the geometry of the 3-manifold
which depends only on its end invariants. Part of the program is joint work with
Brock and Canary. The complex of curves is also instrumental in studying the
Teichmuller space of hyperbolic structures on a surface, and its symmetry group,
known as the Mapping Class Group. Hyperbolicity of the complex implies a type of
relative hyperbolicity property for the Teichmuller space and the Mapping Class
Group, and in collaboration with Brock and Masur, Minsky hopes to apply this to
study the geometric properties of Teichmuller space, and to answer a number of
group-theoretic and algorithmic questions about the mapping class group.



Topological spaces appear in mathematics at varying levels of abstraction. The
earth, for example, can be thought of as a sphere, spinning around its axis. The
set of all positions of this sphere, perhaps as parameterized by the time of day
in New York, can itself be visualized as a circle. The positions of the earth in
its orbit around the sun also make up a circle, and all this information
together can be described by a 2-dimensional surface, called a torus, so that
each point in the torus corresponds to exactly one position of the earth-sun
system, and our motion in space gives rise to a trajectory winding around the
torus. Once a surface is being studied, we often give it various structures: it
can have a metric, which is a way of measuring distance in it; it can also be
filled up in different ways by loops. The set of all possible metrics can itself
be studied as a "space", where motion in this space corresponds to changing
shapes of the surface. The set of all loops in the surface gives rise to another
space, of a more combinatorial character. A fascinating phenomenon, not uncommon
in mathematics, is the appearance of analogies between these different levels of
abstraction. For example, a property of a single metric on a surface called
"hyperbolicity" appears again, in another guise, as a property of the space of
all metrics on the surface and the space of all loops. The interaction between
these different levels yields interesting phenomena and tools which can be
applied to solve a number of problems in
