
* 0450806
* Conference on Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 11/15/2004,11/16/2004
* Vyacheslav Krushkal,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2005
* USD 14,020.00

This conference will focus on connections between main approaches to low
dimensional topology. Great successes have come from the classical topological
3-manifold program (surfaces, foliations and laminations), from the Ricci flow,
Floer homology, and from algebraic invariants in knot theory and topological
field theory. In dimension 4 the Donaldson, Seiberg-Witten, and Oszvath-Szabo
theories have revealed structure of smooth manifolds. However these different
threads remain largely unconnected and, with the notable exception of
geometrization of 3-manifolds, few general structural features have emerged.
This is in contrast with high dimensional topology where great advances between
1950-1980 revealed deep and relatively uniform structure dominated by homotopy
theory, bundles, and stable algebra (K and L theory). We hope that a spirited
discussion among a range of experts and new researchers will help reveal the
deep structure of low dimensions. Can the Ricci flow be coupled to a 2-form or
other gauge-theoretic object on a 4-manifold? Do nonsingular flows with special
dynamics provide a ``singular homology'' analog of the Oszvath-Szabo
``cellular'' Floer homology? Do special metrics associated to foliations and
laminations have implications for the Ricci flow? Taubes' relation between
Seiberg-Witten and Gromov invariants of symplectic manifolds raised hopes that
geometric representatives for Seiberg-Witten could be found more generally. So
far this has been unsuccessful but perhaps it is time to revisit the question.
We look forward to interactions among a wide range of experts and young
researchers with fresh viewpoints.

Topology aims to understand the structure of objects that locally look like the
ordinary Euclidean space but whose global shape may be rather complicated. Work
in the early 20th century focused on dimensions 2 and 3, with the expectation
that higher dimensions would be increasingly complicated and possibly beyond
comprehension. Strangely this was not the case: dimensions above 4 are actually
easier and a deep systematic theory was developed between 1950 and about 1980.
For the last 30 years the focus has returned to dimensions 3 and 4. This has
been one of the most active areas of mathematics, with deep relations to
geometry, analysis, algebra and physics. However a unifying perspective
analogous to the one achieved in higher dimensions is still lacking. The aim of
the conference is to promote interactions among researchers working on different
aspects of the subject, in hopes that unifying perspectives will begin to
emerge.
