
* 0455864
* Conference on Future Directions in 3-Dimensional Topology; May 6-9, 2005; Ann Arbor, MI
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2005,12/14/2004
* Joel Hass,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

We are proposing a conference centered on the theme of evaluating future
directions in the development of 3-dimensional geometry and topology. The
purpose of the conference is to review significant recent developments in the
theory of 3-manifolds and to discuss how they will affect the course of future
research. The conference will be held at the University of Michigan at Ann
Arbor. The planned dates for the conference are May 6 to May 9, 2005. We expect
50 to 80 participants, about one third of whom will be graduate students.Some
talks will be tailored specifically for graduate students.

Several important recent developments that are likely to influence the future of
3-dimensional geometry and topology. 1. The work of Grisha Pereleman on the
evolution of a metric on a 3-dimensional manifold under the Ricci flow is still
being absorbed and reviewed by the mathematical community. It is clear however
that it has the potential to radically change the directions and techniques used
in the study of 3-dimensional topology and related fields. The aim for this
conference is not to focus on the details of Pereleman's methods but rather on
their implications. What other problems are amenable to study by Ricci flow
techniques? Which of the traditional theorems and results of 3-manifold theory
become subsumed in geometrization? What questions become important if
Pereleman's geometrization results hold up. What are the implications to related
areas such as geometric group theory and the differential geometry of surfaces
in 3-manifolds? Will the entire field of 3-manifolds become less important with
this major problem solved, or will go on to have even greater importance? 2.
What are the likely future developments in Geometric Group Theory, and in
Topological Methods in Group Theory, areas largely based on ideas from
3-manifold theory. Stallings first, and more recently Rips and Sela have shown
that 3-manifolds are prototypes in many ways for general finitely presented
groups. 3. Ozsvath and Szabo have developed a theory of holomorphic curves
associated to Heegaard decompositions of closed 3-manifolds, leading to what
they call "Heegaard Floer homology". What impact will this have in understanding
3-manifolds and to other areas? Related to this is the work of Khovanov and
Rasmussen defining and applying a Jones polynomial homology. 4. Four dimensional
techniques such as gauge theory and related topics have had some applications to
problems in 3-manifolds. Thus Kronheimer and Mrowka give a proof of Property P
(also implied by geometrization). What further impact on 3-manifold theory are
such techniques likely to have? 5. Many invariants of knots and 3-manifolds have
been developed over the last two decades, including knot polynomials, finite
type invariants etc. How useful are these in understanding 3-manifolds? What
ties do they have to geometric properties of manifolds such as hyperbolic
volume? 6. Are there significant emerging opportunities to apply the methods of
3-manifold theory to areas such as Computational Geometry and Cosmology as well
as fields such as Computer Aided Design and Computational Complexity. What ties
are developing between the theory of 3-manifolds and such disciplines?
