
* 0456638
* Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference 2005; March 17-19-2005; Mount Berry, GA
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2005,12/02/2004
* Eric McDowell,GA,Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Stewart B. Priddy
* 12/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

STDC 2005 Conference Abstract

The Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at Berry College (Mount
Berry, Georgia) will host the Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference,
March 17-19, 2005. The Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference (STDC)
is one of the longest standing conferences in general topology, having started
in 1967 and continuing as an annual conference. Over the years, the STDC has
become broader, encompassing most of the areas of topology and of topological
approaches to dynamical systems. STDC 2005 will have four special sessions
running in parallel: Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, General and Set-
Theoretic Topology, and Geometric Topology and Geometric Group Theory. To
promote unity and interaction, there will be 12 invited talks of 25-minutes in
two parallel sessions, and 6 plenary talks of 50 minutes. It is our intention
that many of these semi-plenary and plenary talks emphasize interaction of the
research agendas of two or more conference areas.

Topology is the branch of mathematics concerned with those properties of objects
that are unaffected by stretching, twisting and bending. For example, if a point
within some object is approximated by a sequence of points converging to it,
then twisting and bending the object does not affect the approximation. Because
this notion of approximation lies at the heart of so many areas of mathematics,
topology plays an important role across the discipline. In particular, the area
of Dynamical Systems relies heavily on topological ideas. This branch of
mathematics studies the effects of iteratively applying a rule (or rules) to the
elements of some set. For example, rules which model weather conditions and
population growth over time have become paradigms in this field. The most
surprising fact regarding systems such as these is that even very simple rules
applied to nearly identical elements can produce wildly different and
unpredictable outcomes. Thus, chaos theory falls within the realm of dynamical
systems.
