
* 0502401
* EMSW21-RTG: Training Students in Geometry and Topology at Stanford University
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2005,06/21/2012
* Steven Kerckhoff,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2013
* USD 1,923,495.00

The goal of this project is to enhance the education of students in the areas
of geometry and topology at Stanford by providing them with interactive forums
in which to broaden their knowledge and by providing them with the time, through
financial support, to participate in those forums. Stanford has a broad and
active research group in geometry and topology with researchers in geometric
analysis, differential geometry and minimal surfaces, symplectic geometry and
topology, low-dimensional topology and hyperbolic geometry, geometric and
algebraic topology, and algebraic geometry. Aside from the breadth of fields
covered, the Stanford research group in geometry and topology is connected by a
network of overlapping interests and activities. The purpose of this project is
to attract students into this group and to allow them to more fully benefit from
the broad expertise it represents.



In order to facilitate the interaction between students and faculty
representing these varied interests, specific seminars are planned. These will
be run by senior faculty members and will involve graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and, in some cases, advanced undergraduates, who are
interested in these fields. Examples of such seminars include the following: 1)
Classics seminar: Students will present, under the supervision of a faculty
member, various ``classical papers" that transformed their respective areas of
mathematics. 2) Progress seminar: More advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers will discuss their work in detail, as they are working
on it. 3) Physics for mathematicians seminar: Geometry/topology students will
study a relevant area of Physics under the joint supervision of the Mathematics
and Physics faculty. The proposal is designed to bring more US
citizens/permanent residents to the Stanford graduate program in mathematics.
Special attention will be given to attracting more women and minorities to the
program. The activities proposed here should also increase the size and improve
the quality of the pool of Stanford undergraduates who go to graduate programs
at US universities; the majority of these students are US citizens or permanent
residents.
