
* 0502441
* Research in Geometry and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,04/23/2009
* Mladen Bestvina,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 447,615.00

The proposal centers around 3 topics. The first is about questions in group
theory motivated by the first order predicate calculus in logic. The questions
involve e.g. understanding the sets of homomorphisms of a fixed group into a
free group that extend to another fixed group. The second topic concerns the
topology of moduli space of curves and of the Torelli subgroup of a mapping
class group. The idea is to see if homology can be computed using a suitably
chosen Morse function on the moduli space, and on the quotient of Teichmuller
space by the Torelli group, respectively. The Morse function is geometrically
defined -- it is the systole, i.e. the length of the shortest curve (or the
homological version of this in the case of Torelli groups). The last topic is on
the quasi-isometric rigidity of right-angled Artin groups. The subject has seen
some great advances in the last 15 years or so, but this particular class of
groups raises many issues not addressed before.

The subject of the proposal is the study of topological and geometric properties
of several objects that naturally appear in mathematics. For example, consider
the collection of all possible "shapes" of a surface with a fixed number of
holes. This collection forms a space, called moduli space of curves. The
calculation of the "number of holes" for this space has been recently completed
by a topological tour de force. A different method for this calculation is
proposed here, one that would also give additional information. To describe the
method, consider the following analogy. When water is slowly poured into a
normal glass, the surface of water in the glass will always be a disk. By
contrast, if water is poured into a glass with a hollow handle, the surface of
water will consist of two disks once water reaches the handle. Thus, by
examining the shape of the surface of water we can tell if a glass has a handle
or not. Topological spaces, such as moduli space of curves, can be analyzed
similarly. A particular way of "pouring water" is proposed here.


