
* 0503753
* Hyperbolic Manifolds: Geometry, Topology, Group Theory and Arithmetic
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2005,04/17/2009
* Alan Reid,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2009
* USD 220,000.00

Motivated by considerations in topology, geometry, arithmetic and group theory
the proposal intends to study real, complex and quaternionic hyperbolic
manifolds. This will involve the study of discrete groups, and their connections
with other research active areas; for example number theory, and the theory of
expanding graphs. We will also explore various interconnections between these
geometric objects. This has been fruitful in the past, since previous work has
shown how an understanding of higher dimensional hyperbolic manifolds can impact
the topology of 3-dimensional manifolds.

The proposal seeks to further understand basic objects in modern geometry and
topology, namely manifolds that admit a hyperbolic metric of some type. Many of
the problems in the proposal are cross-disciplinary, and are amenable to study
using a broad spectrum of mathematical technqiues; for example from number
theory, geometry, topology and group theory. By their nature, progress and
solutions to problems in the proposal will have a broader impact. The problems
suggested have applications in fields as diverse as number theory (class
numbers) and cosmology (and its relation to the topology of 4-dimensional
hyperbolic manifolds) and computer science (expanding graphs). All of these have
the potential to be fertile grounds for the education of graduate students.
