
* 0503814
* String-related structures in homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,09/22/2009
* Po Hu,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 88,712.00

The overall theme of the investigator's research is the application of homotopy
theory to other areas of mathematics and to physics, in particular to the
understanding of strings and similar structures. Among these structures, most
directly related to of string theory is conformal field theory, which also
appears to be closely connected to elliptic cohomology. This in turn has
implications in the area of automorphic forms, and relations with Borcherds'
Moonshine module. There is also a remarkable connection with the absolute Galois
group of Q, through Grothendieck's program of dessins d'enfants, and the action
of Grothendieck-Teichmueller structures on the formalism that make up conformal
field theories. By way of analogy, studying the space of loops in a topological
space leads to the string topology, which is closely related to operads and
deformation theory in more abstract contexts. To approach these questions, the
investigator uses categorical Koszul duality. Related to Koszul duality is the
notion of Grothendieck/Verdier duality in various contexts, which led back to
A^1- and equivariant stable homotopy theory, including Real-oriented homotopy
theory. This is directly analogous to the A^1-homotopy theory constructed by
Morel and Voevodsky.

-------------------------------------

The overall theme of the investigator's research is the interaction between the
area of algebraic topology in mathematics, and string theory in physics. String
theory emerged in physics in the 70's and 80's as a theory providing new hope
toward gaining a unified theory of all the forces of nature; its basic idea was
that the fundamental units of the universe are not point-like particles, but
tiny one-dimensional strings, which may form a closed loop, or may be open (with
two endpoints). The theory since underwent a tumultuous development in which
many additional structures emerged. Today it is still believed in physics that
the unification program may be facilitated by some theory closely related to
structures discovered by string theory. Despite the long history, many
fundamental aspects of string theory are not well mathematically understood,
which, it seems, has somewhat hindered the physical theory. The investigator
studies some of these issues both directly, and by way of analogy and connection
with similar structures elsewhere in mathematics. Topology can be thought of as
geometry in its purely qualitative aspects. In particular, algebraic topology
has built up many powerful methods for studying topological spaces, by
associating to them certain algebraic/numerical invariants. In physics,
spacetime itself can be considered as a topological space. However, to
understand strings in spacetime, one needs to study not only the points in
topological spaces, but loops in such spaces, which can be thought of as models
for strings. The investigator studies the structures arising from the space of
loops in topological spaces. This includes conformal field theory and string
topology, as well as certain structures from the area of algebra, such as
operads and Hochschild cohomology. The investigator also considers the
structures arising from loops in certain purely abstract, general context, for
instance that of categorical Koszul duality.
