
* 0503658
* Embeddings, Intersections and Symmetries
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2005
* John Klein,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 107,634.00

This proposal involves various aspects of the homotopy theory of manifolds, all
of which, in one way or another, have connections to the theory of embeddings.
The proposal has four parts:

1) Embedding theory. The PI will use techniques arising from the homotopy
theory of Poincare complexes to study embedding questions.

2) Group Actions. The study of equivariant manifold classification problems
will be approached in a new way using homotopy theory.

3) String Topology. This is emerging field, created by Chas and Sullivan,
studies algebraic structures associated with the free loop space of a manifold.
The PI proposes to study homotopy theoretic aspects of string topology.

4) Thickenings. A "thickening" of a space is a manifold model for its homotopy
type. The PI proposes to analyse the homotopy type of the moduli space of
thickenings of a finite complex.

A "manifold" is a space which is locally Euclidean. Manifolds arise naturally in
physics, chemistry and biology as spaces of solutions of a suitably "nice" set
of algebraic equations modeling the scientific object of study (space-time,
atoms, dynamical systems, etc.) . Manifolds play a central role in mathematics.
It is often the case that mathematical questions about manifolds can be
formulated in terms of parametrized families of functions between spaces
associated with manifolds. Homotopy theory is a subject designed to tackle
questions about such families of functions. The PI proposes to study certain
kinds of manifold questions which can be hopefully be analyzed from the homotopy
theoretic toolbox. These involve problems related with intersections, embeddings
and symmetries.


