
* 0504019
* Structure of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,06/16/2009
* Yair Minsky,CT,Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 445,500.00

The field of hyperbolic 3-manifolds and Kleinian groups has seen considerable
progress in the last three years, with the resolution of most of the main
motivational conjectures, such as Tameness, the Ending Lamination Conjecture,
and the Density conjecture. These advances confirm much about our expected
picture of hyperbolic 3-manifolds and their deformation spaces, and place the
field in a moment of transition and opportunity. the techniques introduced in
the proofs have much potential for further applications. Minsky will focus on
deepening our understanding of the structure and deformation theory of
hyperbolic 3-manifold, applying in particular the tools that have come out of
his contribution to the solution of the Ending Lamination Conjecture. The models
and estimates provided by these tools should provide an approach to a number of
open questions, notably that of local connectivity of limit sets, geometric
description of closed manifolds from the Heegaard decompositions, and uniformity
theorems for deformation spaces (some of this work will be in collaboration with
Brock, Bromberg and Canary). Another area of applications (jointly with Brock
and Masur) involves the structure of geodesics in the Teichmuller space endowed
with its Weil-Petersson metric. These have up till now resisted analysis but
appear to be quite intimately connected to the geometry of 3-manifolds.

The interactions between geometry, topology and dynamics have been a beautiful
and powerful feature of mathematics and physics for more than a hundred years.
Dynamics is the study of time-evolution of mathematical or physical systems,
whereas geometry and topology involve "static" objects such as surfaces or
higher-dimensional analogues, often the background for a dynamical process.
Henri Poincare already knew that the standard round sphere, the setting of
classical analysis and geometry, functioned also as a "horizon at infinity" for
an exotic non-Euclidean geometry that we now call Hyperbolic space. Dynamical
properties of transformations of the sphere translate to geometric properties of
rigid motions of this space, and give rise to families of symmetric tilings
whose structure we can study by geometric and topological methods. The
complexity of these systems can constrain them so much that a combinatorial (or
topological) description suffices to determine them uniquely, and this is what
we call rigidity. This phenomenon occurs in many guises throughout geometry and
dynamics, and is relevant to issues such as classification of systems, mapping
out regions of stability and instability, deformation and bifurcation of
families of systems, and probabilistic properties such as ergodicity, all of
which have significance in both pure and applied mathematics. The particular
aspects studied in this project are typical in some ways and special in others.
They focus on the intricate relationships between geometry in two and three
dimensions, and also on the ways in which topology, particularly of systems of
curves within surfaces, determines geometry. There is also a strong emphasis on
studying families of geometric structures on surfaces and three-dimensional
manifolds, which are closely analogous to other families of dynamical systems.
