
* 0504917
* Research in Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,05/16/2007
* Mark Feighn,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 265,000.00

An exciting recent development in geometric group theory is Zlil Sela's
beautiful work on the Tarski problem. This problem asks whether the elementary
theory of a non-abelian free group is independent of the free group in question.
Feighn proposes two projects in this direction, both joint with Mladen Bestvina.
The first is a continuation of a project to simplify Sela's work. In the second,
representing a new direction, a solution to a modified form of Tarski's problem
is proposed. This will lead to new information about definable sets (objects of
primary importance) and will answer questions of Rips and Sela. A third proposed
project is to explore the extent to which the JSJ-decomposition of a group can
be found algorithmically. The specific class of groups to be examined consists
of graphs of free groups, which are of current interest on a number of fronts.
With Guo-An Diao, the principal investigator has shown that the Grushko
decomposition (a coarser decomposition than the JSJ) of these groups can be
found algorithmically. There are two possible satisfactory resolutions, namely a
construction of an algorithm to produce the JSJ-decomposition of a group in the
class or a proof that this problem is unsolvable. For this class of groups,
which exists on the boundary of what can be understood algorithmically, either
resolution would be important.

Geometric group theory is a relatively young branch of mathematics that uses
geometric methods to understand groups. The idea to take a problem in group
theory, translate it into a problem in geometry, and then use geometric methods
to solve the translated problem. The principal investigator proposes to use
geometric methods to explore two general areas. The first is motivated by Zlil
Sela's geometric solution to the Tarski problem which on the face of it is a
problem in the intersection of group theory and logic. Roughly, the problem is
to distinguish groups using the truth of statements formed using only the usual
symbols of logic ("there exists", "for all", variables, etc) and group
operations. For example, you can tell if a group is abelian by asking whether it
is true that, for all elements x and y, xy=yx. The first proposed project, joint
with Mladen Bestvina, is to simplify and extend Sela's ideas. This project is
ongoing and there has already been significant progress. The second proposed
project follows another trend in group theory that is encapsulated by the
question: How much group theory can a computer understand? Much as molecules can
be decomposed into simpler pieces (atoms), groups can be often be decomposed
into simpler groups. The project is to understand such decompositions for a
class of groups called "graphs of free groups", a class which has attracted much
recent attention. It turns out that decomposing groups translates into the
geometric process of cutting a space into simpler pieces. The goal is to use
this geometric idea to discover an algorithm that, given a group, finds its
decomposition. The principal investigator, with Guo-An Diao, has already
constructed an algorithm for a related process that can readily be implemented
on a computer.




