
* 0504212
* Topology of Manifolds, C*-Algebras, and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2005,03/12/2007
* Jonathan Rosenberg,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2009
* USD 229,700.00

Proposed abstract:

Professor Jonathan Rosenberg will study the topology and geometry of manifolds,
as well as C*-algebraic index theory, and various applications. The applications
will include a number of topics relevant to modern physics, such as the
classification of manifolds of positive scalar curvature, relevant to the
problem of understanding the possibilities for the large-scale geometry of
space-time, and questions relevant to dualities between different space-time
topologies in string theory. Professor Rosenberg is closely involved in the
supervision and improvement of the mathematics graduate programs at the
University of Maryland. He will train graduate students and advanced
undergraduate students in algebra, analysis, geometry, topology, and
mathematical physics, and will also work toward integration of mathematical
software into the undergraduate mathematics curriculum.

In more detail, one main focus of the proposal will be the classification of
manifolds via their Yamabe invariants, and the classification of metrics of
positive scalar curvature, problems which involve a quite subtle blend of
differential topology, differential geometry, and analysis. Another focus will
be applications of topology and noncommutative geometry to mathematical physics,
especially to T-duality in string theory. Other topics will include the use of
invariants coming from C*-algebras (especially Kasparov's KK-theory) to study
the geometry and topology of manifolds. For example, the KK-classes coming from
the classical elliptic operators, such as the signature operator and the
Dolbeault operator, will be intensively studied. These studies will deepen the
link between topological and analytic approaches to geometry of manifolds and
singular spaces. In addition, Professor Rosenberg will study the applications of
K-theory to the study of C*-algebras, and various related problems on algebraic
K-theory, especially concerning algebras of operators or algebras coming from
quantization of geometrical systems.
