
* 0504828
* Knot Floer Homology and Gromov-Witten Invariants
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,06/02/2005
* Eaman Eftekhary,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 122,583.00

There are two main problems suggested for further study in this proposal. The
first problem is the study of the Heegaard Floer homology of a three-manifold
obtained by gluing two other three-manifolds with torus boundaries. The gluing
is determined once a framing on the boundary of each component is fixed. The
principal investigator is interested in constructing a relative Heegaard Floer
theory for three-manifolds with framed torus boundary, such that the Floer
theory of the resulting closed three-manifold may be computed from the relative
Floer theories of the two pieces. Potential applications include an
understanding of the Floer theory of satellite knots, and some lower bounds on
the slice genus of such knots, at least in the case of the Whitehead double. The
second problem deals with the construction of integer valued enumerative
invariants of Calabi-Yau threefolds. In an earlier work, the principal
investigator has constructed such an invariant for any given homology class
which is either primitive or a prime multiple of a primitive class. It counts
embedded pseudo-holomorphic curves of a given genus in the Calabi-Yau threefold,
which represent the given homology class. The goal is to overcome the technical
difficulties, which force the restriction on the homology class, and extend the
construction to all homology classes. The principal investigator is also
interested in deriving a generating function formula, which relates these
invariants to Gromov-Witten invariants, similar to the work of Gopakumar and
Vafa in string theory literature.

Counting holomorphic curves in complex or symplectic manifolds has been the
source of great developments in topology, in algebraic geometry and in
mathematics of string theory, for the past two decades. These counts reveal, as
numerical characteristics of the subject of study, very important geometric and
topologic features that have been almost impossible to understand before the
introduction of these techniques. Floer homology in general, and Heegaard Floer
homology in the study of low dimensional manifolds in particular, give examples
of revolutionary technologies in this category. Gromov-Witten invariants,
providing a language for enumerative geometry, form another example. However,
the actual computations are generally very hard. The two problems suggested in
this proposal are aimed at a reduction of the computations to potentially
simpler cases: For a three dimensional manifold obtained from gluing two simpler
three-dimensional pieces we would like to reduce the computation of Heegaard
Floer homology to a computation for each piece, and for Gromov-Witten
invariants, which are generally rational numbers with crazy denominators, we
would like to describe them in terms of integer valued enumerations of
potentially simpler objects. Once these techniques are developed, the
computations will be possible at least in certain interesting classes of
examples. We hope for some fantastic applications of the first problem to the
study of knots, and a very interesting link between the construction of the
second problem and the counts of BPS-states in physics.
