
* 0504208
* Subgroups of Mapping Class Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,05/09/2005
* Tara Brendle,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2006
* USD 87,821.00

The mapping class group Mod(S) of a surface S is the group of orientation-
preserving homeomorphisms of S, up to isotopy, and is a fundamental object of
study in several fields, particularly in geometric group theory and geometric
topology. For example, mapping class groups are closely related to arithmetic
groups (e.g., SL(n,Z)), automorphism groups of a free group, and Artin groups
(e.g., braid groups), making Mod(S) valuable both as a venue for applications
of, and as an inspiration for, more general group theoretic results. Mapping
class groups are also prominent in 3- and 4-manifold topology, e.g., via
Heegaard splittings and Lefschetz fibrations. Moreover, Mod(S) arises naturally
as the fundamental group of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces and is
therefore much studied in complex analysis and algebraic geometry. The PI has an
ongoing program for studying the algebraic structure of Mod(S) and understanding
the relationship between Mod(S), arithmetic groups, and the automorphism group
of a free group, by comparing properties such as actions on combinatorial
models, automorphism and abstract commensurator groups, generating sets,
finiteness properties, subgroups, and possible obstructions to linearity. In the
course of the proposed project, the PI expects to find new generators for two
groups which play an important role in the algebraic characterization of
3-manifolds via Heegaard splittings: the Torelli and Heegaard groups. The PI
also expects to give a new presentation for Mod(S) relating Mod(S) to Coxeter
groups, to find a finite presentation for the Hilden group, and to gain insight
into the homology of the Torelli group and the Johnson kernel using a map
arising from the Rochlin invariant of homology 3-spheres. Understanding the
structure of the Johnson kernel is of particular interest as one can, for
example, use this group to construct all homology 3-spheres.

Surfaces are fundamental objects in mathematics, physics and other sciences.
Mathematicians have understood how to classify 2-dimensional surfaces for nearly
a century. However, the natural second step of investigating surface
automorphisms (maps of a surface to itself which preserve the essential
properties of the surface) has proved to be a much more challenging problem. The
group of surface automorphisms, known as the mapping class group Mod(S) of the
surface S, has been extensively studied, but some of the most basic and
essential questions about its structure remain unsolved. In this project, the
Principal Investigator will continue an ongoing program to study the algebraic
structure of Mod(S). Though Mod(S) arises naturally in many different fields of
mathematics, a particular goal of this project is to look for algebraic
structure in Mod(S) which reveals connections between geometry, topology, and
algebra. For example, one focus will be on the study of subgroups of Mod(S)
which play a large role in the algebraic characterization of various
3-dimensional spaces. Another focus will be understanding certain sets of
generators, or ``building blocks'' of Mod(S), which reveal the relationship
between surfaces, which are topological objects, and reflections and other
symmetries, which are purely geometric in nature.
