
* 0505740
* Homotopy theoretic methods in the study of moduli spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,06/08/2005
* Soren Galatius,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 101,198.00

The proposed activity will continue the development of a relatively new area of
mathematics in which algebraic topology is used to study moduli spaces of
Riemann surfaces and related objects. The main result so far in this area is the
solution, by Madsen and Weiss, of a generalization of a conjecture of Mumford.
This subject lies in the overlap between algebraic topology and other branches
of mathematics, with expected applications in algebraic geometry, symplectic
geometry, and possibly theoretical physics. The proposed activity will further
investigate and develop the result of Madsen and Weiss. Specifically, the
proposed activity will define a d-dimensional cobordism category C^d and
determine the homotopy type of its classifying space. This will imply the result
of Madsen and Weiss, but is a much more general result, opening for many new
possible applications. At the same time, it will be conceptually simpler and
allows for a much simpler proof. This is one project of the proposal. The
remaining four proposed projects are related.

The theorem of Madsen and Weiss is a very important theorem, that has already
recieved much interest. It sheds a completely new light on the moduli spaces M_g
of Riemann surfaces of genus g and on the 2-dimensional cobordism category.
These objects has been studied and used for long time, and in many different
areas of mathematics. On the other hand it is clear that the result is not
definitive, for example it is restricted to dimension d=2. The development of
the proper generalization should be of great interest and importance for
algebraic topology as well as for related fields.
