
* 0505471
* Cohomology, Finiteness Conditions and Classifying Spaces for Families
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2005,04/12/2005
* Ian Leary,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2009
* USD 118,842.00

Professor Leary will continue research on geometric group theory, geometric
topology and L2-cohomology, both alone and in collaboration. In particular, he
will construct groups for which the classifying space for proper actions has
surprising finiteness properties. He will also develop and study a functor that
preserves homology but replaces an arbitrary topological space by a space
admitting a non-positively curved metric. This work should have applications to
topology, algebraic K-theory and group theory. Thirdly, he will contribute to
the study of L2-cohomology, by computing this invariant for a large class of
topological spaces, including the complements of hyperplane arrangements.

A group is the mathematician's abstraction of the notion of symmetry: groups
measure symmetry in the same way that numbers measure quantity. Some of the most
interesting groups arise from geometry, such as the collection of symmetries of
a tiling of the plane. Professor Leary aims to construct groups that share many
of the properties of groups coming from tilings, but that cannot arise from any
`tiling' of any space. In a different direction, he hopes to show that some
aspects of geometry can be modeled (in a certain precise sense) within the
theory of groups. This should lead to new insights within both geometry and
group theory.
