
* 0505076
* Topology of Legendrian and minimal submanifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,08/04/2008
* Tobias Ekholm,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 115,600.00

The project concerns contact geometry and the geometry of minimal varieties. The
soft properties of contact geometry are governed by so called h-principles. In
recent years, the hard properties have been uncovered by using holomorphic curve
techniques in the framework of Symplectic Field Theory. The project proposes to
study a part of this theory known as Legendrian contact homology. This theory
has had enormous success for Legendrian knots of dimension 1. Parallels of the
1-dimensional phenomena have been shown to exists for higher dimensional
Legendrian submanifolds but the effectiveness of contact homology in higher
dimensions has been limited because computations in the theory are comparatively
difficult since they involve infinite dimensional spaces in an essential way.
One of the main goals of this research project is to prove a conjecture which
reduces the computation of Legendrian contact homology in 1-jet spaces to a
purely finite dimensional problem. This would be important not only for contact
geometry itself: profound recent results in knot theory were derived using
heuristic arguments from higher dimensional contact homology and a proof of the
conjecture would establish the link between knot theory and higher dimensional
contact homology rigorously. The conjecture will also be applied both to
internal questions in contact geometry (e.g. to estimate the number of double
points of exact Lagrangian immersions in $\C^n$) and to problems in differential
topology. The project also intends to complete earlier results concerning
minimal surfaces with small total boundary curvature as well as expand the range
of applications of the techniques used there, in particular, to problems
concerning higher dimensional minimal varieties. Many of the problems arising in
connection with this study asks for topological constructions with geometrical
control.

In topology one is often concerned with open differential relations and the
class of allowed deformations is very large. This is a reflection of the fact
that spaces studied in topology in a sense are "soft" objects. In geometry, on
the other hand, one often faces differential equations and the class of
deformations is considerably smaller. Comparing to the situation in topology,
one could say that objects in geometry are "hard". This project proposes to
study problems in the two areas, contact geometry and minimal varieties, using
the interplay between soft and hard.
