
* 0505080
* The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2005,05/16/2007
* Ronald Stern,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 239,906.00

Despite spectacular advances in defining invariants for simply-connected smooth
and symplectic 4-dimensional manifolds and the discovery of important
qualitative features about these manifolds, we seem to be retreating from any
hope to classify simply-connectedsmooth or symplectic 4-dimensional manifolds.
The subject is rich in examples that demonstrate a wide variety of disparate
phenomena. Yet it is precisely this richness which gives us little hope to even
conjecture a classification scheme. The most successful attempts have associated
to each 4-dimensional manifold the solution space to complex systems of
equations that arise in particle physics: the Yang-Mills equations and the
monopole equations of Seiberg and Witten. These solution spaces are useful in
distinguishing cunningly constructed 4-dimensional manifolds. This proposal
assembles all known techniques in a manner that provides approachable questions
that further explore a potential classification scheme. The first goal is to
understand why smooth structures on 4-manifolds are sensitive to local
topological change. The second step is to assemble the local topology into new
invariants that will distinguish those manifolds with the same Seiberg-Witten
invariants already constructed by the principal investigator. The core of this
project is to determine a sequence of operations that relate homeomorphic smooth
4-manifolds.

Excitement has been generated by the idea that the puniest of all forces,
gravity, may in fact be a strong as nature's other three fundamental forces: the
strong force which binds protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei; the
weak force which governs radioactive decay; and the forces that govern
electricity and magnetism. The perceived mismatch between these three forces and
gravity creates a theoretical nightmare; it's the principle reason we have yet
to find a grand unified theory. However, it has recently been hypothesized that
this weakness is a mirage; the force of gravity only appears weak because its
force is diluted in our own universe and most of gravity's force radiates out
into extra dimensions. All other forces remain trapped in our 3-dimensional
world, while gravity is free to roam other dimensions. With this hypothesis,
there could be other worlds that are parallel to our own; they all neatly stack
up, each oblivious of the other, with gravity the only force that moves between
them. New mathematics will be generated in this project to further explore these
ideas. Much of the relevant mathematics has already exposed the special nature
of dimensions three and four. The passage from one universe to another could be
explained by a local change known as a logarithmic transform on a null-
homologous torus. This operation captures many of the features of worm holes. It
is the purpose of this project to explore the conjecture that any two
homeomorphic smooth 4-manifolds are related by a sequence of such
transformations. At bottom, the goal of this project is to develop more
systematic constructions of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds with the hope that a
general picture begins to emerge that will at least suggest a classification
scheme.
