
* 0508635
* Quantum Topology in Dimension Three
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2005,07/11/2005
* Charles Frohman,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 107,984.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0508635 Principal Investigator: Charles D. Frohman

The principal investigator will extend and interpret quantum invariants of
three-manifolds utilizing the geometry of character varieties. The ideas he is
exploring will combine tools from gauge theory, representation theory,
homological algebra, and three-manifold topology. This entails work on several
problems. With Kania-Bartoszynksa he will define a quantum invariant of three-
manifolds which will be a real analytic function on the open interval (-1,1).
The invariant will be obtained by heat kernel regularization of the divergent
formula for the Turaev-Viro invariant. The power series expansion at 0, will be
in terms of weighted signed counts of surfaces carried by a spine of the
manifold. The normalized limit as you approach 1, will yield the total
Reidemeister torsion of the SU(2)-character variety of the fundamental group of
the manifold. Using ideas from matrix models he will develop an analogous
invariant based on the SL(2,C)-character variety of the three-manifold. With his
students he will continue to study the connection between the A-polynomial and
quantum invariants, and explore the knot and link homology theories of Khovanov
and Khovanov-Rozansky. With Oliver Dasbach and Marta Asaeda he is looking at
homology theories underlying the Alexander polynomial. Finally, given a three-
manifold and a Heegaard splitting there is an algebra which is the Kauffman
bracket skein module of the Heegaard surface and a bimodule over that algebra
built from the skein modules of the two handle-bodies. With Mike McLendon, he
will study whether this homology is a three-manifold invariant, and if it is,
what its relation to Khovanov homology is.

The rational understanding of the path integrals of Richard Feynman stand as one
of the major unresolved problems of mathematics. Using his integrals Feynman was
able to make computations in quantum electrodynamics that far exceeded previous
work. The tools he developed allowed the construction of modern integrated
circuits. The rules that physicists use for computing path integrals have never
been made completely rigorous. The major thrust of Frohman's work in recent
years has been about these integrals in a simplified setting where things can
actually be computed. Specifically, the Yang-Mills measure in the Kauffman
bracket skein module assigns to a gauge field on the space of flat connections
on a surface a number. The formula for the measure coincides with an asymptotic
expansion that appears throughout the physical literature. However, in this
situation it is actually a convergent series. Frohman is using this formula, and
the estimates he used to prove it converged, to pursue the analytic study of
three-manifold invariants that were before only computable using algebraic and
combinatorial methods. The goal of the project is to reveal the geometric and
toplogical nature of quantum invariants of three-manifolds to the end of
increasing the understanding of three-manifolds, representation theory and
quantum gravity.


