
* 0508467
* RUI: Interactions Between Homotopy Theory and Commutative Algebra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2005,07/12/2007
* James Turner,MI,Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2009
* USD 114,347.00

In recent years, there have been many deep connections found between homotopy
theory and commutative algebra. This research continues this pursuit in several
such directions. First, the study of topological spaces or structured spectra
through algebraic invariants, such as homotopy or (co-)homology, can be studied
from the global perspective on the algebraic side via a moduli space of
structures. A fine invariant for studying such a moduli space is the cotangent
complex associated to the given algebra. One part of this research, in joint
work with Paul Goerss, will look to extend the study of Hopkins-Miller-Mahowald-
Goerss on topological modular forms from, which realized Lubin-Tate algebras as
E_\infinity ring spectra and calculated their endomorphisms, to more general
Shimura varieties. In a similar vein, this research will seek to clarify, in
joint work with David Blanc and Mark Johnson, how a variation of this cotangent
complex controls the question of realizing a diagram of \Pi-algebras as a
diagram of spaces, by looking for ways of connecting cohomological obstructions
to things like Toda brackets. Finally, this research will seek to extend
Grothendieck's program for classifying smooth schemes to more general schemes in
the setting of derived algebraic geometry. The driving mechanism will be to take
the cotangent complex to be the proper analogue of the Kahler differentials and
generalize accordingly. This would frame the approach of characterizing
commutative algebras using the simplicial resolutions (as ultimately articulated
by M. Andre and D. Quillen) in an algebraic geometric setting.

Throughout the history of string theory in theoretical physics, surprising
connections have been made between several areas of pure mathematics - in
particular, number theory and topology. One such connection has been made
between the arithmetic of elliptic curves and modular forms, important in A.
Wiles resolution of Fermat's Last Theorem, and cohomology theories in topology -
the connection being relevant to string theory via the concept of elliptic
genera. From the topologist's standpoint, some of the relevant properties being
sought can be expressed in terms of whether the cohomology's associated spectrum
possesses a suitable multiplicative structure. The question of realizing such
structures can lead to questions regarding ways in which commutative algebras
and homotopical structures in topology interact. The goal of this research is to
further understand such interactions in two ways. The first is to collectively
study all possible multiplicative structures on a spectrum with a prescribed
algebraic data via the concept of a moduli space. The other approach utilizes a
global geometric device, called a stack, to understand these multiplicative
spectra collectively in the context of a more homotopical notion of algebraic
geometry. The aim of this research will then focus on studying other possible
multiplicative spectra associated to cohomology theories which arise from more
general arithmetic forms, such as automorphic forms. Involved in this project is
also the aim to characterize basic types of objects in this homotopical
algebraic geometry and drawing connections to recent homological
characterizations of algebras.


