
* 0509793
* A Quantum Field Theory Approach to the Study of Low-dimensional Topology Invaraints and their Categorification
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2005,06/21/2005
* Lev Rozansky,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2008
* USD 116,540.00

The Jones polynomial invariant of links presents two puzzles. The first one is
its interpretation within the framework of classical topology and its relation
to the fundamental group of the link complement. This relation is well-known for
the Alexander polynomial, but its Jones analog is missing. I search for it by
using the quantum field theory approach. I decompose the colored Jones
polynomial in the semi-classical limit into a sum of many simpler invariants,
which turn out to be multi-variable polynomial invariants of links. These
invariants are arranged naturally into a `tower' and the Alexander polynomial
lies at its foundation. My goal is to study the properties of the other `higher
level' polynomials and establish their relation to the topology of the knot
complement. The second puzzle of the Jones polynomial is its polynomial
structure, which does not follow easily from its Chern-Simons-Witten path
integral presentation. An amazing explanation for the polynomial nature of the
Jones polynomial comes from Khovanov's categorification program, which
interprets the Jones polynomial as a graded Euler characteristic of a chain
complex of graded modules, associated to a link up to a homotopy. I will study
the possible quantum field theory interpretations of the Khovanov homology.
Namely, the homology of the categorification complex should be a space of states
for a 4-dimensional topological quantum field theory, which has to be
constructed. This construction should help us to extend Khovanov's results to
quantum polynomial invariants of 3-manifolds and to interpret their relation to
4-dimensional topology.

The problem of knot classification is very old and although its formulation is
simple and transparent, it has not been solved yet despite concerted efforts of
many mathematicians. One of the most successful approaches to knot
classification is the construction of knot invariants, that is, the numbers,
which can be easily computed by looking at a picture of a knot and which would
be the same for all pictures representing the same knot. This area has undergone
significant developments in the last 30 years starting with the invention of the
Jones polynomial. This polynomial and the other invariants which followed it,
are intimately related to quantum field theory and can be expressed as so-called
path integrals. Thus many of the new ideas in the theory of knot invariants are
inspired by methods and approaches of quantum physics. The goal of my research
is to use the methods of quantum field theory in order to interpret the new
`quantum' topological invariants within the framework of classical topology and
to apply them to the solution of the knot classification problem.
