
* 0512714
* Conference Proposal: Talbot Workshops 2005 - 2007: Geometric Langlands
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/15/2005,10/31/2006
* Haynes Miller,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2009
* USD 38,250.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0512714 Principal Investigator: Haynes R. Miller, Michael J. Hopkins

The Talbot program is a series of yearly workshop retreats bringing together
graduate students, recent PhDs, and faculty mentors for an intense exploration
of a topic of active mathematical research. The Talbot 2004 workshop was devoted
to the Stolz-Teichner model of elliptic cohomology and was mentored by Stephan
Stolz. The Talbot 2005 workshop will focus on the geometric Langlands program
and be mentored by David Ben-Zvi. The geometric Langlands program is one of the
most fertile areas of mathematics, integrating representation theory, topology,
and algebraic geometry. The original conjectures of Langlands tie infinite-
dimensional representation theory to the structure of Galois groups, with
profound applications to number theory. From the geometric perspective deriving
from the renowned theorem of Borel-Weil-Bott, one would like to classify such
representations by equivariant sheaves on a parametrizing space. Drinfeld and
Laumon, among others, adapted Langlands' original ideas for function fields to
formulate a far reaching geometric generalization, now called the geometric
Langlands program. Work in this area over the past twenty years has changed the
face of modern representation theory. Recent advances, such as new geometric
generalizations of the classical Satake isomorphism, make this an ideal time to
gather young mathematicians to study these results, the techniques used to
derive them, and newly exposed avenues for future research.

The Talbot workshops seek to introduce aspiring mathematicians to active areas
of mathematical research, foster community and collaboration across
subdisciplinary and institutional lines, and form pedagogical and research ties
between established mathematicians and young researchers. The topic for Talbot
2004 concerns a central problem in mathematics deeply related to neighboring
areas of science. For instance, the crystallographic study of proteins, quantum
states of particles, and the structure of integer solutions to polynomial
equations are all central to chemistry, physics, and cryptography/number theory;
their deeper study requires probing the algebraic structures that govern aspects
of their nature. Representation theory is precisely the field of mathematics
devoted to this study. Further, the geometric Langlands program offers a
unifying vision for the specific algebraic structures suited to each of these
areas, which are called reflection groups, Lie groups, and Galois groups. This
Talbot workshop will bring together graduate students with different specialties
and from many universities to spend a week focused on this important subject.
The participants and their mentor, David Ben-Zvi, will share a residence as well
as lectures, discussions, and meals. This informal atmosphere, mixing fellowship
and intellectual interest, will promote a concentrated study of the material and
lay the foundation for future collaboration and research.
