
* 0513918
* Homological Algebra Methods in Topology and Combinatorics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2005,10/03/2006
* Yongwu Rong,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2009
* USD 108,000.00

Over the past two decades, low dimensional topology has seen a great deal of
studies in two types of invariants: gauge theory type invariants in dimension
four and combinatorial type invariants in dimension three. While both sides have
deep connections with physics, they share little common techniques and have
rather different flavors. This picture could change though, with recent work due
to Khovanov and Ozsvath-Szabo. In 1999, Khovanov introduced a graded homology
theory for knots, and proved that its graded Euler characteristic is the Jones
polynomial. This has turned out to be a far reaching generalization of the Jones
polynomial. Furthermore, there is strong evidence that Khovanov theory, along
with the Ozsvath-Szabo theory, could bridge the connection between gauge theory
type and combinatorial type invariants. Motivated by Khovanov's work, the PI,
with his student Laure Helme-Guizon, has established a graded homology theory
for graphs which yields the chromatic polynomial when taking Euler
characteristic. The PI intends to further his investigation on these homology
theories, both for knots and for graphs. Some of the specific problems are:
understanding their geometric meanings, studying their behavior under various
cut and paste operations, constructing homology theories for various other
polynomials of knots and graphs, and investigating relations with other
invariants in low dimensional topology.

Low dimensional topology studies the shapes of three and four dimensional
spaces. These dimensions are of particular interests to mankind because of the
dimensions of our space and our space-time. A specific subfield in low
dimensional topology is knot theory, which studies the knottedness in our three
dimensional space. Knots are worthwhile to study not only because they are
fundamental in 3-dimensional spatial structure, but also because of its
connection to areas outside mathematics. For example, biochemists have
discovered knotted DNA molecule (1980s) and knotted proteins (2004). It is also
intimately related to the study of graph theory, an area interesting to
mathematicians, computer scientists, and others. Over the past two decades,
there have been a flourish of new invariants in low dimensional topology,
boosted by ideas from gauge theory, quantum algebras, and mathematical physics.
In particular, a new invariant for knots, developed by Khovanov using ideas in
homological algebra, has sparked a great deal of interest recently. An analogous
theory for graphs has since been developed by the PI and his student. This
project aims to investigate these new invariants, with a particular emphasis on
the homological algebra methods for knots and graphs.
