
* 0539088
* Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference 2006
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2006,10/26/2005
* Jerry Vaughan,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0539088 Principal Investigator: Jerry E. Vaughan, Alexander
Chigogidze

The Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conferences (STDC) have been among the
most successful and longest running annual topology conferences in the nation,
attracting an international audience. The conference for 2006 will be the
fortieth annual meeting of STDC. The conference brings together mathematicians
and graduate students working in the two core areas, and covers most areas of
topology and of topological approaches to dynamical systems. The conference
fosters extensive interactions among adjacent research areas and their
applications. This contributes greatly to the advancement of knowledge through
communication of recent results to a broad audience. Further impact comes from
publication of refereed papers from among those presented. The conference
emphasizes participation by graduate students, young researchers, women and
under represented minority groups. We expect the conference to attract about 200
participants. The conference activities feature hour plenary talks and half-hour
talks in two parallel sessions given by leading experts, and four special
sessions of contributed talks. The special sessions are entitled: Continuum
Theory, Dynamical Systems, General and Set-Theoretic Topology, and Geometric
Topology and Geometric Group Theory. It is our intention that many of these
plenary and semi-plenary talks emphasize interaction of the research agendas of
two or more conference areas.

Topology is a diverse area of mathematics that grew out of classical geometry
and analysis. Its language and ideas pervade much of modern mathematics. Topics
in topology range from the classification of surfaces in space to limits of
sequences and approximation of various mathematical objects. A dynamical system
is a physical setting together with rules for how the setting changes or evolves
over the course of time (for example, population growth and fractals). The area
of Dynamical Systems studies ways to predict the long-term behavior of such
systems. The language and ideas of topology, which are heavily used in the area
of Dynamical Systems, are often used in many areas of science such as physics,
chemistry, and computer science. Recently, topological ideas are finding
application in areas such as biology, psychology, sociology, medicine, and
robotics. The meeting of the fortieth annual STDC helps insure the continued
progress, growth and leadership of United States researchers in topology and
topological methods in Dynamical Systems.
