
* 0539044
* Applications of Noncommutative Algebra to Low-Dimensional Topology and Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2005,07/15/2005
* Shelly Harvey,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 107,992.00

The principal investigator proposes to continue the investigation of topology
and geometry of low-dimensional manifolds using invariants that arise from non-
commutative algebra and von Neumann Algebras. These reflect the highly non-
commutative nature of the fundamental group. In previous work, the PI showed
that this type of invariant gives estimates for the Thurston norm of a
3-manifold, obstruct a 3-manifold fibering over the circle, obstruct the
existence of a symplectic structure on certain 4-manifolds, give new information
about the structure of the link concordance group, and obstruct a group being
the fundamental group of a 3-manifold or having positive deficiency. The PI
proposes to find new interesting non-commutative algebraic invariants and to
apply these invariants to questions in low-dimensional topology; for example,
homology cobordism of 3-manifolds (and link concordance), symplectic structures
of 4-manifolds, genera of contact structures of 3-manifolds, Betti numbers of
finite covers of 3-manifolds, and depth of foliations of 3-manifolds. The PI
also proposes to find a specific relationship between her invariants of a three
manifold and the Heegard Floer Homology of a 3-manifold.

Topology is the study of the continuous change of space (by stretching or
twisting but not tearing). In this project, the PI will focus on spaces that are
locally modelled on 3-dimensional space (the space that we live in) and
4-dimensional space (3-dimensional space along with a time dimension). These are
called 3 and 4-dimensional manifolds respectively.One of the ways that we can
better understand these spaces is via their "fundamental group." The fundamental
group isan algebraic object associated to any topological space which measures
the number of holes in a the space. It is defined as the set of loops starting
and ending at a point. We can formally multiply loops in the fundamental group
as follows. If A is a loop and B is another loop, we define "A times B", denoted
AB, to be the loop obtained by first traversing A and then traversing B. The
multiplication of loops is non-commutative as in matrix multiplication. That is,
AB is not the same as BA, since traversing A then B is not the same as
traversing B then A. Unfortunately,the fundamental group of a space is quite
difficult to understand. In this project, the PI will use noncommutative
algebraic techniques to better understand the fundamental group and hence better
understand the 3 and 4-dimensional manifolds themselves. For example, one of the
non-commutative techniques the PI will use involves matrices which are no longer
finite but have an infinite number of rows and columns.
