
* 0540236
* Conference on Topology, Geometry, and Physics; May 2006; New York, NY
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2005,08/24/2005
* Robert Friedman,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2007
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0540236 Principal Investigator: Robert D. Friedman, Peter S. Ozsvath

This is a proposal for a four-day-long, broad conference at Columbia University
on "Topology, Geometry, and Physics.'' The conference will focus on the
following major themes, and their interconnections: hyperbolic manifolds and
geometrization gauge theory, three- and four-manifolds, Hodge theory, and
interactions between mathematics and modern physics. Such a conference is
particularly timely, in view of the many breakthroughs in each of these
subjects. In particular, the recent spectacular work of Perelman on the Poincare
conjecture and Thurston's geometrization conjecture, as well as new developments
in hyperbolic geometry, make this an especially opportune moment to survey the
new landscape of three-manifold theory. At the same time, new techniques of
gauge theory and new combinatorial methods have deepened the current
understanding of three- and four-manifolds and it is time to take stock of these
developments and their relation to other work in the field. Many of the new
results in geometric topology have been based upon ideas arising in mathematical
physics and geometric analysis, and these kind of interactions will serve as a
unifying theme for the conference.

A fundamental problem in mathematics is to describe all possible shapes. In the
case of surfaces (two dimensional objects), possible shapes include a sphere
(the surface of the earth, for example), a torus (the surface of a tire) and
more complicated generalizations. A great deal of research has been concerned
with dimension three, the dimension of space, and dimension four, the dimension
of space-time. Because of its relevance to understanding our physical world,
understanding all possible shapes in these dimensions is particularly important.
Paradoxically, these cases are much harder to understand and to classify than
higher-dimensional objects (which in turn are much harder to visualize in any
meaningful way). The study of dimensions three and four has drawn on a rich
variety of mathematical and physical ideas. Recent work of a Russian
mathematician, G. Perelman, seems to confirm one of the famous outstanding
conjectures of topology, the Poincare conjecture (which gives a complete
characterization of the three dimensional analogue of a sphere), as well as a
profound generalization of this conjecture, the geometrization conjecture of
Thurston, which gives in principle a scheme whereby one could describe all
possible three-dimensional shapes. A major goal of this conference is to
understand these new ideas, as well as other recent work in dimensions three and
four, and to evaluate our new understanding of geometry and topology in these
dimensions.
