
* 0603270
* Journees Peter Shalen - A Conference on 3-Dimensional Topology and Its Role in Mathematics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2006,09/27/2007
* Marc Culler,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2008
* USD 24,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0603270 Principal Investigator: Marc E. Culler, Steven Boyer

The subject of 3-manifold topology has a long history of deep and interesting
interactions with other parts of mathematics. The complexity of these
connections has increased with time, as the subject developed, and it has
exploded in recent years. The coincidence of this explosion with the recent
solution of several of the major outstanding problems in the area make this a
good time for reflection on its relationship to the rest of mathematics. This
grant will support participants in a conference, to be held at CRM in Montreal,
which aims to bring together a varied group of leading researchers whose work
demonstrates deep connections between 3-manifold topology and other areas of
mathematics. The speakers will include leading researchers in areas such as:
geometrization of 3-manifolds; combinatorial group theory and coarse geometric
properties of groups; properties of random 3-manifolds and asymptotic properties
of hyperbolic surfaces; Floer homology, Khovanov-Rozansky homology; 3-manifold
invariants arising from contact structures; character varieties; and Dehn
surgery. The conference will honor Peter Shalen, whose work has been a major
force in bringing many different aspect of mathematics to bear on the study of
3-manifolds, and in expanding the influence of 3-manifold topology into other
areas.

Throughout history the interaction between mathematics and science has been
characterized by the mysterious phenomenon that mathematical ideas which are
developed with no specific application in mind turn out to be perfectly suited
for future applications to science. For example, differential geometry, which
provided the ideal mathematical foundation for Einstein's general relativity
theory, was developed much earlier by mathematicians who could not have
anticipated the way in which it would be applied in physics. On a smaller scale,
there is a similar phenomenon involving different areas of mathematics. A recent
example of this, which is directly related to the topic of this conference, is
provided by Perelman's proof of Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture. This
conference aims to facilitate these sorts of unexpected fruitful interactions
between different areas of mathematics. The central topic of the conference is
the study of 3-dimensional spaces. Speakers have been selected whose work
involves significant new applications to this subject of ideas which originate
from a wide range of other areas of mathematics.

The conference web site is http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/cal/fr/mois200606.html.
