
* 0603713
* String Topology and the Algebraic Topology of Moduli Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,06/16/2008
* Ralph Cohen,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 420,480.00



This proposal consists of several projects using algebraic topological
techniques to study geometric questions arising in String Topology, and the
topology of moduli spaces. The theory of String Topology, first introduced by
Chas and Sullivan in 1999, now involves a vast array of rich structure on spaces
of paths and loops of manifolds, as well as maps from surfaces to manifolds. In
this proposal, Cohen will emphasize applications of string topology, and the
recent breakthroughs in the study of the homotopy type of moduli spaces. These
applications will be both to geometry (understanding the Gromov-Witten theory of
cotangent bundles, and the cobordism type of moduli spaces of holomorphic
curves), and within algebraic topology (the K -theory of loop spaces of
classifying spaces, twisted equivariant K -theory, and Waldhausen's algebraic K
-theory of spaces). Cohen, in collaboration with I. Madsen, will also study the
homotopy type of moduli spaces of maps of surfaces, extending Madsen and Weiss's
recent work on the generalized Mumford conjecture. They propose a longer term
project to use this knowledge, as well as an adaptation of string topology
methods, to understand bordism classes represented by the compact moduli spaces
of stable holomorphic curves in a symplectic manifold.





This proposal consists of several projects investigating the new area of
research known as "String Topology", as well as related questions. String
topology, a theory that was first introduced by Chas and Sullivan in 1999,
studies structures on spaces of paths, loops, and surfaces. This structure was
motivated by formalisms in string theory in physics. The idea is to understand
how loops (or paths) in a background space can evolve in time. Loops can evolve
by changing in size and even breaking apart. These phenomena are measured by
studying surfaces mapping to the background space, that span these loops. In
this project, Cohen tends to study the intersection properties of these spaces
of loops and surfaces, and in particular the topology of the space of surfaces
mapping to a background space. His goal is to apply these constructions to a
variety of geometric questions.








