
* 0603980
* Dynamics of Flows on Translation Surfaces, and the Combinatorics and Geometry of Teichmuller Space and 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2006,04/02/2008
* Howard Masur,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2011
* USD 178,540.00

The principal investigator will work on problems in the geometry and topology of
surfaces, and three manifolds. The first part of the proposal is concerned with
the understanding of the dynamics of flows on translation surfaces. This subject
has its origins in the dynamics of billiards in polygons. Specifically, the plan
is to study conditions on a translation surface which will guarantee that there
are directions in which the flow is minimal, but not uniquely ergodic. The
objective of the second part of the proposal is to study the Weil-Petersson
metric on Teichmuller space. Little is known about geodesics in this metric. The
principal investigator will use combinatorial and geometric methods to study
these geodesics. The third major area of research is the study of Heegaard
splittings of a three manifold, via the combinatorics and geometry of the disc
complex associated to a handlebody. An initial goal of this study is to show
that the disc complex is a Gromov hyperbolic space. One hopes to use this fact
to build model manifolds for Heegard splittings.

The principal investigator works in the mathematical fields of geometry and
dynamical systems on two dimensional surfaces. The study of surfaces dates back
hundreds of years, and is intimately connected with our understanding of the
world around us. Surprisingly, there is still much to be learned about surfaces.
Geometry is concerned with their shapes, such as angles and straight lines,
while in dynamical systems one studies how objects can evolve in time. The
subject of dynamical systems dates back thousands of years to the study of the
motion of the planets. One of the main goals of this grant is to study the
dynamical properites of objects moving in straight lines on surfaces. It is
expected that the findings of this work will lead to greater understanding of
these fundamental objects. The principal investigator plans to disseminate the
knowledge gained by the activities of this grant by publishing the results and
giving public lectures. The principal investigator is actively involved in the
education and training of graduate students, both at his own institution, the
University of Illinois at Chicago, and at the University of Chicago.
