
* 0603958
* Stein surfaces, 4-manifolds and symplectic topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2006,05/12/2008
* Robert Gompf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2010
* USD 255,157.00

DMS-0603958 Robert Gompf

A primary aim of this project is to use topological methods to study which open
subsets of complex surfaces are Stein. Preliminary results show that up to
topological isotopy, Stein open subsets are as common as possible. That is, if U
satisfies the basic necessary condition (it is homeomorphic to an open
handlebody with handles of index at most 2), then it is topologically isotopic
(not necessarily smoothly or ambiently) to a Stein open subset. The project is
revealing much more detailed structure: a 2-complex topological spine K for U
that is smoothly embedded except for one point on each 2-cell, and a
neighborhood system of K consisting of homeomorphic Stein surfaces indexed by a
Cantor set and frequently realizing uncountably many diffeomorphism types. There
is much control over minimal genera of homology classes of the Stein
neighborhoods. The project investigates these phenomena using techniques from
topological 4-manifold theory (Casson handles and reimbedding), and also applies
these methods to study pseudoconvex smooth and topological embeddings of
3-manifolds into complex surfaces. A second thrust of the proposal concerns the
topology of closed, symplectic 4-manifolds, such as the recently discovered
simply connected 4-manifolds with small Euler characteristics. For example, what
range of signature and Euler characteristic is realized for a fixed fundamental
group? Which symplectic manifolds decompose completely after connected sum with
a single CP^2? Can one find general bounds on the number of CP^2 summands
required to decompose symplectic manifolds? These questions can be studied via
Kirby calculus and Lefschetz fibrations. One can also drop the symplectic
structures and ask the above questions for irreducible smooth 4-manifolds.

The project concerns the classification of 3- and 4-manifolds and their contact,
symplectic and Stein structures. An n-manifold is a space locally
indistinguishable from Euclidean n-space. For example the space in which we live
and the universe (space-time) are 3- and 4-manifolds, respectively. Contact and
symplectic structures first arose in classical physics (optics and Hamiltonian
mechanics, respectively), but they are also intimately connected with more
recent physics such as string theory, as well as various branches of mathematics
such as algebraic geometry, topology and dynamical systems. Stein manifolds are
symplectic manifolds endowed with additional structure that is naturally
expressed via contact topology. They also have various equivalent definitions in
terms of complex analysis - for example, Stein manifolds are essentially the
same as complex submanifolds of complex n-space. Complex analysts have
recognized Stein manifolds as fundamental objects of study for most of the past
century, but much about them remains unknown. The present project investigates
which open subsets of a complex manifold are Stein manifolds. This question
(like many in topology) is most subtle in the context of 4-manifolds. In this
setting, the project has already shown that every subset satisfying the most
basic requirements can be deformed into a Stein subset, although the deformation
cannot usually be made smooth. Such unsmoothable deformations can only be
accessed via esoteric techniques from topological 4-manifold theory. Since these
techniques are quite alien to complex analysts, the research is in some sense
interdisciplinary, and the results are completely unlike anything obtainable by
traditional analytic methods. For example, the resulting Stein manifolds
frequently come in uncountably many types, all topologically equivalent but
smoothly distinct. In addition to Stein manifolds, the project deals with
4-manifolds and symplectic and contact manifolds. Most of what is known about
the classifications of these objects has been discovered in the past few
decades. While the fields are developing rapidly, the final classification
schemes remain elusive.
