
* 0603736
* Knots, Heegaard Splittings and Width Complexes
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, 
* 07/01/2006,11/13/2008
* Jennifer Schultens,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 201,932.00

The proposed research grows out of a desire to better understand the workings of
thin position, both in the context of knots and in the context of 3-manifolds.
Simplicial complexes, cell complexes and other complexes have featured
prominently in geometric group theory for many years. Their utility in the study
of 3-manifolds has been established through the work of Masur and Minsky, Hempel
and others. Defining and studying the ``width complex'' will help streamline
current research on knot theory and Heegaard splittings. It will also
reformulate some of the P.I.'s pet problems in these areas. Some of these
problems pertain to the behavior of genus and rank under gluing of 3-manifolds.
Others concern stabilizing of Heegaard splittings. Yet others concern the nature
of untelescopings of Heegaard splittings.

The proposed research grows out of a desire to better understand knots, that is,
knotted circles in 3-dimensional space, and 3-manifolds, that is, 3-dimensional
generalizations of surfaces. The key idea here is to use a certain type of
complex, that is, a fancy bookkeeping device, to encode information about knots
and 3-manifolds. Interestingly, this complex recasts standard problems of the
research area in a new light. The project is extensive. Some parts are
accessible to graduate students and former graduate students of the P.I. The
P.I. has directed three Ph.D. dissertations to date and maintains especially
close contact with Maria Robinson (Seattle University). The P.I. is currently
supervising two graduate students: Shawn Lanier and Alice Stevens. The P.I.
maintains several international collaborations.
