
* 0603964
* Algebraic Topology, Representation Theory, and Theoretical Physics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2006,03/23/2010
* Daniel Freed,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2012
* USD 538,968.00

The PI will continue two main lines of research. The first, joint with Michael
Hopkins and Constantin Teleman, builds on our theorem identifying the Verlinde
ring in the representation theory of loop groups with a certain twisted
equivariant K-theory ring. The Verlinde ring appears as part of a 3-dimensional
topological quantum field theory, Chern-Simons theory, and we will attempt to
make further constructions in this direction using K-theory. In another
direction, the Verlinde ring may be made using correspondence diagrams and
integration in K-theory. Consistent orientations of moduli spaces are necessary
to carry this out, and the appearance of Madsen-Tillmann spectra in this regard
will be further explored. Extensions to families of surfaces and "open strings"
potentially connect with other mathematics, for example von Neumann algebras,
and may open up new links. The second main line of research, joint with a
variety of collaborators, concerns topological ideas in string theory and
M-theory. For example, with Greg Moore and Graeme Segal we hope to construct
completely the quantum theory of a generalized self-dual field. This will mix
theta functions, Heisenberg groups, quadratic forms, and the index theorem in a
novel manner. There are also interesting questions involving various aspects of
D-branes and the B-field, some of which impact current ideas about the landscape
of solutions to string theory. In addition, there are many student projects
which relate to these topics as well as to the geometric theory of Dirac
operators.

This research is part of an interaction between algebraic topology and quantum
field theory which began in the mid 1970s. The flow of ideas is bidirectional.
Existing mathematics is applied to solve particular problems in physical
theories. New ideas emerging from the physics inspire developments and new
directions in the mathematics. In particular, over the past 15 years a new
topological side to quantum field theory has been developed and has had
ramifications not only in topology but other parts of geometry as well. Some of
our efforts are devoted to using the integration processes in algebraic topology
to shed light on the integration processes in topological quantum field theory--
the former are well-defined whereas the latter have as yet to be understood
mathematically in the necessary generality. The grant also supports educational
activities, including the Saturday Morning Math Group, a highly successful
outreach program for middle and high school students.
