
* 0603940
* Homological Invariants of Knots and Three-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,06/03/2011
* Jacob Rasmussen,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 121,545.00

DMS-0603940 Jacob Rasmussen

This project is about a class of knot invariants known as ``knot homologies''
which generalize classical invariants such as the Alexander and Jones
polynomial. The PI plans to investigate a conjectured relationship between two
versions of these invariants. The first version was developed by Khovanov and
Rozansky and is combinatorial in nature. The second is known as knot Floer
homology, and has its origins in the Heegaard Floer homology of Ozsvath and
Szabo. It is not combinatorial, but is known to carry a great deal of geometric
information about the knot. Despite the differences in their definitions, these
two theories exhibit some truly striking similarities. The project aims to
explain these similarities and to use them to get a better understanding of both
theories. One posssible application is to find combinatorial analogs of gauge
theoretic invariants like the knot Floer homology.

The study of knotted curves in three-dimensional space is intimately related to
the geometry of three- and four-dimensional spaces themselves. In the last few
decades, ideas from physics have led to the development of two major types of
invariants for such curves, known as ``quantum'' and ``gauge theoretic''
invariants. Although both types have roots in the quantum theory of fields,
there was little sign that they were related. Recently, however, some remarkable
similarities between the two have begun to appear. The aim of this project is to
better understand the relationship between these two classes of invariants.
