
* 0603932
* Pseudoholomorphic curves, orbifolds, and group actions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2006,03/01/2011
* Weimin Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2012
* USD 105,540.00

DMS-0603932 Weimin Chen

Gromov's pseudoholomorphic curve theory has been at the center of many great
advances in mathematics in the past twenty years. This project seeks to apply
Gromov's ideas and techniques of pseudoholomorphic curves in the context of
group actions on manifolds, which technically amounts to studying
pseudoholomorphic curves in the quotient space of the group action. Such a
quotient space, called an orbifold, may have singularities in general, which
correspond to the fixed points of the group action. Particularly, this project
proposes to systematically study a certain class of smooth finite group actions
on four-dimensional manifolds, which includes finite order automorphisms of
nonsingular algebraic surfaces, a subject which has been long studied in
algebraic geometry. The project also seeks to classify a certain type of circle
actions on the five-dimensional sphere involved in the study of Einstein metrics
on the sphere, which is a subject of central importance in Riemannian geometry.

The importance of symmetry in mathematics has been long recognized. A crucial
issue in the study of symmetry is to understand the structure of the set of
points in the space which are fixed under the symmetry. The central new idea in
this project is the observation that when studying symmetries of a four-
dimensional space (for instance, the universe in which we live), one can often
extract useful information about the fixed points of a symmetry by studying a
certain type of rigid two-dimensional subspaces (like a soap bubble) in the
four-dimensional space.
