
* 0604354
* Interactions of homotopy theory and algebra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,05/01/2008
* Daniel Dugger,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 90,057.00

The project has three components, all concerning new interactions between
algebra and topology. In the first component, the investigator will explore the
role of orthogonal Grassmannians in motivic homotopy theory. The focus will be
on their relationship with Hermitian K-theory and on their motivic cohomology,
the latter being related to motivic characteristic classes for quadratic
bundles. One goal will be to geometrically construct such classes and to
investigate their basic properties. In the second part of the project the
investigator will explore (with D. Biss and D. Isaksen) spaces of zero-divisors
in Cayley-Dickson algebras, in an attempt to completely classify these. This may
eventually have applications to the Kervaire invariant one problem, and this
will be explored. Finally, the researcher will continue joint work with B.
Shipley which studies the relationship between differential graded algebras and
ring spectra.

The last ten years have seen the discovery of many new, surprising ways in which
topology and algebra interact. Historically, algebra has always been used to
give information about topology; but what is amazing about recent developments
is that they often use topology to give information about algebra. This project
focuses on three instances of this. The main component of the research involves
motivic cohomology, which is a very exciting area that is growing quickly. At
its core, it involves the application of topological techniques to the study of
systems of polynomial equations. The objective of the project is to study the
motivic cohomology of certain basic objects which are well-understood from a
topological viewpoint, and to investigate how the algebra and topology interact
in these important examples. The results should be very important for the
further development of the field.




