
* 0604772
* Problems in higher dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2006,08/11/2006
* Lowell Jones,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2009
* USD 102,948.00



One of the several subjects which this project will focus on is a (possibly)
new type of invariant for finite group actions on toplogical spaces. Let G
denote a finite p-group, for some prime integer p, and let F denote a field of
characteristic p. Any cellular group action h:GxK ---> K by G on a finite CW
complex K gives rise to a chain complex C(*) over the group ring F(G). An
"elemental chain subcomplex" of C(*) is any chain subcomplex E(*) such that for
some integer i the boundary map E(i) ---> E(i-1) is an isomorphism between
principle F(G)-modules, and E(j)=0 if j is not equal to i,i-1. A chain
subcomplex D(*) of C(*) is called a "minimal core" for C(*) if C(*) is the
direct sum of D(*) and some elemental chain subcomplexes of C(*), and if D(*)
does not have any elemental chain complex direct summands. In recent work Jones
has shown that a minimal core always exists and that its isomorphism type
depends only on the equivariant homotopy type of the group action h. In future
work Jones plans to focus on the classification (up to isomorhism) of all
minimal cores over the group ring F(G).

In toplogy (that field of mathematics to which this project is most closely
associated) one studies the structure of spaces in a very loose manner. Examples
of the spaces which topologists study occur everywhere ---- from theortical
physics to objects occuring in everyday life such as a ball or donut. From the
point of view of toplology all balls are the same (they have the same shape when
considered as abstract toplological spaces); likewise any two donuts have the
same "shape"; however a ball has a different "shape" than a donut (since a donut
has a hole but no ball has a hole in it). The main object of topology is the
determination of when two differenet spaces have the same "shape" (such spaces
are said to be "topologically equivalent"). For well over one hundered years an
important approach to this problem has been to associate algebraic objects (such
as numbers, groups, rings, etc.) to each space in such a way that if two
different spaces are topologically equivalent then all their known associated
algebraic objects must be equal. This approach has been very successful because
the associated algebraic objects are generally much easier to understand then
are the spaces themselves. Jones has recently discovered what seems to be a new
type of algebraic object associated to spaces. Currently he is trying calculate
this new algebraic object and to understand how it is related to the many older
well known algebraic objects associated to spaces.
