
* 0604994
* The Geometry and Topology of Quantum Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2006,02/26/2007
* Soren Hansen,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2010
* USD 101,998.00

This project concerns the quantum invariants of 3-manifolds and links in them. A
main problem is that these invariants are poorly understood from the point of
view of topology and geometry. The goal of this project is to make connections
between the quantum invariants and the existing knowledge of the geometry and
topology of 3-manifolds. The main approach will be an investigation of the large
level asymptotic expansion of the quantum invariants of closed 3-manifolds. The
idea of studying these asymptotics stems from Witten's work on the quantum
invariants. From that work and subsequent work of mathematicians there have
emerged some rigorous mathematical conjectures about the geometric content of
these asymptotics. These conjectures indicate that the quantum invariants hide
deep topological information. The PI plans to check, in collaboration with
others, (some of) the conjectures via concrete case studies. E.g., he will
jointly with J.E. Andersen continue their project on the surgeries on the figure
8 knot. All but a finite number of these 3-manifolds are hyperbolic and it is
the hope that this case study can shed some light on the connection between
quantum invariants and hyperbolic geometry. A main question is whether the
quantum invariants can detect the volume of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In addition
the PI will try to work from a more general point of view, namely he will apply
T. Yoshida's new approach to the quantum invariants to try to calculate the
asymptotic expansion of the invariants for all closed 3-manifolds, Yoshida's
construction being based on an abelianization of conformal field theory. In that
connection the PI will jointly with Yoshida work on proving that Yoshida's
invariants coincide with the more well established Reshetikhin--Turaev
invariants thereby making a connection to the other approaches to the quantum
invariants.

This project tries to develop new techniques to obtain knowledge about the shape
(topology) and geometry of low-dimensional objects such as knots and
3-dimensional spaces. A main reason that we should study low-dimensional spaces
and their geometry and shape is that nature contains such spaces in many
contexts. Thus large molecules, e.g. DNA, have a "knotted" structure and newer
research points in the direction that one can apply knot invariants to obtain
information about such molecules. Certain of their properties depend on their
shape, e.g., how they are "knotted". Another example is in cosmology where a
central question is: What is the "shape" of our universe? Here one should think
of the fact that when we walk around on the earth it just looks like an ordinary
plane but in fact the surface of the earth is like the surface of a very large
ball. It is similar with our universe. Locally everything looks flat, i.e.,
locally our universe looks like a standard 3-dimensional Euclidean space (a
3-dimensional pendant to a plane), but maybe the universe as a whole is
something completely different, like a curved compact space. Mathematicians use
so-called invariants to detect topological and geometric properties of spaces,
e.g., if they are curved like a sphere or not like a plane. The quantum
invariants, the theme for this project, is a relatively new family of invariants
dating back to V. Jones' discovery of the Jones polynomial in the 80ties.
