
* 0604958
* Classifying a Family of Models for the Henon Attractor: A U.S. - Croatia Collaboration
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, International Research Collab
* 07/15/2006,07/10/2006
* Brian Raines,TX,Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2011
* USD 46,375.00

One of the main thrusts of research in the topology of dynamical systems is an
investigation into the topological structure of sets left invariant under a
dynamical system, such as attractors. We propose investigating the topological
structure of a family of models for the non-hyperbolic H\'{e}non attractors:
inverse limit spaces generated by unimodal maps of the interval. A celebrated
conjecture in the topological theory of inverse limits is the Ingram Conjecture
which states that the kneading sequence is a topological invariant for inverse
limits generated by unimodal maps. Our aim is to classify a large family of
inverse limits generated by unimodal maps, namely the inverse limit spaces
generated by tent maps with a sparse postcritical orbit. This will be a major
step towards a proof of the Ingram Conjecture.

The study of chaotic dynamical systems has surged in importance in the last few
decades. One of the main avenues of research is into the delicate structure of
chaotic attractors. A major stumbling block in this endeavor is that usually we
do not have a precise mathematical description for these attractors, but rather
we have only numerical evidence. However, there is a family of models for
certain chaotic attractors that do have a precise mathematical description:
inverse limit spaces of unimodal maps. Understanding the structure of these
inverse limit spaces more fully will lead to a better understanding of chaotic
attractors. This proposal represents an international collaboration with the
University of Zagreb, Croatia. The aim of the collaboration is to fully describe
the structure of this family of models for certain chaotic attractors.


