
* 0605172
* Collaborative Proposal: Stringy Invariants, Orbicurves, and Topological Field Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2006,11/02/2006
* Takashi Kimura,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2009
* USD 110,261.00

The Principal Investigators will further develop and use their recent results
in orbifold cohomology, orbifold K-theory and the orbifold Chern character. They
will expand their work on the obstruction bundle to include orbifold Gromov-
Witten theory which will have implications not only for calculations, but also
important theoretical significance. Secondly, they will generalize their
constructions of stringy and orbifold K-theory and cohomology from the case of a
finite group to the case of a non-Abelian, infinite group with possibly infinite
stabilizers. Third, they will study invariants arising from their stringy and
orbifold Chern characters. In particular, they will investigate the Chern
classes and similar structures in the stringy and orbifold settings. Finally,
they will examine the relation of these invariants to their counterparts on
various hyper-Kaehler and crepant resolutions of the underlying singular spaces.

Invariants of spaces are fundamental tools in topology and geometry. The
development of new invariants is of great importance to these fields, as it
provides new tools to identify and describe essential properties of geometric
and topological spaces. Invariants also appear in theoretical physics as
observables in topological quantum field theories, for example. In many physical
and mathematical settings, the spaces of greatest importance also have
symmetries, and it is important to understand how those symmetries interact with
the geometric and topological properties of the space. Recently, the PIs have
developed new invariants of spaces with symmetries (stringy K-theory) and have
also made important progress in describing connections between their new
invariants and previously known invariants, such as orbifold cohomology. They
have also used their newly developed tools to refine and simplify many aspects
of those previously known invariants. With the support of this grant, the PIs
will use their theory of stringy K- theory as well as their improvements on
orbifold cohomology to study spaces with symmetries. They will also further
develop these tools to extend their applicability to more types of spaces,
including spaces with continuous symmetries, which are common throughout
mathematics and physics. They will also develop new invariants of such spaces,
including enhancements of well-known classical invariants such as Chern classes,
but accounting for symmetries. Such invariants are suggested by topological
string theory and will provide powerful tools for understanding these spaces.
