
* 0605073
* Calculus of Functors, Operads, and Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,05/09/2006
* Gregory Arone,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 111,326.00

Arone is interested in the interplay between calculus of functors, operads and
geometric topology. He is investigating the Taylor approximations to spaces of
smooth embeddings, and he has found formulas for these approximations in terms
of spaces of trees and spaces of graphs. He also intends to show (in a joint
work with P. Lambrechts and I. Volic) that the formality of the little cubes
operad implies quite strong rational splitting results for spaces of embeddings
of a manifold into a Euclidean space. These splitting results generalize to
general embedding spaces some major theorems of knot theory (e.g., the collapse
of the Vassiliev spectral sequence). In longer term, Arone would like to extend
this work to the study of diffeomorphisms of manifolds. Roughly speaking, the
first derivative of the space of diffeomorphisms is given by Waldhausen's
A-theory, or alternatively by topological cyclic homology (TC), and Arone would
like to find the higher analogues of TC, corresponding to the higher
derivatives. The role played by the circle group in the definition of TC should
in higher degrees be played by a category of graphs a fixed homotopy type,
perhaps related to the outer space of graphs that has been used to study the
groups of automorphisms of a free group. In a different vein, Arone is also
interested in developing further the general theory of calculus of functors. For
instance, he is interested in developing a theory of polynomial functors that
would generalize Goodwillie's theory of homogeneous functor. Arone's
understanding of the subject was given a boost by the work of M. Ching, which
made clear the relevance of operads to this question. Arone is also interested
in applying calculus of functors to mainstream homotopy theory. In a recent work
with K. Lesh, he discovered a new filtration of complex K-theory and a rather
surprising relationship between this filtration and the calculus of functors.
The paper ends with a series of conjectures about the precise nature of this
relationship, and he would like to pursue these conjectures.

Arone believes that the proposal will shed new light on active areas of current
research in mathematics and will lead to important new insights. The proposed
research should cast an important part of geometric topology in terms familiar
to algebraic topologists, and conversely bring the power of homotopy theory to
geometric topology. The proposed activity involves an exciting interplay of
ideas from algebraic topology, combinatorics, group cohomology and geometric
topology. The PI hopes that eventually it will impact the thinking of
mathematicians from fields other than topology. It should also generate exciting
new ways to introduce important topics in topology to students. It is already
beginning to generate a number of PhD theses in mathematics.
