
* 0636580
* Instanton Floer Homology with Lagrangian Boundary Conditions and the Atiyah-Floer Conjecture
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2006,06/16/2006
* Katrin Wehrheim,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 29,492.00

The main object of this project is a new Lagrangian boundary value problem for
anti-self-dual instantons on four-manifolds proposed by Salamon. This appears
naturally from the Chern-Simons functional on three-manifolds with boundary and
leads to a new approach for Floer homology on three-manifolds with boundary. The
construction of this new Floer homology moreover is a first step in a program
that might lead to a proof of the Atiyah-Floer conjecture. The latter relates
the Floer homology of a homology three-sphere to a corresponding Lagrangian
Floer homology in a moduli space of flat connections, which arise from a
Heegaard splitting of the three-manifold. This conjecture is a longstanding open
question and its solution would be an important step towards understanding the
relations between different invariants of homology three-spheres. The Atiyah-
Floer conjecture has an analogue relating the new Heegaard Floer homology by
Ozsvath and Szabo to Seiberg-Witten invariants. This program also aims to
understand the relation between these new invariants and the Floer homologies in
the Atiyah-Floer conjecture. More generally, this program aims to achieve a
better understanding and exposition of the analytic foundations of gauge theory
and the construction of Floer homologies.

This project belongs into the general realm of interaction between symplectic
geometry and low dimensional topology. Important progress in these areas has
been made in the last twenty years starting with the work of Donaldson on smooth
four-dimensional manifolds, which was based on anti-self-dual instantons (which
roughly are a special case of the electromagnetic field equations), and with the
work of Gromov on pseudoholomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds (a
generalization of holomorphic complex functions). In both subjects Floer
introduced in the late eighties his new approach to infinite dimensional Morse
theory. In Morse theory, properties of a finite dimensional space are understood
in terms of the zeros and flow lines of gradient vector fields on this space. In
Floer's context, this space is infinite dimensional but arises from certain
objects (like paths) in an underlying finite dimensional manifold with some
extra structure. The corresponding Floer theory extracts informations about this
underlying manifold and its extra structure from the space of solutions of a
partial differential equation associated to it. The aim of this project is to
define a Floer theory, where the underlying manifold has a boundary, and this
gives rise to a boundary condition for the partial differential equation. This
is one step in a program to understand the relation between different Floer
theories that arise from the same underlying manifolds.


