
* 0649446
* An International Conference on: New Challenges and Perspectives in Symplectic Field Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2007,03/07/2007
* Ralph Cohen,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2008
* USD 32,000.00

The international Conference on ``New Challenges and Perspectives in Symplectic
Field Theory (SFT)'' will take place at Stanford University, June 25--29, 2007.
This will be the very first conference of such amplitute to be held in this
subject. The Conference will host the world's leading mathematicians including
the well established senior researchers (Donaldson, Eliashberg, Fukaya, Gabai,
Givental, Gromov, Hitchin, Hofer, McDuff, Witten, ...), but with a definite
focus on strong younger mathematicians and some mid-carreer mathematicians at
the peak of their productivity. SFT deals with algebraic invariants attached to
symplectic manifolds with contact boundaries. It captures both the geometry of
the interior of the symplectic manifold (through a generalization of the Gromov-
Witten invariants) and the subtle geometry of the Reeb orbits of the contact
boundaries components. It includes, in a single framework, the ancestors of SFT,
i.e the symplectic and contact homologies. The Conference will happen at a
crucial moment when SFT and other rapidly growing subjects of intensive research
in mathematics have begun to interact in the most exciting and promising way. In
particular, the relations with new low dimensional topological invariants, eg
those of Oszvath and Szabo, as well as with new Floer theoretical developments
(eg the Branching Floer Homology or the Cluster complexes) and with hierarchies
of integrable systems will be explored. Surgery, regularity and compactness
problems will be discussed and various applications to knot theory, dynamical
systems, the topology of Lagrangian embeddings will also be the focus of
interactions amongst specialists of diverse backgrounds.

The international conference on ``New Challenges and Perspectives in Symplectic
Field Theory (SFT)'' will take place at Stanford University, June 25--29, 2007.
This will be the very first conference of such amplitute to be held in this
subject. The Conference will host the world's leading mathematicians including
the well established senior researchers but with a definite focus on strong
younger mathematicians and some mid-carreer mathematicians at the peak of their
productivity. SFT deals with the problem of integrating, in a single powerful
framework, the geometry of the ``internal topology'' of ambient spaces where
dynamical systems occur, with the intricate behaviour of closed orbits of these
systems. Its ultimate aim is to understand to which extent the topology of
ambient spaces determines the qualitative behaviour of dynamical laws. It poses
lots of deep, absolutely fascinating analytical and algebraic challenges and
bears relations to many rapidly emerging fields of scientific investigation in
the world, like the recent development in low dimensional topology (in dimension
3 and 4) or the structure of objects known to physicists as ``integrable systems
and hierarchies'' that have been a resurgent theme of research over the last
fifty years.


