
* 0705233
* Collaborative Research: Chromatic homotopy theory and open string theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2007,06/01/2009
* Matthew Ando,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 441,569.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0705233, 0705381 Principal Investigator: Matthew Ando, Eric R. Sharpe

Ando and Sharpe will investigate several questions in elliptic cohomology
suggested by the physics of open string theory. In physics, elliptic genera
arise in closed string theory, but the recent work of Stolz and Teichner and of
Borisov and Libgover and Ganter strongly suggests that open string theory plays
an important role in elliptic cohomology. Ando and Sharpe propose to introduce
recent developments in open string theory, particularly ideas about D-branes and
K-theory, to the study of elliptic cohomology. For example they hope to use open
string theory to investigate the relationship between elliptic cohomology and
the K-theory of K-theory, as studied by Baas, Dundas, Richter, and Rognes. They
also hope to give a unified account of the McKay correspondence for elliptic
genera, due to Borisov and Libgober, and for sheaves, due to Bridgeland, King,
and Reid.

Elliptic cohomology arises from topology, and it signals a profound
relationship between physics, particularly the physics of string theory, and at
least two branches of mathematics, topology and number theory. Precisely how
these things are related through elliptic cohomology remains mysterious: the
physicist Edward Witten called elliptic cohomology "a piece of 21st century
mathematics that happened to fall into the 20th century." Until very recently,
the study of the physics of elliptic cohomology has focused mainly on "closed"
string theory, in which particles are replaced by loops of string. There is now
a rich theory of "open" strings, in which particles may also be unlooped strands
of string. Ando and Sharpe suggest that the physics of open string theory has
deep implications in elliptic cohomology. They propose to investigate several of
these implications, which they hope will shed light on some of the important
mysteries in the subject.
