
* 0705050
* Topology of Singular Algebraic Varieties
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2007,07/27/2007
* Anatoly Libgober,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 152,172.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0705050 Principal Investigator: Anatoly S. Libgober

The project deals with the study of topological invariants for singular
algebraic varieties with many ideas motivated by physics. One of its goals is to
develop new invariants for singular spaces extending the theory of elliptic
genus of varieties with mild singularities and orbifolds which was presented in
joint works with Lev Borisov earlier. This will yields an extension of the
previous contributions by many authors on vertex operator algebras associated to
manifolds or orbifolds and application of these invariants to geometric
problems. PI plans to develop further generalizations of elliptic genus
detecting the torsion in the cobordisms of special unitary complex manifolds as
well as use this invariant in classification and surgery problems of singular
spaces. The principal investigator will investigate the possibility that the
elliptic genus plays a role in singularity theory beyond classical applications
in Landau-Ginzburg models associated with weighted homogeneous polynomials. In
particular it is planned to consider the extensions of elliptic genus of Landau-
Ginzburg models in connection with the Arnold-Steenbrink spectrum of isolated
singularities. In another direction, PI plans to study the homotopy groups of
non-simply connected quasiprojective varieties. In particular the study of
characteristic varieties associated with homotopy groups controlling among other
things the cohomology of local systems will be continued. A.Libgober will focus
on properties of the Hodge decomposition of the latter and will study the
fundamental problem of realization of these invariants, i.e. the existence of
quasiprojectve varieties with given characteristic varieties. As part of this
work, PI will investigate the restrictions on the dimensions of characteristic
varieties in the case of plane reducible curves generalizing results in the case
of arrangements of lines in complex projective plane.

In general terms the proposal aims to develop new approaches to the study of
geometry of spaces appearing in a variety of problems in mathematics and such
aspects of theoretical physics as string theory. A new type of data, called
elliptic genus, reflecting geometry and topology of these spaces which appeared
naturally in physics will be investigated from a mathematical perspective and
applied to a wide range of problems in geometry, topology and singularity
theory. It is planned to study further generalizations of elliptic genus which
should have applications to fundamental problems of physics. The realization of
presence of infinite dimensional aspects in geometric issues, on which our work
depends in an essential way, is a novel feature which emerged in the last 20
years in mathematics and physics. It is planned to widely disseminate such new
viewpoints gaining strength in contemporary mathematics and physics.


