
* 0705159
* Topology and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,06/08/2007
* Nitya Kitchloo,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 182,511.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0705159 Principal Investigator: Nitya Kitchloo

This proposal emphasizes three concrete projects. The aim in the first project
is to give a topological interpretation to the class of highest weight
representations of infinite dimensional Kac-Moody groups. The PI plans to
construct a variant of equivariant K-theory on the category of spaces that admit
a proper action of a Kac-Moody group. In particular, one hopes to relate the
class of highest weight representations with elements in this K-theory. This
project will generalize recent work of Freed-Hopkins-Teleman. The authors cited
gave a topological interpretation of the positive energy representations of Loop
groups. This is a special case of an affine Kac-Moody group. This research
program will study more general Kac-Moody groups. The goal of the next project
is to understand the topology of the space of compatible complex structures on a
symplectic 4-manifold. This builds on an earlier joint project of mine where we
showed that for rational ruled surfaces with arbitrary symplectic forms, the
space of compatible complex structures is weakly contractible. In that project,
we use a comparison technique that relates the space of complex structures with
the space of almost complex structures, and decompose the latter using the
theory of J-holomorphic curves. In the proposed project, we will attempt to
apply our techniques to other 4-dimensional symplectic manifolds. As a by
product of our techniques, we hope to derive consequences about the group of
symplectomorphisms of 4-dimensional manifolds. In the final project, we study a
new cohomology theory called real Johnson-Wilson theory, and develop
computational tools to make it accessible. Real Johnson-Wilson theory is
constructed by taking fixed points with respect to an involution on standard
Johnson-Wilson theory. These are 2-local theories indexed over the integers,
with the first theory being 2-localized real K-theory. We plan to use our tools,
along with techniques in Algebraic Topology, to settle various old questions
regarding immersions of real projective spaces in euclidean space. Previously,
the best know results used the theory TMF (Topological Modular forms).

The general focus of my projects is to explore the interaction between geometry
and topology. The objects of study in geometry are fundamental physical objects
(in possibly more than three dimensions), that are endowed with various
structure. The structure one associates to these spaces could be as crude as the
homotopy type (the information about the space that is preserved under all
continuous deformations), or one may be interested in more subtle structure like
the differential structure (the local information about the space that makes it
smooth). One may refine the smooth structure even further and study symplectic,
or complex structure. These questions are motivated by fundamental inquiries
into our physical universe. Indeed, mathematical physics is a rich source of
questions and ideas. Given a particular structure of interest, one may ask the
question of how to enumerate them. In other words, one is interested in ways to
parametrize all possible structures on a space. For example, John Milnor was the
first person to really show that spheres admit multiple non-equivalent smooth
structures, starting with the 7-dimensional sphere which admits 28 such
structures. One of my projects is to study the question that inquires into the
number of complex structures in 4-dimensional smooth spaces. The techniques that
one uses to understand the space of complex structures is to decompose it into
pieces that have some significance in terms of their symmetry. Then one studies
these pieces using the invariants of topology and then reassembles these pieces
to get a coherent picture on the global level. The question of symmetry is also
important in other projects that I propose. For example, the linear symmetries
of a vector space (like euclidean space), which preserve some property, are
known as representations. Another project aims to study a class of such
representations that act on infinite dimensional vector spaces. We will try to
encode these objects via a topological invariant known as equivariant K-theory.
Such invariants are generally known as cohomology theories and form natural
receptacles for algebraic information derived from geometry. In a third and
final project, the PI plans to develop such a cohomology theory, called real
Johnson-Wilson theory. We hope to justify its importance by showing that it
helps to solve an old geometric question about the minimum dimension of
euclidean space where a certain class of spaces, known as real projective
spaces, may be realized.
