
* 0706798
* RUI: Algebraic Dynamics of Knot Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Daniel Silver,AL,University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2011
* USD 227,626.00

The PIs will continue their program to understand the algebra arising from knots
and links by using new techniques of algebraic dynamics. Modules over Laurent
polynomial rings in d variables are replaced by their Pontryagin duals, which
are compact abelian groups. Actions by the variables become commuting
homeomorphisms, and corresponding dynamical invariants (e.g., numbers of
periodic points, topological entropy, etc.) provide new topologicial invariants.
The focus will be on Mahler measure, surface dynamics and twisted homology. The
project will strengthen newly emerging connections between knot theory,
dynamical systems and number theory.

Although knots and links arise in a host of scientific phenomena such as DNA,
solar flares and fluid flows, their mathematical study is fairly new. Fueled by
ideas from many areas of mathematics, progress in knot theory has exploded
during the past two decades, and the subject now attracts wide interest from
physicists, biologists and engineers as well as mathematicians. This project
will continue the investigators' program of applying ideas from another
mathematical field, dynamical systems, in order to gain a new perspective.
Computer methods will be used to develop hypotheses. The PIs will also write a
monograph, the first survey of this interdisciplinary study, designed for
graduate students and researchers.


