
* 0706945
* Moduli spaces, homotopy Frobenius algebras and mirror symmetry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2007,06/13/2007
* Kevin Costello,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2011
* USD 190,118.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0706945 Principal Investigator: Kevin J. Costello

The moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces play a central role in many areas of
mathematics and theoretical physics, including geometric and algebraic topology,
symplectic topology, string theory, and number theory. This project explores
another manifestation of the moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces, which is maybe
not so widely known. This is their appearance in homological algebra, and more
precisely in the study of cyclic A-infinity algebras (a kind of "Frobenius
algebra up to homotopy"). The philosophy underlying much of this project is that
everything one can say about the homotopy types of the various moduli spaces can
be expressed in terms of the homotopy theory of cyclic A-infinity algebras. One
precise manifestation of this philosophy (which will be proved in this project)
is that the moduli space of surfaces arises as certain "homology operations" for
cyclic A-infinity algebras. This theoretical result will be used to investigate
some concrete higher-genus aspects of the mirror symmetry conjecture, which
plays a prominent role in current work on algebraic and symplectic geometry. In
particular, this project will attempt to compute the conjectural mirror partner
of the higher-genus Gromov-Witten invariants in some examples.

The space of all possible two-dimensional shapes -- known as the moduli space of
surfaces -- has long been a fundamental object of study in many areas of
mathematics, from geometry to number theory. This space also plays an important
role in string theory, the putative "theory of everything". This project is
concerned with setting up a correspondence between two-dimensional geometry (the
moduli space of surfaces) and a kind of abstract algebra. This correspondence
will be used to test certain mathematical conjectures coming from string theory.
String theorists have predicted that two different simplified models of string
theory-- known as the A model and the B model -- are mathematically equivalent.
This prediction has stimulated a great deal of mathematical work in the last 15
years. The PI will tackle some computations in the B model which have been
heretofore out of reach. The results of these computations will then be compared
with known computations in the A model, hopefully leading to further
verification of the predictions of string theory.
