
* 0706877
* Ring Spectra, DGAs and Derived Equivalences
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2007,06/01/2009
* Brooke Shipley,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 273,694.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0706877 Principal Investigator: Brooke E. Shipley

The PI proposes to study algebraic derived equivalences using methods from
homotopy theory. Specifically, the main project proposed here is to consider
when an equivalence between derived categories can be realized by an underlying
richly structured equivalence. The PI and Dugger have shown that certain derived
equivalences of differential graded algebras (DGAs) can only be realized by
"topological equivalences" (involving tilting spectra) which arise by
considering DGAs in the broader context of ring spectra. One goal of this
project is to produce simple invariants for detecting topological equivalences
of DGAs. Another goal is to extend the study of topological equivalences to DG-
categories. In on-going joint work with Dugger, the PI is also investigating an
exotic example of two derived equivalent DGAs with no underlying structured
equivalence.

The proposed research projects involve the interplay beween the study of
algebraic structures and topology, the study of shapes or spaces. Algebraic
topologists use algebraic structures to describe and simplify topological
phenomena. In a project on realizing derived equivalences, the investigator
hopes to use techniques developed in algebraic topology to attack questions
which originate in algebra. The PI also plans to organize conferences which will
help to train graduate students as well as disseminate results. In addition, the
PI will continue to be involved with several organizations which promote the
participation of women in science.
