
* 0706929
* Noncommutativity in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2007,05/12/2008
* Tim Cochran,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2011
* USD 282,939.00

The Principal Investigator of the project is Tim D. Cochran of William Marsh
Rice University in Houston Texas. The broad goal of the project is to find
applications of methods of noncommutative algebra to problems in topology and
group theory. Over the last ten years the PI and collaborators have developed a
vast theory of so-called higher-order Alexander modules, linking forms and
signatures. These can be associated to knots, links, 3-manifolds, spaces, groups
or even surface homeomorphisms. The PI and Shelly Harvey have many new results
on how homology constrains these invariants of the fundamental group. The
project will apply these techniques to important open problems in topology and
group theory. Specific goals are: to find a refinement of Heegard Floer Knot
Homology that better reflects the noncommutativity of the fundamental group of
the knot exterior; to use higher-order signatures to construct quasi-
homomorphisms of subgroups of mapping class groups and to construct homology
classes for such subgroups; to further investigate the knot concordance group,
both topological and smooth; to apply these techniques to study algebraic curves
in complex 2-space; to continue to find further relationships between homology
equivalence and fundamental group and apply these results to the virtual betti
number problem in 3-manifolds.



This project studies mathematical aspects of the shape, or topology, of
3-dimensional objects. Shape is very important in the study of networks, search
algorithms, in the design of drugs, satellite recognition of objects, the
medical imaging and modeling of human organs and in the function of cellular
DNA. Even though all common objects are 3-dimensional in nature, such shapes can
be quite complicated. For example, the shape of a tangled piece of string is
quite complex. Moreover much is unknown: the shapes of most proteins, for
example. How can an imaging device distinguish a tank from a house given only
partial data? How can one usefully quantify the shape of a brain given that all
brains are different? The scientific study of shape requires mathematical ideas
that can accurately quantify the complex non-linear behavior of such objects.
Grade-school mathematics is very linear: 2 times 3 equals 3 times two. In
college one learns that noncommutative algebra, such as matrices where AB is not
necessarily BA, is necessary to model simple real-life situations. This project
will develop new tools in noncommutative mathematics and apply these to specific
problems concerning the shape of 3-dimensional objects.
