
* 0706979
* Low dimensional topology and invariants from symplectic geometry, gauge theory, and quantum algebra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2007,08/17/2007
* Tomasz Mrowka,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2009
* USD 78,448.00

The theme of this project is to study invariants coming from symplectic
geometry, gauge theory, and quantum algebra and apply these invariants to
questions in low-dimensional topology and geometry. A central objective is to
understand the topological quantum field theoretic aspects of various Floer
homology theories in dimensions (2+1). Goals of the project include the
discovery of formulas for the Floer homology of three-manifolds obtained by
gluing together manifolds with boundary, the definition of relative Floer
invariants for knots and surfaces in the context of contact and symplectic
homology theories, and the discovery of topological characterizations of three-
manifolds and knots which arise as the boundaries of complex surfaces and
curves, respectively. As the invariants studied have already proved to be quite
powerful, many possible applications could arise. Among these applications are
the study of Dehn surgery problems, smooth concordance and unknotting numbers of
knots, and the study of algebraic curves.

The study of three- and four-dimensional spaces, and knotted curves and surfaces
within them, is a central task to our understanding of both large and small
scale aspects of the universe. Determining the shape of the universe depends
upon a mathematical understanding of the possible shapes that could occur and
the properties these shapes have. These properties are known as invariants, and
the project furthers our understanding of space by the discovery of new
invariants and the study of existing invariants. In this pursuit it has been
quite fruitful to examine the way in which curves and surfaces can be tied in
knots. This kind of knotting is not only relevant to understanding the shape of
space, but has recently become significant in the study of DNA. Confined to a
small space, long strands of DNA naturally become knotted, and certain processes
depend upon an understanding of the complexity of these knots. Applications of
this project include effective ways of measuring different types of complexity
of knots.
