
* 0706719
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,06/08/2007
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2011
* USD 154,134.00

The proposal divides into three projects in the related fields of two
dimensional dynamical systems and geometric group theory. The first is joint
work with John Franks. One question that we address is : for which elements of
the diffeomorphism group of a surface does the centralizer have a finite index
subgroup with a global fixed point. This relates directly to understanding which
subgroups of the mapping class group can act faithfully on a surface by
diffeomorphisms. We are also looking for an analog in the group of area
preserving homeomorphisms of the disk, of the Calabi invariant, which is defined
for area preserving diffeomorphisms of the disk. The goal of the second project,
which is a collaboration with Mark Feighn, is to solve the conjugacy problem for
the group of outer automorphisms of a free group. The third project continues
joint work with Lee Mosher. One of our goals is to show that an infinite
subgroup of the outer automorphism group of a free group is either reducible or
contains a fully irreducible element. Another is to show that the complex of
free splittings of the free group is hyperbolic.

The mapping class group of a surface, the diffeomorphism group of a surface and
the outer automorphism group of the free group are related in fundamental ways.
Classification theorems for elements of the mapping class group yield
information about the algebraic properties of subgroups of the diffeomorphism
group and so yield restrictions on the kinds of groups that can act on surfaces
and on the ways in which groups can act. One of the main motivations for
studying the outer automorphism group of the free group is its very close
connection to mapping class groups. One part of the proposal focuses on finding
global fixed points for subgroups of diffeomorphisms acting on a surface; i.e.
points that are stationary for every element of the subgroup. Another is to
understand actions of the mapping class group of a surface on that surface.
Other parts of the proposal seek to generalize known important results about the
mapping class group to the outer automorphism groupof the free group. Among
these results are the conjugacy problem and a subgroup dichotomy. The former
asks for an algorithm to decide if two elements differ only by a change of
coordinates and the latter is the analogue for subgroups of a basic
classification theorem for individual elements.
