
* 0706705
* Formal Groups, Structured Ring Spectra, and Stable Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,05/06/2009
* Paul Goerss,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 286,634.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0706705 Principal Investigator: Paul G. Goerss

The chromatic picture of stable homotopy uses the algebraic geometry of formal
groups to organize and direct investigations into the deeper structure of
computations and theory. This project seeks to develop this point of view in two
directions, one local and one global. The first, or local, direction is an
investigation into K(n)-local homotopy theory in general and into the K(2)-local
sphere in particular. The second, or more global, direction, would be to make
systematic our knowledge of structured ring spectra using stacks and the moduli
stack of formal groups as the basic parameterizing device. In particular, a main
part of the project is to continue work on the problem of realizing families of
commutative ring spectra over the moduli stack of formal groups. The spectrum of
topological modular forms arises from taking the homotopy inverse limit of just
such a family and recent work of Lurie, Behrens, and Lawson had given new
examples. We can ask for systematic results along these lines, and we can ask
for a thorough investigation into the examples we have. An intriguing and novel
feature of these families is that they use the theory of Barsotti-Tate groups to
combine information from formal groups of various heights.

This project is in homotopy theory, which is a branch of topology, a rather
modern field that grew naturally out of geometry by studying phenomena that
remain invariant under continuous transformations, rather than rigid (e.g.,
angle-preserving) transformations. Of particular importance in topology are the
continuous maps between large dimensional spheres; under a suitable equivalence
relation, this is the ring of stable homotopy groups of spheres. This notorious
difficult to calculate, or even to make conjectures about; therefore, in the
past few decades we have focused on trying to understand large-scale qualitative
phenomena. In summary, this is the main thrust of this project as well. It has
been very fruitful to detect these phenomena using tools from other fields,
especially algebraic geometry. The transition from topology to geometry is done
using homology theories, which is a way of linearizing behavior in topology.
Simply sticking to one such theory is a radical process, however, and it loses
too much data; therefore, we study families of such theories. Of particular
importance is the family parametrized by the stack of one-parameter formal Lie
groups. The theory of stacks is vital here, as this allows us to study
symmetries across continuous families of geometric objects -- especially when
the self-symmetries can vary non-continuously throughout the family, as is most
certainly the case here.
