
* 0706955
* Topology and motives associated to moduli spaces of curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Richard Hain,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2011
* USD 276,133.00

The main focus of this project is Hodge and Galois structures on completions of
mapping class groups and their relationship to mixed motives over moduli spaces
of curves. One case of particular interest is in genus 1, where the PI is
studying mixed motives associated to elliptic curves. With Makoto Matsumoto
(Hiroshima University) the PI is studying the action of the absolute Galois
group on the Malcev completion of the fundamental group of a once-punctured
elliptic curve and also on the relative completion of the corresponding mapping
class group. With Gregory Pearlstein (Michigan State) the PI is studying
variations of mixed Hodge structure over moduli spaces of elliptic curves and
their relationship to iterated integrals of modular forms recently defined by
Yuri Manin. The Galois and Hodge structures are parallel and the PI expects each
approach to illuminate the other. In other projects, the PI and his
collaborators are developing general machinery needed to study the case of
elliptic motives. On the Galois side, Matsumoto and the PI are proving basic
results about Galois actions on completions of arithmetic mapping class groups.
On the Hodge side, Pearlstein, Terasoma and the PI are developing fundamental
mathematical tools for studying general classes of variations of mixed Hodge
structure over complex algebraic varieties.

Motives encode deep connections between the theory of whole numbers, integrals
of certain algebraic functions and topology. Each of these theories has its own
set of symmetries, and all are related through the theory of motives. The PI,
together with his collaborators and students, are investigating the interactions
of these symmetry groups that are associated to ``elliptic curves'', which are
curves defined by cubic polynomials. Although this work is foundational, it has
potential applications to cryptography and pseudo random number generation.
Indeed, the PI's principal collaborator, Matsumoto (Hiroshima University), is an
established expert in these subjects.
