
* 0706642
* Topics in low-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2007,08/17/2007
* Darren Long,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2011
* USD 132,939.00

Long plans to work on a variety of projects concerned with the geometric,
algebraic and structural aspects of low and higher dimensional hyperbolic, real
projective and complex hyperbolic manifolds. The problems form a broad spectrum
including an exploration of an intriguing totally new area: the real projective
deformations of hyperbolic manifolds. These ideas have connexions with group
deformations inside complex hyperbolic isometry groups which it is hoped will
have implications for the study of complex hyperbolic manifolds, about which
almost nothing is known. Further, the proposer will build upon his recent work
on aspects of the questions connected to the existence of surface groups and how
one can increase the homology of a hyperbolic manifold, including a new group
theoretic perspective on these issues and incorporating new progress in the
arithmetic case. Finally, we hope to work on a project which considers pseudo-
Anosov maps acting on a punctured torus, which draws together threads coming
from elliptic curves, pseudo-Anosov dynamical systems and number theory.



A space is called a 3-manifold if it is made of small chunks all of which are
``like'' the ordinary 3-dimensional space that we live in. The recent seminal
work of Perelmann has shown that one can get a certain sort of global
understanding of such manifolds by proving that they are ``geometric''. Amongst
geometrical manifolds, by far the most important are the class called hyperbolic
manifolds. This class is ubiquitous in many areas of mathematics, ranging from
low-dimensional topology, to dynamical systems, number theory. Indeed, this
class is also crucially important in physics. However, even with Perlemann's
work, hyperbolic manifolds themselves are still fairly poorly understood,
although their importance have made them a magnet for research for well over
thirty years. This proposal directs itself towards aspects of the structural
study of hyperbolic manifolds and how they can be bent into other types of
spaces. The proposer has results which restrict the sorts of manifolds which can
arise in certain physical models of the universe and this type of bending is
imprtant in physics. He also intends to continue work on a famous old conjecture
about which sorts of two-dimensional objects can live inside these 3-dimensional
objects.




