
* 0706876
* Flows and structures on metric spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2007,08/24/2007
* Igor Mineyev,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2012
* USD 135,601.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0706876 Principal Investigator: Igor Mineyev

The main objective of this project is to develop techniques for constructing
metric spaces. One would like to have nice metric spaces on which a given group
can act, either by isometries or topologically; and to make them "as canonical
as possible". The principal investigator's symmetric join construction and the
conformal metric on the boundaries of hyperbolic groups, and others, were steps
in this general direction. Ideally, one would like to have a functorial
construction that associates to every group in a given class (with a metric on
it), say, a uniquely geodesic metric space with a (cocompact, isometric,
properly discontinuous) action by the group. This seems to be a very difficult
question (this is the kind of things that Perelman's Ricci flow does to
manifolds, and we essentially want its analogue for general metric spaces). This
question is related to several major problems in topology and geometry. Our goal
is to make further progress in this direction. Another goal is to further
investigate how geometry of groups is reflected in various types of
(co)homology, and vice versa.

A metric space is one of the most important and most basic mathematical notions:
it is a set of points in which one is given the distance between any two points,
with very natural properties. All branches of mathematics use this notion. Our
Universe is an example of a metric space, and there is no reason for it to look
like the 3-dimensional Euclidean space at all. We are interested in
understanding what kinds of metric spaces can possibly be there, and "how good"
they can be. For example, in order to be "good", one should at least be able to
pass from one point to another by a shortest possible path within the given
space. Manifolds considered by classical Riemannian geometry have this property.
We aim for a generalization of classical geometry from manifolds to metric
spaces. One goal of this project is to explicitly construct good metric spaces
and to understand how they form. This simple idea is related to deep questions
facing modern mathematics. As a by-product, this might give us more insight to
the structure and formation of our Universe. Our original motivation though is
the beauty and mathematical importance of the problem rather than any particular
immediate application. (Our Universe is only a special case of a metric space.)


