
* 0707014
* Applications of Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2007,08/02/2007
* James McClure,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 168,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0707014 Principal Investigator: James E. McClure

The principal investigator plans to work in four quite different areas where
homotopy-theoretic methods can be applied. The first area is string topology.
This part of the project is joint with Ralph Kaufmann; Kaufmann and McClure will
combine their previous work on string topology in order to obtain a lifting of
string topology to the chain level for arbitrary genus. The second area is
surgery spectra. This is joint with Gerd Laures; Laures and McClure will
complete their proof that certain symmetric L-spectra have E-infinity ring
structures and that the symmetric signature is an E-infinity ring map. They will
also extend their work in order to show that a certain map from algebraic
K-theory to symmetric L-theory defined by Weiss and Williams is an E-infinity
ring map. The third area is intersection homology. This is joint with Greg
Friedman and Scott Wilson; Friedman, McClure and Wilson will work to develop
homotopy theoretic structure on intersection chains which should (for example)
lead to the development of a rational homotopy theory of stratified spaces. The
fourth area is C* algebras. This is joint with Marius Dadarlat; Dadarlat and
McClure will work to show that the classical work of Dixmier and Douady on
bundles whose fibre is the algebra of compact operators can be extended to
bundles whose fibre is a Kirchberg algebra.

The original goal of homotopy theory was to develop methods which could be
applied to geometric problems (including problems in dimensions higher than
three). Since its origin in the early twentieth century, homotopy theory has
developed into an autonomous discipline, but the connection with geometry has
always been a central concern. Since about 1960, it has become apparent that
homotopy theory has applications to other things besides geometry, for example
to analysis, algebra, and more recently to physics. The work of the principal
investigator and his coauthors is intended to take the latest developments in
homotopy theory (for example, the theory of symmetric spectra) and apply them to
other areas, including geometric problems (the classification of higher-
dimensional shapes), and problems in mathematical physics (string topology is
part of the program being carried on by many people to develop a clearer
mathematical understanding of ideas from string theory).
