
* 0707068
* Field Theories and Elliptic Cohomology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2007,07/24/2007
* Stephan Stolz,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 187,999.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0707068 Principal Investigator: Stephan Stolz

In previous joint work with Peter Teichner, the principal investigator was
successful in collecting evidence that elliptic cohomology is closely related to
super symmetric field theories by showing that the partition function of a super
symmetric field theory of dimension 2 is an integral modular form; the space of
super symmetric field theories of dimension 1 is homotopy equivalent to the
infinite loop space determined by the real K-theory spectrum and that a
0-dimensional super symmetric field theory over a manifold represents an
ordinary cohomology class (with real coefficients). These advances support the
belief of the principal investigator that he and Peter Teichner have found the
right way to incorporate `super symmetry' and `locality' in Graeme Segal's
definition of quantum field theory. The principal investigator is optimistic
that this might be the crucial step necessary to solve the two decade old
problem of how to relate field theories and elliptic cohomology. A particularly
interesting aspect is that the `push forward' maps in these cohomology theories
seem to correspond to physicists' quantization procedures via functional
integrals, which are mathematically not well understood.

The last two decades have seen very fruitful interactions between theoretical
physics and topology. On a philosophical level this is not surprising since
topology can be understood broadly as the study of `qualitative' aspects in
mathematics, and it is to be expected that it is the QUALITATIVE aspects of a
complicated quantum system (i.e., the aspects that don't change when varying the
parameters of the theory) that should be easiest to analyze. This interaction
has deeply influenced both areas with physicists using sophisticated tools from
topology, and topologists incorporating ideas from quantum field theory. The
principal investigator hopes that relating super symmetric quantum field
theories of dimension 0,1 and 2 to well- studied objects in topology, namely
`generalized cohomology theories' will significantly strengthen that interaction
by bringing the calculational power of algebraic topology to physics and the
physical/ geometric meaning of these cohomology classes to topology.
