
* 0707526
* Collaborative Research: Categorification of Link and 3-Manifold Invariants
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,07/06/2009
* Alexander Shumakovitch,DC,George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 94,364.00

The proposal deals with algebraically defined invariants of links and link
cobordisms, known as link homology theories. In a typical instance, such a
theory assigns bigraded homology groups to a link and a homomorphism of groups
to a link cobordism. Various quantum invariants of links gain a novel
interpretation as the Euler characteristics of these theories. Link homology
theories can be though of as four-dimensional topological quantum field
theories, restricted to links in the 3-space and link cobordisms. Applications
of link homology include a combinatorial proof of the Milnor conjecture,
efficient estimates of the Thurston-Bennequin invariant of knots, and
nonexistence of taut foliations on many double branched covers of knots. The
proposal's aim is to deepen understanding of known link homology theories and
their interrelations, including the ones between Khovanov homology and knot
Floer homology, find more applications of link homology to low-dimensional
topology, discover link homology theories categorifying a variety of quantum
link invariants, extend knot Floer homology to tangles, find categorifications
of quantum 3-manifold invariants, and explore the relations of link homology to
various branches of mathematics, including homological algebra and
representation theory. The principal investigators will place a significant
emphasis on experimental aspects of the theory, including writing efficient
programs to compute link homology.

A link is a collection of knotted circles located in the usual space that we
live in, and 3-manifolds are geometric object modeled on that space. One of the
main problems in studying links and manifolds is their classification, that is,
finding methods to tell them apart from each other. From the very beginning,
algebra played an important role in distinguishing links and manifolds, since
algebraic objects are in general easier to compare to each other than geometric
ones. Categorification, also known as link homology, is a procedure of replacing
a known link invariant with a family of algebraic objects that significantly
enhance the original invariant. This procedure was recently developed by the
lead principal investigator, who found categorifications of several polynomial
invariants of links. These categorifications are relatively easy to describe,
but rather challenging to compute for a given link. The aim of this project is
to better understand existing link homology theories and their interrelations,
as well as to find new ones. The principal investigators also plan to write
efficient programs for computing link homology. Link homology is a young and
quickly growing field. It lies on the crossroads of research in 3- and
4-dimensional topology, symplectic topology, homological algebra, and
representation theory. The recent explosion of interest in link homology, its
structure and applications, is likely to continue in the foreseeable future.
