
* 0711341
* Contact topology and automorphisms of surfaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Gordana Matic,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 244,028.00

Fundamental work of Giroux established a one-to-one correspondence between
contact structures on closed three-manifolds and automorphisms of surfaces up to
stabilization via compatible open book decompositions. It is this correspondence
between two classically studied, fundamentally important, objects that the PIs
propose to study. Since positive stabilization of surface automorphisms
generates an almost intractable equivalence relation, it is important to discern
the properties of a contact structure from just a single representative
automorphism. An example of such a result is the fact that automorphisms which
are compositions of positive Dehn twists induce contact structures that are
Stein fillable, i.e. that arise as natural boundaries of Stein manifolds. We are
working to understand questions like: what property of an automorphism
guarantees symplectic fillability, what property implies existence of Giroux
torsion. Investigating these questions will have applications to the study of
contact invariants in Heegaard-Floer homology theory in both the bounded and
unbounded cases.

Contact topology or geometry and its even dimensional counterparts, symplectic
topology or geometry, were born out of the study of questions arising in
classical mechanics and thermodynamics. Three-dimensional manifolds are
mathematical objects modeled on the space in which we live. Contact structures
on such spaces arise naturally in the study of fluid flows as the family of
planes perpendicular to the flow. A familiar example of a contact structure
occurs in the design of DLP front projection televisions where they dictate the
use of literally millions of tiny mirrors rather than one large curved mirror.
Considerable progress has been made in the last several decades on the three-
dimensional contact topology and four-dimensional symplectic topology. Recent
progress has allowed researchers to apply two-dimensional techniques to the
inherently three-dimensional study of contact topology.
