
* 0803997
* Computational motivic homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2008,05/22/2008
* Daniel Isaksen,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2012
* USD 99,150.00

My main goal in this project is to carry out computations in motivic homotopy
theory, i.e., the homotopy theory of algebraic varieties. Voevodsky's now famous
proof of the Milnor Conjecture is based primarily on techniques in motivic
homotopy theory. Specifically, I am interested in the motivic version of the
Adams spectral sequence, with base field R or C. One reason to focus only on R
or C is that thorough computations are possible over these fields, but the
computations still exhibit non-classical phenomena. The motivic Adams spectral
sequence has a major deficiency in that it is not known to converge. Even if the
spectral sequence does not converge, it is nonetheless possible to draw many
conclusions about motivic stable homotopy groups. I believe that these and other
further computations will be an important guide to further study of motivic
homotopy theory. There is also a chance that motivic computations will reveal
something new about classical stable homotopy groups.

Homotopy theory is a technique for studying geometric objects up to certain
kinds of deformations. Homotopical approaches often allow for concrete
calculations that are otherwise inaccessible. Computations of stable homotopy
groups have been a major topic of research in topology since the middle of the
20th century. Although tremendous progress has been made, much remains unknown.
In the 1990's, Fabien Morel and Vladimir Voevodsky developed motivic homotopy
theory. In analogy to classical homotopy theory, motivic homotopy theory allows
us to study algebraic objects up to certain kinds of deformations. My goal is to
carry out some fundamental computations in motivic homotopy theory. The goal is
both a better understanding of the new algebraic theory as well as the classical
geometric theory.
