
* 0804365
* Homomorphisms to hyperbolic and mapping class groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2008,08/21/2008
* Daniel Groves,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 100,817.00

The set of homomorphisms between a pair of (discrete) groups is a discrete set
which has been shown over recent years to carry a remarkable amount of
structure. In this project, the PI will use the techniques of geometric group
theory (groups acting on metric spaces) to study this set in two scenarios. The
first is when the target group is a hyperbolic group. In this case the focus is
algorithmic, and we search for algorithms to describe the set of homomorphisms
explicitly. This will lead on to an algorithmic study of the logic of hyperbolic
groups. The second scenario is when the target group is the mapping class group
of S, an orientable surface of finite-type. If B is a nice space, then the set
of (isomorphism classes of) S-bundles over B is naturally parametrised by
(conjugacy classes of) homomorphisms from the fundamental group of B to the
mapping class group of S. Thus the study of this set of homomorphisms is of
fundamental interest to the study of surface bundles, a subject of broad
interest throughout mathematics.



Groups arise as the set of symmetries of a mathematical object. Thinking of a
symmetry as a physical motion, one can `do nothing', `perform one symmetry and
then another', and `undo a symmetry'. This gives algebraic structure to the set
of symmetries, and abstracting this idea gives a group. This project will study
a group G using the geometric properties of a space of which G is the set of
symmetries. It will tackle questions about algorithms to solve equations over
groups, which take their motivation from theoretical computer science and logic.
A second focus is the study of surface bundles using group theory. A surface
bundle is a space which locally looks like a product of two lower dimensional
spaces (one of which is two dimensional), and they arise throughout pure
mathematics.


