
* 0805836
* Contact Topology, Knots, and Heegaard Floer Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2008,08/04/2008
* Olga Plamenevskaya,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2011
* USD 107,158.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0805836 Principal Investigator: Olga Plamenevskaya

This proposal focuses on contact topology in dimension 3 and the related version
of knot theory, the study of Legendrian and transverse knots. Contact structures
on 3-manifolds encode subtle topological information, and knots in contact
manifolds (tangent or transverse to the contact planes) have many additional
properties. The goal of this project is to better understand the relation
between and find new applications of various invariants of contact structures
and Legendrian and transverse knots. More specifically, the PI will study
various versions of the contact, Legendrian and transverse invariants in
Heegaard Floer homology; she proposes to investigate knots via associated
contact manifolds, such as those obtained by surgery on Legendrian knots and
branched covers of transverse knots. A related part of the project is to develop
similar invariants in knot homologies arising from quantum algebra (Khovanov and
Khovanov-Rozansky homology). An intriguing relation between Heegaard Floer
theory (defined via holomorphic disks) and the quantum algebraic knot homologies
exists outside of contact geometry; the PI proposes to study this relation in
presence of a contact structure. In particular, in her previous work the PI
suggested a transverse knot invariant in Khovanov homology. The interplay
between Heegaard Floer and Khovanov homologies allows to use this invariant to
prove tightness of certain contact structures on branched double covers of
knots. Further progress on this project could yield quantum algebraic tools for
studying contact structures in a more general setting, and would improve our
understanding of the relation between theories of a very different nature.

The proposed research is on geometric topology, an area of mathematics that
studies shapes of curved spaces (manifolds) in various dimensions. In dimensions
3 and 4, this can be thought of as understanding the structure of space and
space-time, and is particularly interesting and important. The study of knots in
dimension 3 plays a major role in topology and has important connection to other
sciences (for example, DNA and certain proteins can be knotted). The proposed
project focuses on study of 3-manifolds and knots in presence of a contact
structure, an object somewhat analogous to an electric field in physics.
(Historically, the study of contact structures was first motivated by classical
mechanics, optics and thermodynamics.) Contact structures are important objects
by themselves, but also encode valuable information about the space they live
in. In her research, the PI plans to use tools and ideas from different branches
of mathematics such as geometry and quantum algebra. The broader goals of the
project thus include a better understanding of the relation between these
different branches, as well as new results in and applications of the topology
of contact manifolds.
