
* 0805951
* Algebraic applications of the homotopy theory of homotopy theories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2008,08/28/2008
* Julia Bergner,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2013
* USD 82,697.00

This proposal concerns the application of various models for the homotopy theory
of homotopy theories to more concrete situations in algebra and topology. More
specifically, we would like to take questions traditionally posed in the
settings of model categories and derived categories and translate them into the
context of complete Segal spaces. This approach seems particularly promising for
situations in which the derived category plays a role, in that we can retain
much higher-order information in a complete Segal space that is lost when
passing to the derived category. Our primary application at this point is
generalizing Toen's definition of derived Hall algebras associated to certain
kinds of stable model categories. By defining a derived Hall algebra for a
stable complete Segal space, we hope to gain insight into extending a result
relating Hall algebras and quantum enveloping algebras arising from certain Lie
algebras.

This work will take techniques traditionally used in algebraic topology and
apply them to questions arising in algebra. In particular, we hope to answer an
open problem in representation theory, an area in which these methods have not
yet been used. This approach is expected to provide a new perspective on
constructions in algebra as well as in topology.
