
* 0805867
* Noncommutative Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2008,05/22/2008
* Constance Leidy,CT,Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,310.00

A fundamental goal in low-dimensional topology is the classification of
manifolds. The fundamental group of the manifold is an important algebraic
invariant, but is rarely abelian. On the other hand, since the homology groups
of the manifold are abelian, they can be classified easily. Unfortunately, a lot
of the rich structure of the fundamental group is lost when considering the
homology groups. Homology with local coefficients associates modules to the
manifold. Since modules are abelian groups, distinguishing them is still
tenable. Furthermore, since these are often modules over noncommutative rings,
some of the rich structure of the fundamental group is retained. These homology
modules, as well as linking forms defined on them, have been used to define
algebraic invariants of knot complements, 3-manifolds, and algebraic curve
complements. These have led to new results about knot concordance, obstructions
to the existence of symplectic structures on the product of a 3-manifold with
the circle, and restrictions on which groups can be realized as the fundamental
group of an algebraic curve complement. The goal of this project is to use these
noncommutative techniques to find answers to questions related to three
particular areas of low-dimensional topology: knot Floer homology, the topology
of algebraic curve complements, and the structure of the knot concordance group.

The goal of this project is to use non-commutative algebra to better understand
knotted curves and surfaces. The study of knotted curves and surfaces has
important applications in biology and physics. For example, DNA strands are
naturally knotted, but must unknot in order to replicate. Also understanding
knotted surfaces is fundamental to understanding the shape of the universe. Many
mathematicians have used algebra to better understand how curves and surfaces
can knot, however the type of algebra considered is usually commutative. By
employing non-commutative algebras, we can get a more refined understanding for
how curves and surfaces can knot.


