
* 0805785
* Algebraic Structures of Mathematical Physics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2008,08/28/2008
* Alexander Voronov,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2012
* USD 145,726.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0805785 Principal Investigator: Alexander A. Voronov

The goal of the project is to solve a number of important problems in the
rapidly developing fields of Topological Field Theory (TFT), Symplectic Field
Theory (SFT), and Gromov-Witten theory. The first part of the project will span
from higher category theory, to cobordisms and to quantum field theories. The
plan is to place cobordisms of manifolds with corners within an appropriate
n-category framework and describe TFTs as n-functors from the n-category of
cobordisms to that of n-vector spaces, as well as show that physical models,
such as gauge (Wess-Zumino-Witten), Yang-Mills, Chern-Simons, Seiberg-Witten
theories, and sigma-model may be described as such higher TFTs. The second part
of the project consists in bringing together algebraic geometric and symplectic
methods to construct a full solution to the so-called Quantum Master Equation in
Gromov-Witten theory. This equation describes the topology of the moduli spaces
of holomorphic curves and relevant algebraic structures, providing important
invariants in symplectic and algebraic geometry. The third part of the project
aims at lifting Gromov-Witten theory to the (Floer) chain level and developing a
combinatorial version of Gromov-Witten theory, thus bridging the areas of
enumerative algebraic geometry, symplectic Floer theory, and graph homology. The
last, SFT part of the project will result in constructing a new compactification
of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces, which would govern the algebraic
operations and invariants arising in SFT. This compactification will be an SFT
analogue of the Deligne-Mumford compactification relevant to Gromov-Witten
theory.

The project aims at discovering and studying new algebraic structures in
topology suggested or motivated by mathematical physics, in particular, string
theory, Symplectic Field Theory, and Gromov-Witten theory. Another long-term
goal is to build a bridge between several mathematical cultures working on
problems related to mathematical physics. These cultures include algebraists,
algebraic topologists, symplectic geometers, algebraic geometers, and geometric
topologists, to name a few. The algebraic structures is a mathematical
reincarnation of such fundamental structures of physical theories as correlators
and relations between them (Ward identities). Understanding this structure is
crucial for understanding the physical theory. From the point of view of
mathematics, the project leads to new mathematical ideas, new algebra, geometry,
and topology, motivated by physics.
