
* 0805932
* Finiteness properties of groups acting on rooted trees
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2008,05/29/2008
* Zoran Sunik,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2011
* USD 104,252.00

The proposer suggests a research plan involving properties of self-similar
groups acting on rooted trees, with particular attention paid to classes of
self-similar groups enjoying additional finiteness properties such as being
generated by a finite self-similar set, being branch groups (having rigid
stabilizers of finite index), being finitely constrained (being defined by
finitely many forbidden patterns), being contracting (having finite nucleus),
being torsion, etc. Among the proposed directions of study are problems
involving growth questions, correspondence between notions and results in
symbolic dynamics and the theory of self-similar groups, Hausdorff dimension of
closures of self-similar groups, questions relating torsion, growth, Hausdorff
dimension and the branching property in the setting of self-similar groups, and
properties of some particularly interesting groups such as Hanoi Towers groups
and the tent map groups.

Broadly speaking, the notion of self-similarity concerns an entity in which many
copies of the original can be found at various scales within the entity itself.
This is a fundamental notion reflected in many ways both in nature (well known
examples include structure of clouds, coastal shapes, plant branching patterns,
etc.) and in mathematics (as a recursion, iteration, self-reference,
renormalization, etc.). The notion of self-similarity was recently introduced
into group theory through actions on rooted trees. The point of view of studying
some aspects and some classes of groups through actions on rooted trees has
proved to be rather fruitful, since it allows the introduction of many
natural(visual) concepts and ideas, while simplifying the notation and
presentation. In fact, it is precisely this shift in language that enabled
better intuition and resulted in the ongoing explosion of insights,
breakthroughs, and links to other areas of mathematics. The current research
moves in many directions, reflecting the richness of the subject and its wide
appeal and applicability (we can explain and relate in the language of self-
similar groups some 2000 years old problems such as Chinese Rings, modern
mathematical constructions such as groups of intermediate growth, and entirely
new concepts such as iterated monodromy groups).
