
* 0806027
* 3-manifold geometry and topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2008,04/20/2010
* Ian Agol,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2012
* USD 333,162.00

This project proposes several avenues of study relating the topology and
geometry of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The principal topics are the study of
immersed surfaces in 3-manifolds, maps between hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and
volumes of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The most ambitious aspect of the project
involves the virtual Haken conjecture, which is equivalent to showing that
hyperbolic 3-manifolds have a finite-sheeted cover which contains an embedded
pi_1-injective surface. The PI would like to relate this to the virtual fibering
conjecture of Thurston, which states that a hyperbolic 3-manifold has a finite-
sheeted cover which fibers over the circle, and implies the virtual Haken
conjecture. The PI would like to show that Haken 3-manifolds are homotopy
equivalent to a compact CAT(0) cube complex. Next, the PI would like to show
that fundamental groups of hyperbolic 3-manifolds are LERF. This would follow if
Gromov-hyperbolic groups are residually finite, although this is believed to be
false by many geometric group theorists. Following a program of Haglund and
Wise, these conjectures would imply that a Haken hyperbolic manifold has
fundamental group which virtually embeds in a right-angled reflection group.
This in turn would imply that these manifolds virtually fiber by previous work
of the PI. The PI also plans to investigate the volumes of hyperbolic Haken
manifolds, and how various topological restrictions on the manifold give rise to
lower bounds on volume. For example, the PI would like to understand the
asymptotic behavior of the volumes of orientable hyperbolic 3-manifolds with n
cusps.

The mathematical study of 3-dimensional spaces goes back to the work of
Poincare. Because classical physics describes our universe to be a 3-dimensional
space, the classification of 3-dimensional spaces is an important mathematical
endeavor, since it may have ramifications for the global structure of our
universe. Recently, this classification was spectacularly achieved by Perelman,
using Hamilton's Ricci flow, who resolved Thurston's geometrization conjecture,
and as a consequence the Poincare conjecture, which goes back 100 years. The
geometrization conjecture implies that any finite 3-dimensional space has a
canonical decomposition into geometric pieces, the most interesting of which are
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Mathematicians studying 3-manifolds are still sorting
out the implications of Perelman's work and of the geometrization conjecture.
This project will pursue various aspects of the ramifications of the
geometrization conjecture. The principal and most ambitious project will study
2-dimensional objects inside of 3-dimensional spaces, especially the hyperbolic
ones, which satisfy certain strong topological restrictions. Studying these
2-dimensional objects has implications for the global structure of finite
3-dimensional spaces. The project also aims to study the geometry of hyperbolic
3-manifolds, and in particular understand the simplest such manifolds and how
their geometric properties (such as volume) relate to their topological
properties, such as how many components of the boundary.
