
* 0808974
* Categorification and Topological Quantum Field Theories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2008,09/11/2012
* Lev Rozansky,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2013
* USD 144,593.00

One of the most important developments in 3-dimensional topology over the last
25 years was the discovery of the so-called quantum invariants of links and
3-manifolds such as the Jones, HOMFLYPT and Kauffman polynomials and the
Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants. These invariants were described combinatorially,
their relation to classical 3-dimensional topology was mysterious, and the only
conceptual explanation for their existence came from physics: Witten constructed
a family of topological quantum field theories, whose path integral partition
functions were conjectured to coincide with quantum invariants. Recently,
Khovanov, Ozsvath ans Szabo discovered the categorification of polynomial link
invariants: to a link one associates a chain complex of graded vector spaces,
whose graded Euler characteristic coincides with a given polynomial invariant.
Also, to a cobordism between two links one associates a chain map between the
link categorification complexes. Most of the known categorification
constructions are either combinatorial or `semi-combinatorial' and their
intrinsic 3-dimensional origin remains mysterious. The goal of this proposal is
to extend the categorification to a wider class of link polynomial invariants
and, more importantly, to the Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants of 3-manifolds.
Rozansky suggests two approaches to this problem. First, he intends to use
combinatorial methods based upon commutative algebra (matrix factorizations) and
upon the topology of virtual links. These methods have shown promise in the
categorification of the HOMFLYPT and SO(2N) Kauffman polynomials. The second
approach is based on the methods of quantum field theory. Categorification
implies that Witten's Chern-Simons theory is a dimensional reduction of a yet
unknown 4-dimensional theory. The candidate theories were considered in the
papers of Gukov, Kapustin and Witten, but the correct theory has not been found
yet. A construction of this topological quantum field theory may lead to
combinatorial categorification constructions for link and manifold invariants.
It should also provide a conceptual explanation for the existence of cobordism
invariants.



3-dimensional topology deals with classification of knots, links and
3-dimensional surfaces. The main approach to this problem is to construct
topological invariants, that is, the numbers or polynomials that can be assigned
to a topological object, computed readily from its presentation (say, from the
picture of a knot) and used to distinguish these objects. A major breakthrough
it 3-dimensional topology came about 25 years ago with the discovery of a wide
variety of the so-called quantum invariants. Surprisingly, these invariants were
rooted in physics: they come from a special kind of a 3-dimensional quantum
field theory. Thus quantum invariants provide an important bridge between
topology and advanced physical theories. A more recent development came in the
form of categorification: it turned out that quantum invariants were just
dimensions of special vector spaces associated with topological objects. From
the physics point of view, this means that the 3-dimensional quantum field
theory describing quantum invariants is the dimensional reduction of the yet
unknown 4-dimensional theory (the idea of dimensional reduction is familiar in
string theory which requires a 9-dimensional space, 6 extra dimensions being
wrapped up tightly in order to make them invisible for a general observer).
Rozansky proposes to search for the 4-dimensional physical theory related to
categorification and to use the topology-physics relation in order to get a
better understanding of both fields of science.
