
* 0852439
* Applications and Refinements of Floer Homology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2008,08/02/2009
* Ciprian Manolescu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2011
* USD 162,801.00

The proposed research is on Floer homology and its applications to low-
dimensional topology. Floer homology is an infinite dimensional version of Morse
theory which has been used to construct various invariants of knots,
3-manifolds, 4-manifolds, etc. In turn, these invariants can answer subtle
questions about the respective topological objects. One source of invariants
with numerous topological applications is Heegaard Floer theory. For example,
the Heegaard Floer invariant for knots (called knot Floer homology) is able to
detect the genus of a knot. Originally, all the Heegaard Floer invariants were
defined in terms of pseudo-holomorphic curves in symmetric products. Recently,
knot Floer homology has been given several combinatorial descriptions. One focus
of this project is to find combinatorial descriptions for the Heegaard Floer
three- and four-manifold invariants as well. In other directions, the PI will
work on finding connections between knot Floer homology and other knot
invariants, such as the Khovanov-Rozansky homologies; intepreting the Khovanov-
Rozansky homologies geometrically; developing Floer homotopy theory; and
constructing new Floer-theoretic invariants of three-manifolds using moduli
spaces of flat connections.

Floer homology plays a central role in the construction of topological quantum
field theories. These are toy models used in Mathematical Physics to develop
quantum theories about the universe. They are also of interest to topologists,
who study the possible shapes of space in various dimensions. An important
problem is the classification of these shapes, and this is particularly
difficult in four dimensions. Floer homology and the associated invariants are
some of the most useful tools for detecting properties of four-dimensional
shapes. Because our macroscopic space-time has four dimensions, this is an
essential input for quantum physicists and cosmologists looking for geometric
models for the universe. Furthermore, recently Floer homology has found
surprising applications in biology, more precisely in the analysis of DNA
knotting.
