
* 0901078
* Conference Travel Funding: Algebraic Topology, Group Theory, and Representation Theory; Summer 2009; Isle of Skye, Scotland
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2009,02/19/2009
* Kathryn Lesh,NY,Union College
* Standard Grant
* Yongwu  J. Rong
* 09/30/2010
* USD 22,500.00

This project will provide support for attendance of US researchers at the event
"Conference on Algebraic Topology, Group Theory, and Representation Theory,"
which will be held June 9-15 2009. The conference is based on the observation
that recent years have seen ever-increasing activity in the area common to the
mathematical fields of algebraic topology on one hand, and group and
representation theory on the other hand. Topics where these areas have converged
include the study of the homotopy theory classifying spaces of compact Lie
groups, fusion systems, and local-global themes in group theory. The conference
will bring together researchers in these fields of mathematics to share and
discuss current developments, in order to stimulate activity and enhance
interaction.

New approaches and solutions to existing problems are often developed by such
interactions between different but related fields. The "Conference on Algebraic
Topology, Group Theory, and Representation Theory" in June 2009 will bring
together researchers in these three areas, which have experienced exciting and
sometimes unexpected common threads. The organizers expect around 100
participants at the conference, a significant number of whom will be early in
their careers. As the interaction between the disciplines represented in the
conference is relatively new, it should be very attractive to young researchers,
who will be exposed to a variety of approaches by their attendance.
