
* 0904200
* Geodesic currents on free groups and the Outer space
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2009,09/28/2009
* Ilya Kapovich,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 282,601.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0904200 Principal Investigator: Ilya Kapovich

The outer automorphism group of a free group is a more complicated and much less
well understood cousin of the modular group of a Riemann surface. The project
aims to study the outer automorphism group of a free group via analyzing the
interaction between the Culler-Vogtmann Outer space (the traditionally
considered free group analog of the Teichmuller space) and the space of geodesic
currents on a free group. A geodesic current is a measure-theoretic
generalization of the notion of a closed curve or a conjugacy class. The space
of geodesic currents turns out to be a natural companion of the Outer space and
studying them together should produce substantial new information of the
dynamics and geometry of the outer automorphism group of a free group. A key
tool to be used for such study is the so-called ``geometric intersection form''
introduced in the earlier work of the proposer. Specific questions to be studied
include: studying the geometry of various free group analogs of the curve
complex, constructing domains of discontinuity and developing a theory of convex
co-compactness for subgroups of the outer automorphism group of a free group,
developing a theory of generalized (or ``non-commutative'') currents, and
others. In combinatorics and computer science there is an active search for
theories of words based on domains other than an integer segment (e.g. the
integer lattice of the Cayley graph of a free group). The theory of generalized
currents, introduced in the proposal, provides a good model of this kind that
should be useful in the study of words based on non-linear domains. The proposal
aims to develop this theory further and to investigate in more detail the
interactions between geometric group theory and computer science that arise in
this context.

The goal of the project is to study dynamics and geometry of the outer
automorphism group of a free group, one of the most mysterious, interesting and
least understood mathematical objects. Among the key ideas is the use of a new
tool, called a ``geodesic current'', which allows one to bring substantial new
machinery and techniques from analysis and ergodic theory to the subject. The
project will also explore, via the notion of generalized geodesic currents,
interactions between geometric group theory and computer science, aimed at
understanding new types of data structures - namely words that, unlike standard
words, are not written on straight line segments. A significant component of the
project includes REU (``Research Experience for Undergraduates'') activities,
that will involve U.S. undergraduate students in advanced mathematical research
and help prepare them for future careers in science and technology. The proposed
research has served as a basis for a project, funded for two years, under the
umbrella of the UIUC-CNRS institutional collaborative agreement, for
collaborative research in geometric group theory between researchers from UIUC
and Marseille. The NSF grant will be used to expand and enhance that project, to
involve additional research groups and to further build up institutional
international research ties between UIUC and CNRS.
