
* 0905950
* Collaborative Research: Homotopy Theory: Applications and New Dimensions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2009,01/16/2015
* Haynes Miller,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 1,225,953.00

The work of this proposal involves the collaborative efforts of three senior
(Hopkins, Lurie and Miller) and two junior (Barwick and Behrens) investigators.
During the last few years revolutionary new directions have opened for algebraic
topology. At the center is the theory of higher categories, which appear in
diverse ways. Hopkins and Lurie have been using the homotopy theory of infinity
n-categories to classify topological quantum field theories. They have already
done this in dimension less than or equal to 2, and propose to pursue a program
outlined by Lurie to extend this to all dimensions. The terms of the
classification represent a refinement of the Baez-Dolan cobordism hypothesis.
Barwick and Lurie propose to develop new approaches to infinity n-categories,
better suited to the demands placed on the subject by the many new directions.
Lurie proposes a program using derived algebraic geometry to study the problem
of lifting the affine algebraic group schemes to derived group schemes defined
over the sphere spectrum. Behrens, Lurie and Miller propose to study the
Goodwillie tower in this context, as giving a functor from the infinity
2-category of infinity 1-categories, to the infinity 2-category of stable
multicategories. New directions in topology have also been created by
significant computational advances. Hopkins, Mike Hill and Doug Ravenel have
made important progress computing the homotopy groups of the Hopkins-Miller
cohomology theories associated to orbifold families of formal group laws. These
computations have very recently led to a solution of the longstanding "Kervaire
invariant" problem. There are many new directions opened up by this work. The
computations themselves are what mediates between classical and topological
automorphic forms, and Behrens and Hopkins are planning on determining new rings
of topological automorphic forms. Behrens and Hopkins are also working on the
problem of determining the structures needed by a vector bundle in order that it
be oriented in the theory of topological automorphic forms. These orientations
are fundamental to any geometric interpretation of these theories, and represent
yet another interface with the theory of infinity n-categories.

In broad strokes, the work in this proposal represents deep progress and new
directions on the oldest problem in algebraic topology: how to count the number
of solutions to a system of equations. When the number of equations is equal to
the number of unknowns, the answer to the problem is known as the "degree," and
many of the triumphs of the subject in the 1920's and early 1930's result from a
clear understanding of the degree. In the mid 1930's, Pontryagin introduced new
topological methods in case the number of equations is smaller than the number
of unknowns. This led to a remarkable interrelation between algebraic topology
and geometry and over the next 50 years to dramatic progress in the fundamental
problems of geometry. The important "Kervaire Invariant" problem dates from this
work of Pontryagin and remained open until very recently, when it was solved by
Mike Hill, Hopkins, and Doug Ravenel, using some of the ideas of this proposal.
Part of the work proposed here is to carry this development further using these
new ideas. In the late 1980's a different mechanism for counting the solutions
to a system of equations was developed by Atiyah and Witten, in response to the
demands of quantum field theory. They introduced the notion of a "topological
field theory." Relating this notion to Pontryagins' work forced a reexamination
of the most basic ideas about "space," and what emerged was a kind of hybrid
object, an ``infinity $n$-category,''part of which is best probed by the
traditional methods of algebraic topology, and part of which is best understood
in the essentially combinatorial conceptual framework of category theory. Jacob
Lurie is one of the worlds leading experts on the theory of infinity
n-categories, and he and Clark Barwick have proposed to investigate new
approaches to the theory. Working partly with Hopkins, Lurie has made dramatic
progress on what one might call the "quantum counting"of the number of solutions
to a system of equations. In more mathematical terms, he has articulated a clear
framework for classifying topological field theories, and made made substantive
progress on its realization. Once one has decided "how" to count the number of
solutions to a system of equations, fundamental questions emerge about the
mathematical nature of the "value" of such a count.About ten years ago, Hopkins
and Miller defined the theory of "topological modular forms" designed to be a
particularly useful receptacle for these values. Recently, Mark Behrens and
Tyler Lawson introduced a generalization, the theory of "topological automorphic
forms."Behrens proposes work on several projects with Lurie and Hopkins which
will further our understanding of these topological automorphic forms.
