
* 0905823
* Investigations in the application of homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2009,06/20/2013
* Gunnar Carlsson,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 690,147.00

This project deals with three separate problems in homotopy theory. The first is
the study of algebraic K-theory of fields and motivic homotopy theory. We will
continue the study of the representation theoretic model for the algebraic
K-theory of fields using derived completion constructions, and attempt to use
motivic homotopy theory and algebraic K-theory to study the Halperin-Carlsson
conjectures on free finite group actions on finite complexes. The second is
internal to homotopy theory, and will carry out an analysis of higher
topological cyclic homology constructions in the hopes of obtaining good
geometric versions of phenomena of higher chromatic levels. The third problem is
the study of various aspects of "generalized persistence", which provides a
method for studying finite metric spaces, and therefore many data sets coming
out of science and engineering. Specifically, we wish to study barcode
invariants of certain quivers which will help to assess the "strength" of a
topological signal.

This project deals with applications of certain geometric techniques, referred
to as topological, to other parts of mathematics and eventually even outside of
mathematics. Topological techniques capture qualitative features of geometric
objects, such as the presence of loops, spheres, and other surfaces within them
in a systematic way which allows it to be used as a tool for geometric pattern
recognition in a broad sense. Interpreted this way, these techniques have
applications in areas as diverse as number theory and the solution of algebraic
equations on the one end to problems in data analysis on the other end. In
addition, we will pursue an interesting direction in the study of homotopy
theory, where we hope to make concrete and geometrical certain constructions
which at the moment are less sharply defined.


