
* 0905380
* Fibrations and the topology of low-dimensional manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2009,07/02/2009
* Thomas Mark,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2013
* USD 110,096.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Through their connection with mapping class groups, Lefschetz fibrations and
related structures on 4-manifolds provide a group-theoretic means for studying
symplectic and near-symplectic 4-manifolds. This project will use Lefschetz
fibrations in conjunction with invariants coming from Floer homology to study
several related questions. First, the PI has shown that several geometric
operations on 4-manifolds can be realized as instances of monodromy
substitutions in Lefschetz fibrations, coming from new relations in the mapping
class group. The PI will pursue this line of inquiry with the goal of finding
new constructions of exotic 4-manifolds. Second, the PI will use the technology
of relative Ozsváth-Szabó invariants (developed in joint work of the PI and S.
Jabuka) to produce new examples of contact 3-manifolds admitting infinitely many
topologically equivalent but smoothly distinct Stein fillings, extending
previous joint work. Next is the topological meaning of the Ozsváth-Szabó
invariants themselves: for example, do the Ozsváth-Szabó invariants provide
constraints on the sorts of Lefschetz structures supported by a given
4-manifold? Conversely, can one calculate the Ozsváth-Szabó invariants of a
Lefschetz fibration from its monodromy representation? Finally, he will continue
to develop the theory of perturbed Heegaard Floer homology, which will expand
the utility of the Heegaard Floer "package."

Since Einstein's description of mechanics and electrodynamics as inherently a
four-dimensional theory, the observed universe has generally been conceived as a
smooth four-dimensional manifold: that is, a four-dimensional analog of a smooth
surface such as a plane or sphere. A fundamental question is then: what manifold
is it? To pose a simplified analogy, the surface of the earth is generally
``flat'' when viewed by a casual observer, but it is a mistake to infer that it
is planar. The universe is similarly "mostly flat" on an appropriate distance
scale, but its global topology or "shape" is not known. A goal of the 4-manifold
topologist, then, is to describe the list of possibilities for the underlying
structure of the universe, in analogy with the relatively easy-to-understand
list of possible surfaces from which a "generally flat" object like the surface
of the earth can select (sphere, torus, etc.). Perhaps not coincidentally, the
theory of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds is vastly more complicated than the
analogous theory in any other dimension. Indeed, surprisingly little is known
regarding important and basic existence and uniqueness questions for smooth
4-manifolds. The work supported by this grant will approach several of these
questions by making use of a Lefschetz fibration (or similar geometric
structure) on a 4-manifold, together with the invariants of 3- and 4-dimensional
manifolds provided by recently-developed mathematical tools that are based on
ideas from gauge-theoretic physics.
