
* 0906483
* Interactions between geometry and topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 10/01/2009,09/17/2009
* Jean-Francois Lafont,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2012
* USD 115,174.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0906483 Principal Investigator: Jean-Francois R. Lafont

The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to work on a series of projects that
incorporate techniques from geometry and topology, with a view to applications
to both of these fields. A major component of this proposal focuses on making
use of geometric arguments to shed light on the algebraic K-theory of (integral
group rings of ) various classes of groups. The PI's previous work with Ortiz
provided a complete algorithm to determind the lower algebraic K-theory for
lattices in the isometry group of hyperbolic 3-space. The PI intends to further
develop techniques for computing the lower algebraic K-theory of various other
geometrically significant classes of groups. The importance of such explicit
computations is twofold. First of all, it provides a testing ground for
conjectures, and a possible source of new conjectures. Secondly, because of the
close relationship between algebraic K-theory and high-dimensional topology, we
expect our computations to shed light on the topology of high-dimensional
manifolds. The PI is also interested in better understanding how various metric
properties constrain the topology of the underlying space. There is a lot of
freedom here, depending on what one means by a metric property, and what aspect
of the topology we choose to study. For instance, one can consider how
Riemannian curvature influences the bounded cohomology of a space. Or one can
try to study how metric properties (e.g. the G-space axioms) can influence the
local topology of a space. Alternatively, one can try to study, within a fixed
class of topological spaces (e.g. closed smooth manifolds), those supporting
various types of metric properties (e.g. Riemannian metrics of non-positive
curvature, as compared to locally CAT(0) metrics). The PI intends to work on
questions related to this circle of ideas.

Geometry is the study of properties of spaces equipped with some additional
structure, usually of a metric nature (i.e. allowing one to measure distances in
the space). In the field of topology, one forgets about the precise underlying
distance, and only retain the notion of points in the space being "close
together". As such, topology is often referred to as "rubber geometry": one can
stretch and deform spaces without changing their underlying topology. In
topology, manifolds are the spaces of most interest. These are spaces which, on
the small scale, look like Euclidean space, but on the large scale, can be
curved. A basic question lies in finding ways to detect when two manifolds are
different from each other. This is usually done by associating certain
invariants to manifolds: if the invariants are different, then the manifolds are
different. One family of invariants which is particularly useful in high-
dimensional topology are the algebraic K-theory invariants. In general, these
invariants are quite hard to compute. The PI plans to develop methods for
computing these invariants, in the special case where the manifold has some nice
underlying geometry. More generally, the PI plans on studying how the presence
of a geometric structure constrains various topological properties (and vice
versa).
