
* 0906401
* Link Homology, Categorification and extended Topological Quantum Field Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2009,07/28/2009
* Carmen Caprau,CA,California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2012
* USD 78,532.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research project deals mainly with link homology theories and topological
quantum field theories (TQFTs). Link homology theories are algebraically defined
invariants of links that generalize and enhance classical invariants such as the
Alexander, Jones and quantum sl(n)-polynomials, and they can often be regarded
as TQFTs restricted to links in the 3-dimensional space and link cobordisms.
There are rank 2 Frobenius extensions that play an important role in such
theories, and the Principal Investigator plans to use the techniques developed
in the last few years in the area of categorification to find new tangle and
link homology theories that are related to rank n-Frobenius extensions for
arbitrary n > 2. The project also aims to deepen the understanding of existing
link homology theories, including the Khovanov-Rozansky homologies, and to
improve the currently known categorifications of the colored Jones polynomial.
The novelty of the proposed research lies in a new approach to link homologies
via webs and foams and to their extension to cobordisms of knots and links. This
new approach also motivates another goal of the project, namely that of
constructing extended TQFTs defined on certain cobordisms with seams, also
called foams.

The proposed research project concerns the theory of knots and links. This area
has provided models and applications to DNA theory, molecular configurations and
physics, and has gone through a significant development recently through
categorifications of quantum invariants, giving rise to link homologies. The
focus of the project is to better perceive the existing link homology theories,
to improve some of their features, as well as to find new homology and
topological quantum field theories. The Principal Investigator anticipates a
better understanding of the quantum sl(n) invariants and of the interplay
between knot theory and representation theory. The findings of the study should
open new perspectives for applications of methods from the field of homological
invariants of knots and links in various branches of mathematics and theoretical
physics, including representation theory, category theory, and topological
quantum field theory.
