
* 0906290
* Higher Grothendieck-Witt groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Marco Schlichting,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2013
* USD 179,825.00

The aim of this project is to deepen our understanding of the algebraic analogue
of real topological K-theory: the theory of higher Grothendieck-Witt groups. The
goal is to establish several fundamental results with special emphasis on
eliminating restrictions on singularities and characteristics which permeate the
literature. Specifically, we will study conjectures of Karoubi and Williams -
the first, relating the integral homology groups of infinite orthogonal,
symplectic and general linear groups, and the second relating homotopy fixed
points of K-theory to hermitian K-theory. We will also study homotopy and
devissage properties of higher Grothendieck-Witt groups when "2 is not
invertible" which are essential in the calculation of hermitian K-groups of
rings of integers in number fields. Finally, we will study higher Grothendieck-
Witt groups in relation with certain invariants defined via A^1-homotopy theory.

Historically, cohomology theories attach to a geometric object such as the
surface of the earth (whose topological properties don't change under small
deformations) certain algebraic objects such as a set of numbers (which are
rather rigid in nature). The study of the attached algebraic objects yields
information about the original geometric object. The success of cohomology
theories in topology lead algebraists to define cohomology theories in an
algebraic context. These algebraic cohomology theories allow us to use our
intuition from 3 space and our experience with working with real numbers to
study systems polynomial equations in higher dimensions and in number systems
(used e.g. in cryptography) where 1+1 could be 0. The theory investigated in
this project, the theory of higher Grothendieck-Witt groups, is one such
algebraic cohomology theory. Compared to its companion theories - algebraic
K-theory, Witt-groups and L-groups - this theory is rather underdeveloped. For
instance, virtually nothing is known in relation with number systems in which
1+1 = 0. This project aims to close the gap in knowledge between the 1+theory of
higher Grothendieck-Witt groups and these companion theories.
