
* 0966902
* Great Lakes Geometry Conference 2010
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 02/01/2010,02/22/2010
* Yong-Geun Oh,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2011
* USD 18,000.00

Building upon the success of the annual Great Lakes Geometry Conference which is
by now a well-established conference held in the Great Lakes region, the PIs
propose to bring together experts of toric geometry and of the related areas
from the faces of symplectic geometry, algebraic geometry and K\"ahler geometry
and to provide a common ground where mathematicians share ideas and visions
towards the goal of understanding the mirror symmetry of toric varieties in all
faces. This will in turn serve a stepping stone towards deeper understanding of
Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry and of Strominger-Yau-Zaslow proposal
of Lagrangian torus fibrations on Calabi-Yau manifolds, which have been one of
the most active areas of research in geometry and physics of string theory in
recent years. While there have been many conferences dedicated to symplectic
geometry and mirror symmetry or toric geometry recent years, the PIs are not
aware of a conference that brings all of these aspects together in the context
of geometry of toric varieties.

The Great Lakes Geometry Conference is by now a well-established conference of
geometry and topology held in the Great Lakes region. The conference in the year
2010 is its 11-th anniversary and will be held in the University of Wisconsin at
Madison. The main theme of the GLGC 2010 is toric geometry and the related areas
which will provide a common ground where mathematicians share ideas and visions
towards the goal of understanding the mirror symmetry of toric varieties in all
faces. We hope that gathering the experts of different faces in toric geometry
and mirror symmetry will encourage collaborations between researchers in the
areas. In this conference, the PIs draw the speakers at this conference from a
diverse spectrum of active research areas in geometry and mathematical physics.
One primary goal of this conference is to expose graduate students and early
career mathematicians in the related fields to some recent exciting new
developments in this active area of geometry and physics of mirror symmetry and
toric geometry. We also hope that the conference will benefit the students and
the early career mathematicians at the University of Wisconsin and other
Midwestern universities, encourage interaction between the universities in the
Midwestern region and beyond, and help graduate students and post-docs to work
in these exciting areas.
