
* 1005661
* Exploring problems in 3- and (3+1)-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,06/10/2010
* Martin Scharlemann,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 141,798.00

In general, Scharlemann's research has centered on the theory of classical knots
and of 3-manifolds, in particular on the use of Heegaard splittings and of
related notions from classical knot theory. The focus has been on the behavior
of surfaces contained in the 3-manifolds, but with a modern viewpoint: Add ideas
from graph theory to old-fashioned combinatorial arguments on surface
intersections; add sutured manifold theory to the classical notion of
hierarchies on 3-manifolds (so parameterizing surfaces and estimates of the
Thurston norm help control and understand the topology); and add thin position
to the classic tools of Morse theory, so handles of the critical index are added
not all at once, but as slowly as possible. Recently Scharlemann has applied
these and similar new tools towards resolving questions in the topology of
4-manifolds, most prominently the Schoenflies Conjecture, but also long-standing
questions about the connection between classical links, their possible slicings
in the 4-ball, and how surgery can affect both. For example, recent work with
Abby Thompson and Bob Gompf uses sutured manifold and Heegaard theory to search
for the easiest possible counterexample to the Generalized Property R
Conjecture. We show that there is a 2-component likely counterexample containing
a square knot (or, maybe seen as easier, a genus 1 knot, so far undetermined) as
a component. These and other results may be the first steps towards a useful
application of 3-manifold ideas to those intriguing topological questions which
are sometimes called 3 + 1-dimensional because they ask how 3- and 4-dimensional
manifolds are interrelated.

One of the most basic observations about the world around us is that it has
three dimensions. The broad intent of this proposal is to help us better
understand spaces with precisely this property: anyone living in one would see
their world as of this sort, namely 3-dimensional. Beyond modeling the universe
around us, these spaces, called "3-manifolds", support interesting phenomena
such as knotting, in which a simple object like a garden-hose (or a string of
DNA, or, more generally, a chemical molecule) can lie in space in a complicated
way. These 3-manifolds also lie on the edge of spaces with additional deep
physical significance, those that locally appear to be 4-dimensional spaces
(such as physicists often refer to as space-time). Our emerging understanding of
3-dimensional manifolds can also help us understand long-standing questions
about these 4-dimensional manifolds. The particular emphasis in this proposal is
on questions that sit on the edge between 3- and 4-dimensional manifold theory
and incorporate knotting phenomena from both. The dimensions are interesting in
part because they model the universe in which we live; knotting within them is a
tool to deepen our understanding of how such spaces relate.
