
* 1005741
* The Topology of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2010,05/29/2015
* Anar Ahmadov,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 134,393.00

This proposal concerns the interaction between low-dimensional topology and
symplectic geometry. The first main theme of the proposed research is to study
exotic smooth structures on small simply connected four-manifolds. The Principal
Investigator and his collaborator B. Doug Park have shown that the complex
projective plane blown up at two, three, and four points admit exotic
irreducible smooth structures. The PI will continue his study with an aim of
further understanding of smooth structures on small four-manifolds such as CP^2,
S^2 x S^2, and CP^2#(-CP^2). The initial work suggests that it would be possible
to construct an exotic smooth structure on some of these remaining small four-
manifolds. The proposed research will also focus on the geography problem for
smooth irreducible simply connected four-manifolds and the construction of
surface bundles over surfaces with non-zero signature. This project may lead to
new theorems on spin and non-spin symplectic geography, and provide new
constructions relevant to attack the Symplectic Bogomolov-Miyaoka-Yau
conjecture. A final theme in the proposed research is the construction of Stein
and strong symplectic fillings of certain contact three-manifolds.

This proposal studies the "exotic" smooth structures on small four-dimensional
manifolds, i.e. the geometric objects which are locally modeled on space-time.
Although it is known that many smooth four-dimensional manifolds admit the
"exotic" smooth structures, such structures are very hard to construct if the
manifold is small. The famous smooth four-dimensional Poincare conjecture
illustrates this phenomenon. The PI recently developed a new and very effective
technique that allows to tackle these small four-dimensional manifolds. The PI's
approach shows a great promise in understanding the classification of smooth
four-dimensional manifolds. This project uses the ideas and tools from several
fields of mathematics, such as geometric topology, symplectic geometry, complex
algebraic geometry, group theory and gauge theory. The problems involved in this
research project also have interesting applications to physics, such as mirror
symmetry and string theory.
