
* 1005318
* The algebra and topology of the mapping class group
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2010,08/30/2010
* Andrew Putman,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 136,969.00

The proposed research concerns the mapping class group of a surface and related
groups. It contains four families of projects. The first concerns the
cohomological properties of finite-index subgroups. Specific goals here include
proving an analogue of the Borel stability theorem for the mapping class group
and proving a sort of "equivariant homological stability" theorem for congruence
subgroups of the special linear group. The second family of projects concerns
the Picard groups of finite covers of the moduli space of curves. The goal here
is to understand the divisibility properties of certain natural line bundles on
these finite covers. The third family of projects concerns the Torelli subgroup
of the mapping class group, which is the kernel of action of the mapping class
group on the first homology group of the surface. The goal here is to clarify
the basic cohomological and combinatorial properties of this group and its
subgroups. The final family of projects concerns the analogue of the Torelli
subgroup in the automorphism group of a free group. The goal here is to adapt
tools that have been successful in studying the mapping class group to the
setting of the automorphism group of a free group. In particular, analogues of
the curve complex will be studied.

The proposed projects concern mapping class groups, which play a key role in
many fields of mathematics, ranging from algebraic geometry and low dimensional
topology to mathematical physics. The problems which involve the cohomology
groups of the mapping class group seek to measure one of the most basic
invariants of these groups ? roughly, the k-dimensional cohomology groups count
the k-dimensional "holes" in geometric models for the groups. These play an
important role in the applications. Another set of problems concern the
combinatorics of these groups. This should allow actual concrete calculations
within them, facilitating the investigation of the diverse objects with which
they interact.
