
* 1005391
* Symmetry groups and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Nitya Kitchloo,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2012
* USD 205,559.00

In his proposal, the PI wishes to explore the central role of symmetries in
various problems of geometry and topology. In more detail: The proposal includes
the study of the equivariant Johnson- Wilson spectrum, denoted by ER(n), under
the involution symmetry given by complex conjugation acting on the standard
Johnson-Wilson spectrum. This theory ER(n) belongs to a family that starts with
real K-theory. These theories have rich structure that has been explored by the
PI in previous work. The power of this structure has been demonstrated by the PI
and his collaborators in extending previously known results about the immersion
dimension of real projective spaces. In his proposal the PI also studies
infinite dimensional symmetry groups like Kac-Moody groups and symplectomorphism
groups. Kac-Moody groups are infinite dimensional generalizations of compact Lie
groups in terms of their structure and representation theory. The PI studies
them from the standpoint of topology by studying their classifying spaces and
the underlying equivariant K-theory. The PI also studies symplectormorphism
groups of certain 4-manifolds. In earlier work, he and his coauthors have
demonstrated that one can use homotopical techniques to completely understand
these groups for rational ruled surfaces. The techniques used there appear to be
applicable in much more generality which the PI plans to explore.

On a general level, the proposal attempts to solve geometric problems by first
understanding the apparent symmetries in the problem and then applying algebraic
techniques to the framework. For example, complex K- theory is an invariant
constructed from families of complex vector spaces parametrized over a general
space (a concept known as a complex vector bundle). Complex conjugation
demonstrates an apparent symmetry of this structure and one obtains real
K-theory by encoding this symmetry. This framework can be formalized into a very
strong algebraic invariant the power of which was demonstrated almost 50 years
ago to answer a fundamental question like which spheres have a group structure,
or which euclidean spaces support the structure of a skew field. The PI studies
a family ER(n) that generalizes real K- theory. In addition to this, the PI
studies questions with apparent symmetries that are no longer finite, but still
have fundamental geometric significance. For example, the infinite dimensional
symplectomorphism group is defined as the symmetries of a smooth manifold which
preserve a fixed symplectic form. The PI has shown that in some cases, this
group is amenable to study using algebraic techniques.
