
* 1005304
* 4-Manifold topology and related topics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2010,06/10/2010
* Robert Gompf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2014
* USD 167,442.00

A major thrust of the project concerns Cappell-Shaneson homotopy 4-spheres.
These have long been considered the most likely counterexamples to the smooth
4-dimensional Poincare Conjecture. Recent work by Akbulut, and a simpler, more
general approach by the PI, have shown that infinitely many of these are
standard. The PI plans to extend his method further, trying to show that all CS-
spheres are standard. He will also study other homotopy 4-spheres containing
fibered 2-knots, accumulating evidence suggesting that the conjecture is true.
The project includes various other avenues of research related to the PI's
expertise. He will search for compact domains of holomorphy in complex surfaces,
using one of his recent theorems. It now suffices to locate smoothly embedded
compact 4-manifolds admitting suitable handle decompositions. He hopes to find
(or rule out) examples such as pseudoconvex embeddings of preassigned homology
spheres, and a compact domain of holomorphy in C^2 homotopy equivalent to the
2-sphere (violating a conjecture of Forstneric). A related theorem of the PI
allows one to construct topological embeddings of 3-manifolds with a generalized
pseudoconvexity property; he will investigate these in more detail. Another
project is to study what manifolds of dimension 4 and higher can be realized as
orbit spaces of vector fields in Euclidean space. Preliminary research shows
that such manifolds must be simply connected, but many 4-manifolds with
nontrivial 2-homology can arise. Various other investigations, concerning
compact 4-manifolds, symplectic structures and Lefschetz pencils will also be
pursued.

The Poincare Conjecture for 3-manifolds has now been proved by Perelman, a full
century after it was first proposed. Its generalization to higher dimensions was
proved in the 1960's except in dimension 4. That last version was proved around
1981 by Freedman. However, the original conjecture was made for topological
manifolds, so that one is allowed to crinkle the manifold in complicated ways.
When manifolds are used in practice, in geometry, analysis, physics, economics
and so on, one normally wants to be able to apply calculus, so one must disallow
crinkling and work entirely with smooth manifolds. The smooth analog of the
Poincare Conjecture has been understood in dimensions >4 since the 1960's, and
is equivalent to the topological version (hence solved) in dimensions <4.
However, the smooth 4-dimensional Poincare Conjecture is still mysterious, and
is the last fundamental open question remaining from the initial heyday of
manifold topology a half-century ago. There have been many potential
counterexamples constructed, homotopy 4-spheres that might not be the standard
4-sphere, but none has been shown to actually be nonstandard. It has also been
quite difficult to show that any of these examples are standard, but the PI has
been in the forefront of research in this direction. His new methods have
dispensed with a large family of potential counterexamples that were constructed
in the 1970's. He intends to further investigate this problem, adding evidence
that the conjecture may be true after all, in spite of the prevailing belief to
the contrary in recent decades. He will also study other problems involving
4-manifolds and other classical mathematical objects.
