
* 1005750
* Link homology and categorification of quantum groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,07/24/2012
* Mikhail Khovanov,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 517,402.00

Quantum link invariants, including the Jones, Kauffman, and other link
polynomials, can be recovered from quantum groups, which are Hopf algebra
deformations of the universal enveloping algebras of simple Lie algebras. These
invariants can be extended to functors from the category of tangles to
categories of quantum group representations. The invariant of a tangle is a
homomorphism of representations. Link homology lifts quantum invariants one
dimension up and can be viewed as functors from the category of link cobordisms
to the category of multi-graded abelian groups. The invariant of a tangle
becomes a functor between triangulated categories assigned to the boundaries of
the tangle. Categorification leads to invariants of tangle cobordisms which take
values in natural transformations between these functors. The categories that
appear in this way categorify tensor products of quantum group representations
and appear thoughout representation theory, symplectic topology, and algebraic
geometry. The proposal aims to further elucidate the structure of link homology,
discover new cohomological operations in them, further tie them up with
Hochschild homology, generalize the Rassmussen invariant, and relate link
homology with the categorification of quantum groups. Categorification of
quantum groups, discovered less that two years ago, realizes them as
Grothendieck groups of categories of projective modules over certain
diagrammatically defined rings, which also appear throughout representation
theory. The PI believes that categorified quantum groups will prove ubiquitous
in several areas of mathematics and will continue studying them for the next few
years.



Mathematicians discovered in the past 30 years deep relations between the theory
of knots and 3-manifolds (objects that locally look like our space but have a
different global behaviour) and a plethora of sophisticated structures in
algebra and geometry. Many of these structures have to do with the elucidation
of the notion of symmetry. All symmetries of a given mathematical or physical
object constitute what is known as a group - a collection of symmetries that can
be composed and reversed. Various developments in the past decades led to a far-
fetched generalizations of the notion of a group, including the discovery of
quantum groups by Drinfeld and Jimbo. More recent further progress in the
direction, in which the PI was involved, resulted in the discovery of so-called
categorified quantum groups, which are even more sophisticated objects, from
which quantum groups can be recovered by forgetting most of the information.
These categorified quantum groups are expected to be intimately related to the
topology in four dimensions. Four-dimensional topology studies objects that
locally look like our space plus the time direction, but may have complicated
global structure. This line of research is expected to further tie together many
areas of mathematics, including representation theory, homological algebra,
topology and geometry.
