
* 1006369
* The Geometry and Topology of Heegaard Splittings
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Jesse Johnson,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2013
* USD 116,357.00

The principal objective of this project is to develop new methods that will
produce a unified and systematic approach to understanding and classifying
isotopy classes of Heegaard splittings in 3-manifolds. In addition to
strengthening the foundations of the field, such an approach will lead to new
results, as well as opening up the field to a wider audience. The new approach
uses geometric intuition from recent results connecting Heegaard splittings to
hyperbolic geometry in order to expand and clarify two existing methods: thin
position and double sweep-outs/graphics. The PI has recently made significant
breakthroughs in understanding and expanding these methods in this direction and
proposes to further explore their potential applications.

Since their introduction in the early 1900s, Heegaard splittings have been a
vital tool for placing 3-manifolds in an accessible context. They provide a good
introduction to geometric topology and an active area of research for young
mathematicians. Right now, the core of the theory of Heegaard splittings is
appropriate for beginning graduate students. However, new research continues to
provide simpler proofs of the main theorems and more intuitive approaches to the
fundamental concepts, so that parts of the field are becoming accessible to
advanced undergraduates. The research project described here will eventually
lead to problems that are appropriate for an undergraduate thesis or even an
REU. This will provide a gateway for students into other areas of algebraic and
geometric topology. It should be noted that OSU has a substantial population of
Native American and other underserved minorities, and Oklahoma is geographically
isolated from the academic centers of the country. Through involvement in the
PI's research, mathematically talented students at OSU will have the opportunity
to develop their talents, increase their visibility and confidence and prepare
themselves for further success in mathematics and science.
