
* 1006298
* Deformation spaces of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,06/10/2010
* Richard Canary,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2013
* USD 199,640.00

Prof. Canary proposes to study the space AH(M) of marked hyperbolic 3- manifolds
homotopy equivalent to a fixed compact 3-manifold M and its natural quotient,
the space AI(M) of unmarked hyperbolic 3-manifolds homotopy equivalent to M. The
space AH(M) may be viewed as the 3-dimensional analogue of the Teichmuller space
of marked hyperbolic surfaces homeomorphic to a fixed closed surface, while the
space AI(M) is the natural analogue of moduli space. Recent work on AH(M) has
focussed on the classification of elements in AH (M), e.g. the Ending Lamination
Theorem, and the difficulty in understanding the topology of the space, e.g.
results establishing that AH(M) need not be locally connected. Prof. Canary
proposes a number of projects which study, and attempt to circumscribe, the
pathological behavior of the topology of AH(M). The study of AI(M) is still in
its infancy, but preliminary results indicate that the topology of AI(M)
reflects the topology of M. Prof. Canary proposes to study the topology of AI(M)
and the dynamics of the action of the outer automorphism group of the
fundamental group of M on AH(M) and, more generally, on the relevant character
variety.

Prof. Canary studies the deformation theory of geometric structures on
3-dimensional manifolds. A 2-dimensional manifold is a space which looks locally
like the 2- dimensional plane. For example, one may consider surfaces of
familiar 3-dimensional objects such as footballs or doughnuts. Similarly, a
3-manifold is a space that looks locally like 3-dimensional Euclidean space. For
example, the universe we live in is a 3-dimensional manifold. A geometric
structure on a manifold gives a way of measuring distances and angles in a
manifold. The study of how geometric structures on manifolds may vary has been a
prominent theme in recent work in both mathematics, for example in the solution
of Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, and physics, for example in string
theory. Prof. Canary will study the variation of geometric structures in the
setting of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In addition, Prof. Canary will continue his
commitment to undergraduate education, by pioneering a new course using inquiry-
based methods, and his work mentoring graduate students and postdoctoral
assistant professors.
