
* 1006553
* Problems in Low Dimensional Geometry and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,06/13/2014
* David Gabai,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2017
* USD 790,971.00

This proposal addresses central problems in low dimensional topology and
geometry. The PI plans to investigate the topology of ending laminations space
as well as problems related to Dehn surgery on links and taut foliations. In
addition to study the topology of low volume hyperbolic 3-manifolds as well as
those which are ultra large. The latter have large volume, Cheeger constant
bounded below and have strongly irreducible minimal genus Heegaard splittings.
The PI also plans to study smooth Schoenflies 4-balls.

Three-manifold topology is the study of objects that locally look like the
standard three-dimensional space in which we live. Two-manifold topology is the
study of surfaces such as the sphere, torus and the surface of higher genus.
While objects such as surfaces and standard 3-space are very simple, the class
of objects that exist in them is incredibly rich and fascinating. For example,
there is knot theory in 3-space and the theory of curves and laminations in
surfaces. These theories in turn are fundamentally connected with many other
mathematical structures such as non Euclidean geometry. This proposal addresses
basic mathematical questions in these areas. A classical fundamental theorem in
topology is that any smooth closed curve in the plane, such as the circle,
bounds a smooth disc. In fact such a theorem is true in dimension three and
unknown in dimension four. The PI plans to investigate this very mysterious
question at the heart of smooth 4-dimensional topology.
