
* 1006054
* Homotopy Theory and Higher Categories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2010,04/12/2012
* Charles Rezk,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 275,206.00

The goal of this proposal is to study the relationship between homotopy theory
and formal groups, and applications of homotopy theory to category theory. The
PI plans to study power operations for Morava E-theory, relating the algebra of
such operations to the Bousfield-Kuhn functor, a construction which picks out
invariants of a single chromatic layer of unstable homotopy theory. The PI
proposes to prove a a series of conjectures, which would lead to some new
computational techniques, and would also draw interesting connections between
unstable homotopy theory and the algebra of cohomology operations in Morava
E-theory. In addition, the PI will study certain models for higher category
theory based on the ideas of homotopy theory. Higher categories have recently
been applied (through work of Hopkins, Lurie and others) to the classification
of topological field theories. The models the PI will study (called Theta-n
spaces), are conjectured to be presentations for the theory of
(infinity,n)-categories; a goal of this project is to prove this conjecture, and
to extend these results to the setting of enriched higher category theory.

Homotopy theory is a branch of topology; it arose as the study of certain
invariant properties of spaces, namely those left unchanged by continuous
deformations. The most powerful tools for studying such properties are what are
called "cohomology theories". Cohomology theories are illuminated by the theory
of formal groups, which in turn are closely related to problems in algebraic
number theory. The first goal of this project is to understand this
relationship, with the prospect of creating new computational tools. A second
goal is to understand how to use homotopy theory to shed light on higher
category theory.
