
* 1007811
* Geometry and Dynamics of Teichmuller Space
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2010,08/30/2010
* KASRA RAFI,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2013
* USD 78,187.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007811 Principal Investigator: Kasra Rafi

These projects pursue two major themes. First, we can think of the action of the
mapping class group on Teichmueller space as an analogue of the action of a
lattice on a Lie group. This analogy is the motivation of some of the proposed
problems, namely the rigidity and the counting problems. The other theme is to
understand the relation between different metrics on Teichmueller space. There
are several distinct metrics of interest on Teichmueller space and many
questions are answered for one metric but not for another. We propose the study
of the behavior of geodesics in the Lipschitz metric on Teichmueller space,
which has the feature that the Lipschitz metric can act as a bridge between the
Teichmueller metric and the Lipschitz metric in Outer space, the model space for
outer automorphisms of a free group.

The mathematical structures studied in this research program provide coordinates
that determine completely a family of two-dimensional geometries. The oldest
questions and constructions in these directions are more than 150 years old but
remain vital because of their central role in mathematics and their use in
analyzing shape-dependent features of physical systems, including brain anatomy
identified in MRI images. One of the newer lines of investigation compensates
for the longstanding difficulty of imposing a truly satisfactory geometry or
metric on Teichmueller spaces by considering several geometries simultaneously,
aiming to take advantage of the good features of each. This project aims to
pursue this investigation to improve fundamental mathematical understanding of
these important spaces.
