
* 1007068
* Research in geometric group theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,04/04/2012
* Michael Davis,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 248,674.00

In recent years the study of Coxeter groups and their relatives (e.g. Artin
groups) and related spaces (e.g. buildings) have become increasingly important
in geometric group theory. The PI (Davis) and Co-PI (Januszkiewicz) plan to
compute various types of cohomology for these groups and spaces. They also will
study the problem of determining whether branched covers of complex manifolds
are nonpositively curved. This is related to a possible attack on the K(pi, 1)
Conjecture for Artin groups. Together with Boris Okun the PI plans to compute
the cohomology with group ring coefficients as well as the L2 cohomology of
Artin groups, Bestvina-Brady groups and graph products of infinite groups. The
Co-PI, together with his collaborators in Poland, plans to work on the problem
of generalizing his notion of simplicial nonpositive curvature.

Nonpositive curvature relates to areas outside pure mathematics ranging from
robotics (via configuration spaces) to statistical mechanics. Coxeter groups are
central in many areas of pure mathematics ranging from geometry and topology to
dynamical systems to number theory and the theory of Lie groups. The study of
Artin groups are a generalization of Artin's braid groups. The braid groups also
have been in different areas of mathematics, for example, knot theory and
algebraic geometry. The proposed research will have an impact in the area of
nonpositive curvature, in the areas of Coxeter groups and Artin groups and other
related areas.
