
* 1007007
* Chromatic Stable Homotopy Theory and Derived Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/07/2012
* Paul Goerss,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 287,732.00

The chromatic picture of stable homotopy uses the algebraic geometry of formal
groups to organize and direct investigations into the deeper structures of the
field. The basic program is to gather local information and then try to assemble
that data into a more global picture. It is in the second step where we can use
constructions and information from the emerging field of derived algebraic
geometry. This proposal focuses on three projects, all growing out of this
local-to-global mixture. The most computational is an investigation of the
homotopy groups of the $K(2)$-local sphere; this is local by nature and we seek
a complete calculation. The other two projects are more global. The first is to
investigate the existence and non-existence of derived schemes (or stacks) with
level structure; that is, structured versions of the Hopkins-Miller topological
modular forms. Of interest here are the bad primes where interesting homotopy
theory arises from supersingular curves. The other project here is a look at
duality. A form of Serre-Grothendieck duality should hold in the derived
setting, but it will be homotopy theoretic in nature, not simply algebraic
geometry.

This project is in homotopy theory, which is a branch of topology, a modern
field that grew naturally out of geometry by studying phenomena that remain
invariant under continuous transformations, rather than rigid (e.g., angle-
preserving) transformations. Of particular importance in topology are the
continuous maps between large dimensional spheres; under a suitable equivalence
relation, this is the ring of stable homotopy groups of spheres. This notorious
difficult to calculate, or even to make conjectures about; therefore, in the
past few decades we have focused on trying to understand large-scale qualitative
phenomena. In summary, this is the main thrust of this project as well. It has
been very fruitful to detect these phenomena using tools from other fields,
especially algebraic geometry. The transition from topology to geometry is done
using homology theories, which is a way of linearizing behavior in topology.
Simply sticking to one such theory is a radical process, however, and it loses
too much data; therefore, we study families of such theories. The theory of
stacks is vital here, as this allows us to study symmetries across continuous
families of geometric objects -- especially when the self-symmetries can vary
non-continuously throughout the family, as is most certainly the case here.
