
* 1007255
* Groups and Algebraic Structures in Topological Quantum Field Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/23/2012
* Constantin Teleman,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 330,997.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1007255 Principal Investigator: Constantin Teleman

The proposed research comprises several, thematically related projects at the
interface of topology, 2-dimensional quantum field theory and category theory.
The first project, gauged mirror symmetry, combines group actions on projective
manifolds, equivariant K-theory and ideas from category theory (open-closed
TQFTs and a conjectural Brauer group of equivariant K-theory). One application
would be the determination of Gromov-Witten theory of GIT quotients from the
gauged Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold. A concrete description of
gauged topological quantum field theories in two dimensions is proposed, based
on recent progress by Kontsevich, Costello, Hopkins and Lurie on 'extended'
topological field theories. The PI has a concrete proposal for coupling a
2-dimensional TQFT to a compact symmetry group and quantizing the gauged theory.
This combines ideas from physics (Landau-Ginzburg super-potentials) with earlier
work by the PI and collaborators on equivariant (twisted) K-theory and the
general index formula on moduli of principal bundles over Riemann surfaces. The
second project explores the 'higher algebras' introduced by the PI and
collaborators as simplified models of higher categories, and the a toy example
of a homotopical TQFT for finite homotopy types. This is hoped to be a good
working ground for the interaction of exotic homology theories with ideas from
QFT. A third, closely related project is the construction of Chern-Simons gauge
theory as a 0-1-2-3 theory by topological methods, along the lines already
accomplished by the PI and collaborators for torus groups.

To explain the context of this research, one must recall that the fundamental
interactions governing energy and matter in the universe are believed to be
governed by quantum field theory, a sophisticated mathematical framework that
has evolved from the beginnings of quantum mechanics over the last century.
Quantum field theory has never been reconciled with general relativity --
another well-supported physical theory -- and much mathematical research over
the last six decades has centered around reconciling the two. Topological
quantum field theory is a toy attempt to come to grips with the problem while
avoiding the analytical difficulties: the notions of distance and magnitude (for
instance, mass) are abandoned, and the geometry of space-time is directly
related to the algebraic structure of the quantum field theory. Substantial
progress in understanding the algebraic structure has been made over the last
decade thanks to work by Kontsevich, Hopkins and Lurie. The PI's projects
revolve around integrating these recent developments with the idea of symmetry
-- in the form of gauge theory -- which is known to be indispensable in
realistic physical theories. (One should recall that the so-called 'standard
model' of particle physics, comprising the electromagnetic, weak and strong
interactions, is a gauge theory.)
