
* 1007260
* Open string topology and holomorphic curves
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/12/2010
* Michael Sullivan,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 112,036.00

The Principal Investigator plans to study algebraic structures that arise
naturally from invariants of Legendrian submanifolds in contact manifolds as
well as arbitrary submanifolds in smooth manifolds. More specifically, the
invariants for a Legendrian submanifold come from holomorphic curves in certain
symplectic manifolds, while the invariants for a smooth submanifold arise from
open string topology which is based on the intersection theory of the manifold's
path space. Both theories have algebraic structures guided by topological field
theory. Part of this project is to refine the language of differential graded
operad algebras to express the two theories in the similar algebraic language.
There is a growing body of evidence that suggests a connection between the
string topology of a manifold and the holomorphic invariants for its lift in the
symplectic cotangent bundle or contact unit cotangent bundle. The Principal
Investigator plans to define and compute some of these invariants, hopefully
leading to a connection between the two theories when the smooth submanifold is
a knot in Euclidean 3-space. The Principal Investigator also proposes several
more computational projects related to knots in 3-space and smooth surfaces in
4-space, also defined using holomorphic curves.

Contact geometry makes many appearances in physics, from optics to
thermodynamics to classical mechanics. For example, particles obeying the Least
Action Principal from mechanics translate into objects in contact geometry (or
its closely related field, symplectic geometry) known as holomorphic curves.
Studying these holomorphic curves have led to some powerful and sometimes
surprising discoveries about contact rigidity and contact dynamics. Knot theory
has applications in understanding large and small aspects of the universe, as
well as long DNA strands confined to small space. A central question in knot
theory is determining the complexity of knots which in turn requires developing
computable non-trivial knot invariants. Again holomorphic curves has recently
provided a plethora of such useful knot invariants. The Principal Investigator
plans to develop other knot invariants, motivated by string theory, that should
be connected to these invariants based on holomorphic curves.
