
* 1007619
* Stable homotopy methods in p-local group theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,05/24/2010
* Kari Ragnarsson,IL,DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2012
* USD 76,732.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator will employ methods from stable
homotopy theory to provide insight into the surprising relationship between
p-local group theory, modular representation theory and stable homotopy theory.
Specifically, the PI will first give a much simplified description of the
p-local finite group model for the homotopy theory of fusion systems. This shows
that a p-local finite group on a finite p-group is equivalent to map from the
classifying space into a p-complete, nilpotent space with a stable retract
satisfying Frobenius reciprocity up to homotopy. In recent work, joint with Radu
Stancu, the PI has shown that saturated fusion systems on a finite p-group are
in bijective correspondence with stable idempotents of the classifying space
that satisfy Frobenius reciprocity. The PI will extend this result to a
bijection between p-local finite groups and idempotents that satisfy Frobenius
reciprocity up to structured homotopies. The crucial question in the field is on
the existence and uniqueness of classifying spaces for saturated fusion systems
(in the form of p-local finite groups). Using results from this project, the
question can be approached by refining the current construction of classifying
spectra from being a construction up to homotopy to producing structured
classifying spectra, and steps will be taken in this direction.

Groups are fundamental objects in mathematics used to keep track of the
symmetries of an object (e.g. a set or a space). A group is said to act on an
object if that object exhibits the symmetries encoded by the group. Among such
objects the classifying space of a group is of special importance, as its
homotopical properties contain information about all possible actions of the
group on topological spaces. A finite group can be characterized as the
fundamental group of its classifying space --the set of paths in the space
beginning and ending in a fixed point where two paths are identified if one can
be continuously deformed into the other. For a given prime p, the p-local
structure of a group can be thought of as the system of symmetries of the group
that can be detected by actions on sets whose cardinality is a power of p. This
notion is made precise by fusion systems as introduced by Puig and developed by
Broto-Levi-Oliver. As conjectured by Martino-Priddy, and proved by Oliver,
p-localizing the classifying space mirrors this construction in topology. More
generally one can consider abstract fusion systems that do not necessarily come
from groups and p-local finite groups are a model for the corresponding
classifying space suggested by Broto-Levi-Oliver. In this project the PI will
elucidate this correspondence by providing a simpler model for classifying
spaces of abstract fusion systems and take important steps toward proving the
existence of classifying spaces for arbitrary fusion systems which is a
fundamental question in the field.
