
* 1007236
* Topological and Geometric Aspects of Discrete Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2010,06/10/2010
* Kevin Whyte,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 175,948.00

The research proposed is concerned with the geometric and topological aspects of
infinite discrete groups. The proposal divides into two main parts: the large
scale geometry of groups and the actions of groups on compact manifolds. Both of
these can be viewed as broad generalizations of the celebrated rigidity results
of Mostow and Margulis for lattices in Lie groups. A significant amount of
research in geometric group theory is devoted to understanding the large scale
geometry of lattices in Lie groups. In this vein, recent results of Eskin,
Fisher, and the PI establish rigidity for certain solvable Lie groups. The
techniques involved are only beginning to be understood, and the PI proposes to
develop them further. In particular the PI hopes to apply these techniques to
show the invariance of the solvable radical in more general Lie groups and to
the quasi-isometric classification of nilpotent Lie groups. The second focal
point of the proposal is the study of groups can appear as topological
symmetries of compact manifolds. There has been much work on this problem, but
the results almost all apply to specific low dimensional manifolds. Even for the
homeomorphisms of the circle there are many unresolved questions. The PI
proposes studying some classes of higher dimensional manifolds which do have
large groups of symmetries on the level of homotopy and to determine whether
these symmetries can be realized as groups of homeomorphism.

Roughly speaking, large scale (or coarse) geometry is the study of geometric
properties of objects "seen from far away". From this perspective, any bounded
object is indistinguishable from a point, and a line of dots is
indistinguishable from a solid line. This sort of geometry has been influential
recently in many areas of mathematics, notably group theory, topology, and
geometric analysis. This research will extend previous work of the PI exploring
the large scale geometry of several classes of mathematical objects, both
classical geometric spaces and objects only now being viewed in a geometric
manner. A particular focus of the proposal is the study of the possible coarse
geometries of groups of topological symmetries of relative simple objects built
out of familiar spaces, like spheres or other surfaces.
