
* 1007059
* The mapping class group and its finitely generated subgroups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2010,07/10/2010
* Nathan Broaddus,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 118,739.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to study the mapping class group and its
various normal finitely generated subgroups. The project comprises three main
parts. There is a well-known dictionary for translating results for the special
linear group over the integers into conjectures for the mapping class group. In
the first part of the project the Principal Investigator aims to further this
connection by studying homological questions surrounding an important object
associated to the mapping class group called the curve complex which is
analogous to the Tits building for the special linear group. An important
subgroup of the mapping class group is the Torelli group which one may view as
the difference between the mapping class group and arithmetic groups such as the
special linear group. The second part of the project aims to reprove Johnson's
finite generation of the Torelli group from a geometric perspective. The
Principal Investigator sees this as a step towards a possible finite
presentation for the Torelli group. The third part of the project looks at the
geometry of various finitely generated normal subgroups of the Torelli group.

Two-dimensional surfaces are fundamental mathematical objects that appear
throughout mathematics, physics, and other sciences. In mathematics surface
symmetries are a key ingredient in the construction and understanding of three-
dimensional objects. In string theory, a branch of theoretical physics, surfaces
arise as paths of strings in space-time called "worldsheets." Surface symmetries
have even arisen in the work of Jack Cowan (University of Chicago) on
understanding how images are processed by the visual cortex in the human brain.
Symmetries of surfaces have been studied mathematically since at least the time
of Euclid's Elements, but their modern study has developed rapidly over the past
century. The Principle Investigator proposes a study of symmetries of surfaces
from three points of view. Firstly, the Principal Investigator intends to
further a well-known analogy between symmetries of surfaces and symmetries of
multidimensional grids (the latter having a well-developed theory of their own).
In the second and third parts of the project the Principal Investigator intends
to investigate a particularly mysterious collection of surface symmetries called
the Torelli group which one may view as the difference between symmetries of
surfaces and symmetries of multidimensional grids.
