
* 1010298
* Cohomology Jumping Loci
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,06/21/2010
* Alexandru Suciu,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 131,911.00

This project explores from various angles the deep and intricate connections
between the topology and geometry of a space, the algebraic structure of its
fundamental group, and the algebraic geometry of the associated cohomology
jumping loci. The study is done in a context which abstracts two of the crucial
features that make the dictionary between topology and algebra work so well for
complements of hyperplane arrangements: formality (which leads to the Tangent
Cone Theorem, relating the characteristic and resonance varieties), and quasi-
projectivity (which insures that the characteristic varieties consist of
possibly translated subtori). Together, these two properties put strong
constraints on the geometry of the resonance varieties, leading to powerful
obstructions to finitely presented groups being realizable as fundamental groups
of smooth, (quasi-) projective complex varieties. Recently, new connections have
emerged, relating the cohomology jumping loci of a space to the homological
finiteness properties of its free abelian covers, and thereby to the structure
of the Dwyer-Fried and Bieri-Neumann-Strebel-Renz invariants. Generalizations of
the classical jump loci---from rank one local systems to the non-abelian
setting, and from cohomology rings to differential graded algebras---extend the
scope of the investigation, and broaden the range of its applicability.

The topological and group-theoretic methods utilized in this project shed new
light on the combinatorial and geometric structure of objects occurring in a
variety of contexts, allowing for cross-pollination between different fields,
with ideas originating in a given area being fruitfully applied in new settings.
The theory of cohomology jumping loci impacts the study of a wide array of
spaces and groups, including toric complexes and moment-angle complexes; right-
angled Artin and Coxeter groups; real and complex quasi-toric manifolds; Kaehler
and quasi-Kaehler manifolds; Milnor fibrations of hyperplane arrangements; as
well as configuration spaces and compactifications of moduli spaces. The study
of these objects, with their multiple connections to the theory of
singularities, graph theory, and low-dimensional topology, provides a rich
interplay between algebra, topology, and combinatorics, yielding applications to
areas ranging from topological robotics to theoretical computer science. The
investigation is being conducted together with several collaborators, as well as
graduate and undergraduate students. Participation in intensive research periods
and workshops is meant to introduce a new generation of students and young
researchers to a very active, interdisciplinary area of study.
