
* 1011857
* Graphs, Trees and Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2010,04/09/2013
* Karen Vogtmann,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2014
* USD 274,913.00

This project studies automorphism groups and deformation spaces of related
metric objects. The motivating examples include the group GL(n,Z) acting on the
deformation space of flat n-tori and the group Out(Fn) acting on the deformation
space of compact metric graphs with fundamental group Fn. The project has four
main components, which take off from these basic examples in various directions.
The first component, joint with Martin Bridson, studies rigidity properties of
Out(Fn) which limit the possibilities for maps between Out(Fn) and Out(Fm) and
constrain the possible actions of Out(Fn) on spheres, contractible manifolds and
CAT(0) spaces. The second component, joint with Ruth Charney, targets
automorphism groups of right-angled Artin groups. In recent work Charney and the
PI have shown that many properties shared by Out(Fn) and GL(n,Z) are in fact
shared by the outer automorphism groups of all right-angled Artin groups. The
tools used have been largely algebraic, but this project will develop new
geometric tools using CAT(0) geometry. The third component, joint with John
Smillie, considers deformation spaces of flat surfaces of arbitrary genus. The
proposal is to define a bordification of the space of marked translation
surfaces with a fixed number of singular points which descends to a
compactification of the moduli space of such translation surfaces. This is
motivated by analogous bordifications of spaces for SL(n, Z) and Out(Fn) and
combines ideas from both, and should be useful in studying cohomological
properties of these groups. The fourth part of the project, joint with Jim
Conant and Martin Kassabov, returns to Out(Fn) and investigates the rational
cohomology of Out(Fn) via the connection found by Kontsevich between this
cohomology and the cohomology of a certain Lie algebra associated to the Lie
operad.

A powerful tool in mathematics is to encode the structure of a geometric object
in an algebraic form. One can then use algebraic ideas to study the geometric
object, or geometric ideas to study the algebraic object. This proposal uses a
bootstrap of this idea to the next level: one can relate the group of {\it
transformations}, or {\it automorphisms} of an algebraic object to the space of
{\it deformations} of an associated geometric object. The underlying algebraic
objects are quite simple: they are free groups, free abelian groups and right-
angled Artin groups, but their automorphism groups are remarkably complex and
still poorly understood. Similarly, the associated algebraic objects (trees,
Euclidean spaces and CAT(0) spaces) are uncomplicated but their deformation
spaces exhibit complex behavior, which has implications in many areas of pure
and applied mathematics. The project will employ topological and geometric tools
to understand these deformation spaces and translate the information obtained
into new information about automorphism groups.
