
* 1034753
* Knots in Poland III; the conference on Knot Theory and its Ramifications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2010,06/18/2010
* Jozef Przytycki,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2011
* USD 28,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1034753 Principal Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki, Mikhail G.
Khovanov

This proposal asks for financial support for US based participants, for a 3-week
long summer program devoted to Knot Theory: Knots in Poland III: conference on
Knot Theory and its Ramifications. It will be a conference interspersed with
specialized workshops and tutorials. It will be third conference in the series
of large, very successful international conferences ``Knots in Poland". The
conferences will take place in Warsaw July 18-25 and in Banach Center in Bedlewo
July 25-August 4, 2010. Specifically, we propose to support about 15 graduate
students and 10 mathematicians without grant. As part of the conference we will
have a series of 3 talks by Tom Mrowka on his proof that Khovanov homology can
be understood as a page in a spectral sequence converging to a version of
Instanton Floer homology. A consequence of this is that Khovanov homology
detects the unknot. Knots have fascinated people from the dawn of the human
history. Much of the early knot theory was motivated by physics and chemistry
(e.g. Kelvin theory of vortex atoms). The fundamental problem in knot theory is
to be able to distinguish non-equivalent knots. There have been exciting new
developments in the area of Knot Theory in recent years. From the Jones,
Homflypt, and Kauffman polynomials, through quantum invariants of 3-manifolds,
Topological Quantum Field Theories, to relations with gauge theory type
invariants in 4-dimensional topology (Donaldson, Witten, etc). More recently,
Khovanov introduced homology theory of links which categorifies the Jones
polynomial (a chain complex is build on the Kauffman model of the Jones
polynomial). Soon after, Ozsvath and Szabo developed Heegaard-Floer homology,
that lifts the Alexander polynomial. These two significantly different theories
are closely related and the dependencies are the object of intensive study. One
can mention here Khovanov-Rozansky categorification of Homflypt polynomial,
categorification of the Kauffman bracket skein module of some 3-dimensional
manifolds, and the result of T.Mrowka that Khovanov homology detects the unknot.

The subject has significant applications and relations with biology, physics,
chemistry and the theory of computation. We feel that a conference on this
subject is highly appropriate at this time, and we strive to be in the frontier
of new development in knot theory and its ramifications. The project has broader
impact in several aspects. Knots in Poland conference brings together from all
over the word, third-world countries, former Soviet Union, minorities, women,
and provides an opportunity for researchers and students to share their latest
ideas and to collaborate with each other. The knowledge obtained on this
occasion will be disseminated by participants throughout the world.
Distinguished researchers (including about 10 woman) will deliver plenary talks
surveying the state of knowledge related to Knot Theory and its Ramifications.
PhD students and fresh PhD's will be encouraged to attend. We expect to publish
conference proceedings (as we did in the past) containing cutting-edge research
papers and lecture notes which will be suitable for research mathematicians,
students and readers with background in other exact sciences, including biology,
chemistry, computer science, and physics.

Conference Web Page: http://www.mimuw.edu.pl/~traczyk/knotpol2010/<http://www.mi
muw.edu.pl/%7Etraczyk/knotpol2010/>
