
* 1053428
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS)
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2011,12/27/2010
* Candice Price,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2011
* USD 24,960.00

The University of Iowa Mathematics Department has received recognition for its
outstanding minority mentoring program and has made a commitment to increase the
number of minority graduate students and scientists. The Underrepresented
Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) is a project
proposed by a group of underrepresented students in its department and will be
largely run and organized by graduate students. The conference is scheduled to
be held at the University of Iowa on April 1-3, 2011. It will be structured so
that speakers will give 20-minute parallel research talks in topology and
algebra. One distinguished graduate student will give an hour long presentation
and one invited faculty member, Dr. Emille Davie Lawrence of California
Polytechnic University Pomona, will give a one hour keynote address.

The broader impact of this event is that graduate students who attend USTARS
will be better equipped to find academic positions and continue the cycle of
research and collaboration. Attendees will be exposed to a greater variety of
current research, ideas, and results, and meet more underrepresented professors
and students in their generation who may become future collaborators or
colleagues. This is particularly important for students with great academic
potential but are not attending top tier research institutions schools that can
often be overlooked, despite a strong faculty and graduate student population.
The conference also promotes diversity in the mathematical sciences by
encouraging women and minorities to attend and give talks. The conference
Organizing Committee is remarkably diverse in gender, ethnicity, and educational
background, and hence is well-positioned to encourage participation by women and
minorities. The participants of the conference will continue to influence the
next generation of students in positive ways by serving as much needed mentors
and encouraging students in the mathematical sciences to advance themselves and
participate in research and conference events.

http://www.mathalliance.org/ustars.asp
