
* 1061232
* Finitely presented solvable groups at The City College of New York, Fall 2010 conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 01/15/2011,01/03/2011
* Gilbert Baumslag,NY,CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

This project is to support a conference on Finitely presented solvable groups at
The City College of New York, Fall 2010. In his address to the International
Congress of Mathematicians in 1983, Gromov talked about groups as geometric
objects. This followed on his proof in 1981 that finitely generated groups of
polynomial growth contain a nilpotent subgroup of finite index, which has helped
to focus attention on the extent to which the asymptotic properties of a
finitely generated solvable group has on its algebraic structure. This has led
to a number of results dealing with the quasi-isometries and rigidity of
solvable groups.Some of these results have been motivated by ideas coming out of
the theory of lie groups, where the semi-simple ones exhibit a rigidity that is
not shared by the solvable ones. This ongoing geometric study of what are
perhaps the simplest finitely generated solvable groups has put into sharp
relief the very nature of finitely presented solvable groups.

Groups arise in many different areas of mathematics, in physics, in chemistry
and in chrystallography among other disciplines. One of the reasons for this is
that they can be used as a tool for understanding and defining symmetry. Floor
patterns in many churches display a symmetry which can be analyzed and better
understood by using group theory and it is this kind of symmetry that groups
capture, but in a more abstract way. Groups also display an innate symmetry of
their own and in recent years efforts have been made to connect geometry to
group theory. This is an important area of current research. The objective of
this conference is to join the existing combinatorial and theoretical approach
of group theory to the geometric approach. The latter requires a great deal of
mathematical machinery. The work that is currently being undertaken involves
solvable groups introduced by Evariste Galois (who died in 1832 in a duel aged
21) to determine the nature of the solutions of everyday polynomial equations.
The aim of the conference is to make the two aspects of group theory available
to graduate students, postdocs and interested professionals.
