
* 1065784
* FRG: Collaborative Research: The topology and invariants of smooth 4-manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,06/06/2016
* Weimin Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 140,096.00

This collaborative project will study the topology of smooth 4-dimensional
manifolds, in connection with well-known problems in low-dimensional topology.
We will focus on the construction of new smooth manifolds with symplectic
structures, including Stein manifolds and symplectic fillings of certain contact
3-manifolds. Recent advances in techniques based on knot surgery and Luttinger
surgery for creating exotic manifolds with small Euler characteristic will be
coupled with computations of gauge-theoretic and symplectic invariants. We will
make use of 4-dimensional handlebody techniques in these constructions, with an
organizing principle being the search for 'corks' and 'plugs' as a technique for
changing the smooth structure. Techniques of gauge theory and symplectic
geometry will be used to investigate the classification of symplectic
4-manifolds and their symmetry groups.

The physical world of space and time is a 4-dimensional space whose local
structure is well understood but whose large-scale (or topological) properties
remain mysterious. This Focused Research Group will explore the global topology
of 4-dimensional spaces, with a goal of understanding what kinds of spaces
(called 4-dimensional manifolds) can exist as mathematical objects, and what the
properties of such manifolds are. Of particular interest will be the problem of
existence and uniqueness of symplectic structures, as well as that of
determining the symmetries of a given manifold. The group will investigate how
subtle changes in the smooth structure of a manifold can be achieved by gluing
together pieces of different manifolds. Such changes will be detected by
combining expertise from several disciplines, including powerful techniques
derived from gauge theories of mathematical physics.
