
* 1104751
* New Recursion Formulae and Integrability for Calabi-Yau Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2011,04/08/2011
* Motohico Mulase,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

The organizing committee, consisting of Vincent Bouchard (University of
Alberta), Tom Coates (Imperial College, London), Emma Previato (Boston
University), Jian Zhou (Tsinghua University, Beijing), and Motohico Mulase
(University of California, Davis) serving as chair, will organize a 5-day
workshop titled "New Recursion Formulae and Integrablity for Calabi-Yau Spaces"
at the Banff International Research Station during the week of October 16-21,
2011 (http://www.birs.ca/events/2011/5-day-workshops/11w5114). The planned
workshop has a clear set of focused goals, and is unique among conferences in
related subjects. The main objective is to establish a topological and geometric
foundation of a newly discovered topological recursion formula of 2007 by
physicists Eynard and Orantin in their work on random matrices, and its Gromov-
Witten theoretic realization due to string theorists Marino and Bouchard-Klemm-
Marino-Pasquetti.One of the major problems in this area is the Remodeling
Conjecture due to them. It states that both open and closed Gromov-Witten
invariants of an arbitrary toric Calabi-Yau 3-fold are, quite miraculously,
calculated by the Eynard-Orantin topological recursion based on the complex
analysis of the mirror curve. A good part of the workshop will be devoted to
attacking this unsolved conjecture. Another emphasis of the workshop is placed
on discovering yet unknown relation between the generating function of Gromov-
Witten invariants of Calabi-Yau spaces and integrable nonlinear partial
differential equations.

The subject matter of the planned Workshop, which is the first full-scale
international workshop specifically devoted to the topics mentioned above, does
not fit in a single discipline of mathematics. An important aspect of the
Workshop is its function of cross fertilization of different areas of
mathematics and theoretical physics. The origin of the main topic is in the soil
of statistical study of random matrices. It's geometric significance was
discovered by string theorists. It's mathematical nature apparently lies in
topology. The theory itself covers a large area of mathematics. So far
rigorously established examples of the theory range from hyperbolic geometry to
algebraic geometry and to combinatorics of topological graph theory. The
mathematical apparatus of these rigorous theories is the Laplace transform and
classical complex analysis. Any new understanding of the proposed topics is
expected to enhance our current knowledge of mirror symmetry, Gromov-Witten
theory, and certain combinatorial problems. The BIRS Workshop plans to bring a
wide variety of researchers, to nurture international and interdisciplinary
collaborations among young participants, and to generate a larger momentum in
the discipline. Since the key players of the subjects are postdoctoral
researchers and faculty members in their early careers, the Workshop is expected
draw the attention of many graduate students and postdoctoral scholars.
