
* 1104688
* Contact structures, open books, and connections between Heegaard Floer homology and the Khovanov-Rozansky link homology theories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2011,07/29/2011
* John Baldwin,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2012
* USD 139,727.00

Heegaard Floer homology is a collection of invariants of knots, 3-manifolds, and
smooth 4-manifolds, defined using symplectic geometry. It has changed the
landscape of low-dimensional topology over the last decade, and has, for
example, been instrumental in many of the recent advances in contact geometry.
This project is devoted to better understanding the internal workings of this
theory and its relationships to other link homology theories like Khovanov and
Rozansky¢s categorification of the HOMFLY polynomial. One of the PI¢s broad
goals is to use these relationships to develop more computable invariants of
knots, 3-manifolds, and contact structures. Another goal involves using Heegaard
Floer homology to better understand the correspondence between topological
features of open books and geometric properties of contact structures. Specific
aims include finding obstructions to a contact structure having support genus
one, determining whether Legendrian surgery preserves tightness, understanding
the relationship between fractional Dehn twist coefficient and fillability, and
developing a combinatorial spanning tree model for knot Floer homology. The PI
plans to use the latter to find an axiomatic description of knot Floer homology,
in part to show that it agrees with the monopole and instanton knot homologies
defined by Kronheimer and Mrowka using gauge theory.

The proposed project involves studying geometric structures on 3- and
4-dimensional manifolds. Understanding these spaces and structures is central to
understanding the shape of our macroscopic universe, and some of the theories
the PI intends to study have applications and origins in physics. Contact
structures, in particular, can serve as a probe with which to study these
spaces, and are also important in classical mechanics, thermodynamics, dynamical
systems, and in the study of liquid crystals. Another goal of the PI¢s proposal
is to develop new methods for understanding knots. Knots arise naturally in
molecules like DNA. Recent work, for example, has applied Floer homology to
determine how various enzymes in the body alter the knottedness of DNA.
Understanding these mechanisms is important for developing certain drugs.
