
* 1104348
* Equivariant motivic homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2011,05/20/2011
* Po Hu,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 108,505.00

The main part the investigator's proposed research is the application of
equivariant methods in two closely related areas, that of topology and of
algebraic geometry. One of the investigator's main ongoing projects (joint with
I. Kriz and K. Ormsby) is to apply the machinery of stable homotopy theory, such
as the Adams and Adams-Novikov spectral sequences, to Morel and Voevodsky's
motivic homotopy theory. Another of the investigator's projects in motivic
homotopy theory, also joint with I. Kriz and K. Ormsby, is the study of
equivariant motivic stable homotopy theory, which in turn also leads to new
information in the world of equivariant topology. Together with I. Kriz, the
investigator has a project studying equivariant spectra in topology arising from
the realizations of motivic spectra, such as the so-called topological hermitian
cobordism spectrum. The groups acting on such spectra contain Z/2, and the
actions incorporate a Real (or complex conjugation) action. As shown by the
recent work of Hill, Hopkins and Ravenel in solving the Kervaire invariant 1
problem, these objects are highly interesting sources of new homotopy
theoretical information. In addition, the investigator also has a project in
understanding string topology, as well as operad actions and deformation theory
in both algebra and topology. This aspect of the investigator's work closely
related to J. Lurie's recent notion of non-abelian Poincare duality on
manifolds.

The overall theme of the investigator's research is in the interaction between
two important areas of mathematics, that of algebraic topology and algebraic
geometry. Algebraic topology can be thought of as "purely qualitative" geometry,
where one is allowed to deform shapes or topological spaces, and associate to
them certain algebraic and numerical invariants. On the other hand, algebraic
geometry can be thought of as the study of certain much more rigid mathematical
objects, built essentially from the solution sets of algebraic equations. Morel
and Voevodsky have constructed a way of applying the methods of algebraic
topology to the area of algebraic geometry, giving rise to a new field of
mathematics, that of motivic homotopy theory. One of the investigator's projects
(joint with I. Kriz and K. Ormsby) is to apply certain well-established
machinery of algebraic topology to this world, which has the potential to answer
long-standing questions. Another project is to gain an understanding of
equivariant motivic homotopy theory, the goal of which is to shed light on
structures in motivic homotopy theory by adding in the actions of groups to the
story. In its turn, gaining an understanding of equivariant motivic homotopy
theory will also lead to new information about objects in topology itself.
