
* 1104690
* Contact manifolds and Heegaard Floer homology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2011,04/26/2013
* Vera Vertesi,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2015
* USD 126,256.00

The proposed project is devoted to deepen the connection of two seemingly
different subfields of low dimensional topology, namely contact topology and
Heegaard Floer homologies. The invariants of Legendrian knots in Heegaard Floer
homology gave several first proofs of new phenomenons in knot theory. During
this project the PI would like to understand relations between the already
defined knot invariants for Legendrian knots, see how these invariants are
related for concordant Legendrian knots and use these invariants together with
other tools to distinguish and hopefully classify Legendrian representations of
a wide class of knots. Contact geometry provided a tool for proving results in
Heegaard Floer homology. As part of the proposed projects the PI would like to
use tools from contact geometry to give a lower bound for the rank of Heegaard
Floer homology for a manifold that contains an incompressible surface.

Low dimensional topology describes our physical world; the space we live in is a
3-dimensional manifold while space-time is a 4-dimensional manifold. The
proposed project is aimed to deepen the connection between two subfields of low
dimensional topology that are inspired by physics in different ways. The first
is the theory of contact manifolds, which arise quite naturally as phase spaces
of moving objects. The other is Heegaard Floer homology which is obtained by
associating to an object a configuration space of constrained functions and
computing the space's algebro-topological invariants.
