
* 1104329
* International Conference on Singularity Theory and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2011,06/09/2011
* Laurentiu Maxim,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2013
* USD 29,183.00

Singularity theory is a meeting place of many disparate areas of mathematics,
where different types of ideas, techniques and results merge together. The
modern theory of singularities dates back to the 1960s, with the pioneering work
of Thom, Hironaka, Brieskorn, Zariski, and many other renowed mathematicians.
More recently, Singularity theory promoted vigorous interchanges among
mathematical fields such as algebraic and geometric topology, algebraic
geometry, number theory, and more applied fields such as the study of
configurations in robot motion planning. An International Conference in
Singularity Theory and Applications will be organized in Hefei, China, during
July 25-31, 2011, and it will be hosted by the University of Science and
Technology of China. The conference will be research-oriented, intended to
disseminate recent developments, but it will also have a significant educational
component, featuring introductory lectures so as to better strengthen
connections among the assorted research groups represented and to provide access
points for younger researchers and students.

In the last century, considerable effort has been directed towards studying
manifolds - spaces that locally look uniform, at each point and in each
direction. This effort has been immensely successful; a substantial part of our
insight has been gained through the study of various invariants (e.g.,
characteristic numbers and classes), the surgery program, etc. In recent
decades, topologists have studied "singular" spaces with increasing interest,
due to their numerous occurrences and applications within pure mathematics
(algebraic geometry, number theory) and outside pure mathematics (mathematical
physics, robot motion planning). In contrast to a manifold, a singular space may
locally look different from point to point. The study of topological properties
of singular spaces developed into the field of Singularity theory. The proposed
conference will focus around recent developments in this fast advancing field of
research.

For more details about the conference, please see:
http://www.math.wisc.edu/~maxim/conf/Hefei/Hefei.html
