
* 1104406
* Invariants in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2011,04/25/2013
* Ciprian Manolescu,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2014
* USD 341,371.00

The main topic of this project is Floer homology and related invariants in low-
dimensional topology. Floer homology is an infinite dimensional version of Morse
theory which has been used to construct various invariants of knots,
3-manifolds, 4-manifolds, etc. In turn, these invariants can answer subtle
questions about the respective topological objects. One source of invariants
with numerous topological applications is Heegaard Floer theory. For example,
the Heegaard Floer invariant for knots (called knot Floer homology) is able to
detect the genus of a knot. Originally, all the Heegaard Floer invariants were
defined in terms of pseudo-holomorphic curves in symmetric products. Recently,
the Heegaard Floer invariants of knots, 3-manifolds and 4-manifolds have all
been given combinatorial descriptions, based on grid diagrams. One focus of this
project is to improve our understanding of these combinatorial descriptions. The
PI will also work on finding connections between knot Floer homology and other
knot invariants, such as the Khovanov-Rozansky homologies; on extending Heegaard
Floer theory to manifolds with corners; and on constructing new Floer-theoretic
invariants of three-manifolds using moduli spaces of flat connections.

The proposed research is on topology, an area of mathematics that studies
geometric objects such as curved spaces (manifolds), and knots in space. One
useful method of studying manifolds and knots is through topological quantum
field theories (TQFT's), which are certain toy models used in Mathematical
Physics to explore quantum theories about the universe. TQFT's are of interest
to topologists because they contain information about the possible shapes of
space in various dimensions. An important problem is the classification of these
shapes, and this is particularly difficult in four dimensions. Because our
macroscopic space-time has four dimensions, the properties of four-dimensional
shapes are an essential input for quantum physicists and cosmologists looking
for geometric models for the universe. The goal of this project is to study the
TQFT's which hold the most promise for our understanding of four-dimensional
shapes.
