
* 1105402
* Character varieties of surfaces: classical and quantum aspects
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2011,08/30/2011
* Francis Bonahon,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,608.00

The Project proposes to investigate the character varieties of surfaces,
consisting of homomorphisms from the fundamental group of a surface to a Lie
group. Character varieties occur in many areas of mathematics and mathematical
physics. The Project combines several aspects of character varieties, involving
in particular geometry, quantum topology and dynamical systems. Its overarching
thread is to capitalize on various techniques and insights that, over the years,
have been developed for certain low-dimensional groups and to apply these to a
wider range of Lie groups and problems. The Project is articulated along two
main themes. The first theme involves classical geometry and is focused on the
case where the Lie group is the special linear group. It proposes to analyze the
so-called Hitchin component of the corresponding character variety. The second
theme is centered on the quantization of character varieties. In particular, one
of the main goals of the Project is to classify all representations of the
Kauffman skein algebra. A final part of the Project is devoted to the
3-dimensional implications of this analysis of representations of the Kauffman
skein algebra, and in particular to applications to the Volume Conjecture.

Many phenomena in mathematics and mathematical physics involve the mathematical
notion of flat bundle over a surface or, equivalently, of homomorphisms from the
fundamental group of a surface to a Lie group. In particular, the case where the
Lie group consist of 2-by-2 matrices is now relatively well understood, because
of its relationship to (non-euclidean) hyperbolic geometry. The thrust of the
Project is to build on this expertise to attack more complicated Lie groups and
to investigate more complex phenomena. It borrows ideas from the theory of
dynamical systems (popularized under the name of "chaos theory") and from
quantum field theory in physics.
