
* 1105520
* Self-similar groups of rooted tree automorphisms
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,08/25/2011
* Zoran Sunik,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2014
* USD 122,813.00

The suggested research plan centers around properties of self-similar groups
acting on rooted trees. In most general terms, the theory of groups acting on
rooted, spherically homogeneous, trees can be understood as study of residually
finite groups by using the language, methods, ideas and the intuition from
topology and geometry. The self-similarity of the object of action (the tree)
and the presence of a fixed vertex (the root) in the theory of groups acting on
rooted trees lead to a set of natural finiteness conditions, such as being a
generated by a finite self-similar set, having rigid stabilizers of finite
index, being defined by finitely many forbidden tree patterns, having finite
nucleus, etc. Such conditions play a crucial role in the proposed problems and
directions of study involving questions on presentations of self-similar groups,
Bieri-Neumann-Strebel Sigma invariants, virtual endomorphisms and their
applications, finitely constrained groups and other group shifts on trees,
relations to Hausdorff dimension, and algorithmic problems, with special
attention given to the conjugacy problem.

In many endeavors, in and outside of mathematics, understanding is achieved in
two, often intertwined, phases. Namely, in the first phase one seeks
understanding of some classes of objects and situations distinguished by their
simplicity or regularity, and in the second understanding of the ways in which
they fit together to build, or at least approximate, the more complex ones.
Since, by its very nature, the notion of self-similarity concerns entities in
which copies of the original can be found at various scales within the entity
itself, the approach of building/understanding complex self-similar structures
from simpler and more regular ones seems particularly well suited. The proposed
research contributes to both natural phases in the understanding of self-similar
group actions on rooted trees. For instance, all finite self-similar groups are
being characterized, and they serve as the building blocks from which the
finitely constrained groups, and more generally all self-similar groups, are put
together. On the other hand, the decidability of algorithmic questions is
explored in contexts in which the building blocks are already well understood
and the solution of the problem in the simple instances could possibly be
assembled into a solution in the composite structure.
