
* 1105058
* Manifolds, Moduli Spaces and Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2011,07/01/2013
* Soren Galatius,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 374,243.00

The proposed research will continue the development of a relatively new area of
mathematics in which homotopy theory is used to study various moduli spaces. An
important early result this area is the solution, by Madsen and Weiss, of a
conjecture of Mumford. Their result concerns the group of symmetries of closed
two-dimensional manifolds or, equivalently, it concerns the moduli space of such
manifolds. A major part of Galatius' proposed activity will study the extension
of this theory to manifolds of higher dimension. This subject lies in the
overlap between algebraic topology and other branches of mathematics, with
expected applications in algebraic geometry, symplectic geometry, and possibly
theoretical physics.

Galatius' research will concern the study of manifolds and their symmetries. A
manifold is a generalized versions of space, appearing all over mathematics and
science. The defining property of a manifold is that it is locally parametrized
by a finite number of real parameters (for example, the surface of the earth is
locally parametrized by two parameters, longitude and latitude). A classic topic
in algebraic topology, Galatius' field of research, is the classification of
manifolds: how does one decide whether two manifolds are isomorphic, and how
does one write a list of all possible manifolds. A related classical problem is
the classification of symmetries of manifolds (for example, rotation about an
axis is a symmetry of the sphere). Galatius' research will apply new methods to
study these classic questions.
