
* 1105407
* RUI: Metric and Topological Properties of Self-Similar Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,08/25/2011
* Jennifer Taback,ME,Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 154,112.00

The principal investigator proposes proposes research in two main areas which
lie at the intersection of geometric group theory and topology. Ever since
Gromov's celebrated theorem on polynomial growth which related a purely
algebraic property with the large scale geometry of a group, researchers have
been interested in what one can learn from studying finitely generated infinite
groups via the geometry of their associated Cayley graphs. One line of proposed
research seeks to continue this program for certain families of self-similar
groups and some generalizations of these groups. The second area of proposed
research arises from topological fixed point theory and concerns groups for
which every automorphism has infinite Reidemeister number, a property which has
other topological consequences. The principal investigator and collaborator P.
Wong are interested in a geometric interpretation of this number for the
families of groups studied, building on their previous work. The self-similar
groups and generalizations studied by the principal investigator include the
family of groups whose Cayley graphs (with respect to an appropriate generating
set) are Diestel-Leader graphs, or horocyclic products of trees, generalizing
geometrically the classical lamplighter groups.

The principal investigator proposes several projects in the area of geometric
group theory. This field studies fundamental mathematical objects called groups
from a geometric point of view. Symmetry groups are a typical example of a
mathematical group. The study of symmetry groups was used, for example, to
discern that the shape of DNA was a double helix. The proposed work of the
principal investigator is related to self-similar groups; the appearance of
self-similarity in mathematics and nature is prevalent, from colorful fractals
to a study of the Maine coastline. In mathematics, self similar groups are
defined relative to their action on an infinite tree; trees, or graphs without
circuits, are fundamental objects in the study of combinatorics and in computer
science. In computer science, for example, trees are used to implement efficient
search algorithms. A self similar group has instructions for a "rearrangement"
of a tree in a particular way. The research questions above all relate to the
interaction between the geometric and algebraic structure attached to such a
group, and what one can learn about algebraic properties by studying geometry,
and vice versa.
