
* 1105643
* Representation Theory and Homological Stability in Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2011,07/23/2013
* Benson Farb,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2015
* USD 440,925.00

The study of the (co)homology of various moduli spaces, mapping class groups and
arithemtic groups is a central topic in topology, with connections to algebraic
geometry, number theory, combinatorial group theory and more. The problems on
which the PI proposes to work include the following. 1. Confirming a broad
conjectural picture of the cohomology of pure braid groups, Torelli-type groups,
and congruence subgroups. Such conjectures are phrased in the language of {\em
representation stability}, a theory (recently discovered by the PI and T.
Church) that imports representation theory as a powerful new tool into the study
of homological stability phenomena. 2. Applying cohomological computations to
computing arithmetic statistics for algebraic varieties, for polynomials, and
for maximal tori in algebraic groups over finite fields. 3. Giving a deeper
geometric understanding of the Morita-Mumford-Miller classes via a remarkable
coincidence between certain characteristic numbers, as discovered by the PI and
T. Church. 4. Constructing a large number of linearly independent unstable
cohomology classes in mapping class groups and arithmetic groups. While it has
been indirectly deduced that super-exponentially many such dimensions of such
cohomology must exist, almost no such classes are known. The technique proposed
here is a new one, using torsion groups to detect rational homology classes. 5.
Constructing $p$-torsion in the homology of level $p$ congruence subgroups of
arithmetic groups, mapping class groups, and other groups. Again the technique
here is new, and has already been applied successfully by the PI and T. Church.

Moduli spaces, or the spaces of shapes, are fundamental objects in mathematics.
Understanding their structure and describing their basic topological properties
is an important problem. Such descriptions are needed if one wants to understand
the evolution of shapes over time, or if one wants to find the most efficient
shape needed to solve a problem. The problem is the topological structure of
moduli spaces is extremely complicated to describe. The purpose of this proposal
is to apply the powerful machinery of representation theory in order to give a
simpler, easier-to-work-with encoding of these complicated structures. The PI
and T. Church discovered that such a language is applicable to structures all
over mathematics, allowing for new descriptions and new insights into the
structure of complicated objects. The PI proposes to apply these ideas to a
variety of problems, with applications to topology, Lie algebras, and counting
problems in number theory.
