
* 1105674
* Open Books, Lefschetz Fibrations, and Related Questions in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2011,05/19/2011
* Olga Plamenevskaya,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2015
* USD 133,906.00

This project focuses on contact and symplectic topology in dimensions 3 and 4.
Due to a result of Giroux, a topological insight into contact structures is
offered by open book decompositions of 3-manifolds. Open books are related to
Lefschetz fibrations on 4-manifolds; the latter provide a topological approach
to Stein and symplectic structures. The PI plans to study these structures using
low-dimensional techniques together with invariants from Heegaard Floer theory.
Specific goals include, for example, the study (joint with M. Hedden) of
Heegaard Floer contact invariants for rational open books. These will have
important applications to surgeries on contact manifolds, and will allow to
prove tightness for new classes of contact structures. In another project (joint
with T. Mark and based on the previous work of the PI and J. Baldwin)
Plamenevskaya will try to obtain invariants of Lefschetz fibrations on
4-manifolds from a certain spectral sequence in Heegaard Floer homology. She
also hopes to develop a better understanding of the 4-dimensional Heegaard Floer
invariants, and to use these (perhaps along with Lefschetz fibrations) to study
certain exotic phenomena in 4 dimensions.

Understanding the shape of the space-time world and of other related objects is
a fundamental problem. The space we live in is an example of a 3-dimensional
manifold (in general, manifolds can be curved or twisted, or have holes in
them). With the addition of time, we obtain a 4-dimensional manifold. Low-
dimensional topology studies the shape of manifolds of dimension 3 and 4. Knots
are another object of research in low-dimensional topology; they have practical
importance for disciplines outside mathematics (for example, DNA and some
polymers are knotted). The goal of the present project is to study 3- and
4-dimensional manifolds equipped with contact (for 3-manifolds) and respectively
symplectic (for 4 manifolds) structures. These structures originate in
mechanics, optics and hydrodynamics, and play a major role in mathematics. The
study of sympectic and contact structures lies at the crossroads of several
important subjects in topology and uses various tools, including gauge theory
(originating from physics), knot theory, and various topological "building
blocks" decompositions, such as those given by open books and Lefschetz
fibrations. The present proposal touches upon many of these aspects; the PI's
goal is both to construct new tools and to find new applications of the theory.
