
* 1105692
* RUI: Relating quantum and classical topology and geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2011,05/19/2011
* Helen Wong,MN,Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 124,770.00

The proposed research focuses on a construction that lies at the core of quantum
topology, namely the Kauffman skein algebra of a space. This combinatorial
object was first defined with the Jones polynomial in mind and thus plays a
central role in the corresponding Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev topology quantum
field theory for 3-manifolds. Later, it was realized in terms of hyperbolic
geometry, namely as a quantization of the PSL(2,C)-character variety. However,
the relationships between the various interpretations remain somewhat
mysterious. By better understanding the algebraic structure of the Kauffman
skein algebra, the PI hopes to facilitate further applications of quantum theory
to problems in 3-manifold theory and to uncover relationships with existing
classical topological invariants. This project also continues the work of
Bonahon and the PI to classify representations of the Kauffman bracket skein
algebra, an endeavor which combines skein theoretic arguments with the
representation theory of the quantum Teichmuller space.

From its inception, quantum topology has been a bridge between mathematics and
mathematical physics. Topology is an area of mathematics concerned with the
intrinsic properties of a space, that is, properties that are preserved under
continuous deformations. This is in contrast to geometry, where there is a
definite concept of distance between points in the space and deformations are
not allowed. Circa 1980, researchers developed a new topological quantum field
theory which, as its nomenclature suggests, drew from both quantum physics and
topology. This new theory opened up exciting avenues for research, and in
particular has allowed many mathematical theorems and constructions to find
applications in physics, quantum computation, and beyond. Conjectured deep
connections between geometry and quantum theory are too becoming clearer and is
a subject of the proposed research. Indeed, the main goal is to strengthen the
relationships between these three - quantum theory, topology, and geometry.
