
* 1106865
* West Coast Algebraic Topology Summer School
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2011,05/27/2011
* Dev Sinha,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1106865 Principal Investigator: Dev Sinha, Ralph Cohen

The principal organizers will be program organizers for a one-week summer school
program in algebraic topology, to be hosted at the University of Oregon. This
summer school will bring thirty graduate students and early-career
mathematicians together for an introduction to an area in topology which is ripe
for investigation, and whose techniques will inform and inspire developments
throughout topology. This summer school will use a unique blend of pedagogical
tools, combining elements which have been successful in other settings. Younger
researchers will be involved with both organizing and giving talks. Attendees
will be encouraged to work problems, fill in background, and do reading together
in addition to attending lectures.

The West Coast Topology Summer School continues a series that began in summer
2010 and will strengthen the knowledge base of topologists and others who use
topology and build a cohort of junior researchers familiar with recent
developments in the subject. The program organizers of the Summer School are the
principal investigators, together with Alejandro Adem of the University of
British Columbia and the Pacific Institute of Mathematical Sciences (PIMS). PIMS
is a partner in the project, which will bring together US--based graduate
students, largely from the western United States, and Canadian graduate students
sponsored by PIMS. In its role as a basic study of shape, topology has
significant ramifications in other areas of mathematics, from basic counting
problems (combinatorics) to solutions of equations (algebra) to applications and
extensions of the calculus (analysis). More broadly, knowledge of topology is
essential for example in studying the structure of the early universe, in
designing a robot arm with a minimal number of controllers, and in searching
large data sets for meaningful groupings as successfully done recently for study
of breast cancer. This summer school will strengthen the ties between basic
areas of theoretical mathematics. Mathematicians from underrepresented
backgrounds will be vigorously recruited. Graduate students and post-docs will
gain hands-on experience with some of the most important developments of
contemporary mathematics, preparing them to be future leaders of the field.
Participants will enlarge their professional networks, which is especially
critical given the geographical distances faced by mathematicians in the western
half of North America. Organizers and participants will also have the
opportunity to reflect upon the array of pedagogical tools employed, and might
employ some themselves in training graduate students and undergraduates or
reaching out to fellow scientists and the general public.
