
* 1111680
* Connections between Homology Theories for Knots and Three-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,07/15/2016
* Stephan Martin Wehrli,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2017
* USD 110,228.00

Khovanov homology and Heegaard Floer homology are powerful invariants for knots
and three-manifolds, which were discovered around the year 2000, and which have
since stirred a tremendous amount of research activity. In particular, both
Khovanov homology and Heegaard Floer homology have been used to give new proofs
of the topological Milnor conjecture and of the existence of exotic smooth
structures on the open four-ball. Previously, such results had only been
accessible via gauge theory. While Khovanov homology is defined combinatorially,
via a construction which is motivated by the representation theory of quantum
groups, Heegaard Floer homology is defined analytically, through moduli spaces
of solutions of differential equations. Around 2008, Heegaard Floer homology was
extended to an invariant for three-manifolds with non-empty boundary, called
"bordered Floer homology", which can be used to compute Heegaard Floer homology
combinatorially whenever a decomposition of a three-manifold into suitable
smaller pieces is given. A main goal of this project is to study the
relationship between bordered Floer homology and Khovanov homology for tangles.
Comparing these two theories will expectedly shed more light on the geometric
content of Khovanov homology and thus make Khovanov homology more suited to
applications. Moreover, the envisioned relationship between bordered Floer
homology and Khovanov homology will provide an example of a perhaps more general
connection between symplectic geometry and representation theory. Other goals of
this project are to develop new homology theories for contact three-manifolds,
and to analyze the properties of Khovanov homology groups of n-cables of knots.

Mathematicians have long been interested in classifying topological spaces that
are locally three-dimensional (like our physical universe) or locally four-
dimensional (like four-dimensional space-time). Related to the problem of
classifying such spaces is the problem of classifying knotted loops embedded in
a given three-dimensional space. Over the past two decades, mathematicians have
used ideas coming from several different areas of mathematics and mathematical
physics (in particular from symplectic geometry, quantum field theory, string
theory, and loop quantum gravity) to develop powerful new tools for classifying
knots and low-dimensional spaces. The most notable ones among these new tools
are Khovanov homology and Heegaard Floer homology. This proposal aims to
investigate the connections between certain generalizations of Khovanov homology
and Heegaard Floer homology, and to use these connections to study knot
theoretical problems. Mathematical knot theory has applications in biomedical
research, where it is used to study the processes that are responsible for
unraveling DNA strands during cell division. Thus, this project is important not
only from a theoretical perspective, but also for its potential applications to
biomedical sciences.
