
* 1137422
* Knots in Washington: Conferences on Knot Theory and its Ramifications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2011,08/26/2011
* Jozef Przytycki,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 66,048.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-1137422 Principal Investigator: Jozef H. Przytycki, Valentina S.
Harizanov, Alexander N. Shumakovitch, Hao Wu

This award provides partial support for participants of a series of conferences
devoted to knot theory and its ramifications. It is a continuation of the very
successful series of the ``Knots in Washington'' conferences held every semester
in the greater Washington, DC area since the Fall of 1995. This proposal asks
for support for four conferences over the next three years. The first such
conference is expected to be held in Fall of 2011, focusing on connections
between Khovanov homology, homology of multi-shelves (e.g. quandles or Boolean
algebras), and Quantum Computing, and relating to the general idea of
categorification including categorification of skein modules. It will be the
33rd conference in the Knots in Washington Conference Series. There have been
exciting new developments in the area of knot theory and 3-manifold topology in
the last 30 years. From the Jones polynomial and quantum invariants of
3-manifolds, through Vassiliev invariants, topological quantum field theories,
to relations with gauge theory type invariants in 4-dimensional topology (e.g.
Donaldson, Witten). More recently, again, a new development in quantum topology
has emerged in the form of ``Khovanov homology", a generalization of the Jones
type polynomials to homology of chain complexes that significantly generalizes
the invariants. Also, the categorification of the Kauffman bracket skein module
of 3-manifolds has been proposed and developed for some manifolds. The relation
to Hochschild homology of algebras has been discovered and studied. The
(quantum) complexity of computing the Jones polynomial and Turaev-Viro
invariants have been analyzed. "Knots in Washington" meetings would provide a
place for researchers in described above areas to communicate and work with one
another. Distinguished researchers will give plenary talks surveying the state
of knowledge related to Khovanov homology. PhD students and fresh PhD's will be
encouraged to attend. We strive to be always in the frontier of new developments
in Knot Theory and its ramifications. Our choice of conference topics also
reflects the strength of our topology group at the George Washington University.

Knots in Washington provides an opportunity for researchers in the area to share
their latest ideas and to collaborate with each other. The presentations include
plenary talks by distinguished researchers, as well as short talks by various
participants. Over the years, we have attracted a large number of postdoctors,
graduate students, and some undergraduates. In the greater Washington DC area,
Knots in Washington helps to bring together the relevant researchers, and to
boost the research activities in the region. Internationally, Knots in
Washington has attracted researchers from all over the world, and is now
considered as a major conference in knot theory and low-dimensional topology. We
expect to publish conference proceedings (as we did in the past) containing
cutting-edge research papers and lecture notes which will be suitable for
research mathematicians, students and readers with background in other exact
sciences, including biology, chemistry, computer science, and physics.
Conference Web Page: http://home.gwu.edu/~przytyck/knots/index.html
