
* 1205786
* RUI: Algebraic topology of knot and link spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2012
* Ismar Volic,MA,Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2015
* USD 151,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1205786, Principal Investigator: Ismar Volic

Insert abstract here for an award recommendation.

The main goal of this project is a better understanding of the topology of knot
and link spaces as well as more general embedding spaces. The principal
investigator proposes to use techniques such as calculus of functors,
cosimplicial spaces, operads, and configuration space integrals to prove results
about homology and homotopy of knots, links, homotopy links, and braids in
Euclidean spaces of various dimensions. In particular, these proposed projects
include a program to describe the rational homotopy type of these spaces; to
combine configuration space integrals with the theory of Milnor invariants; and
to better understand, if not complete resolve, of the issue of the separation of
knots and links by finite type invariants. Moreover, the principal investigator
plans to unify the various ways in which operads appear in the applications of
calculus of functors in knot theory and further the understanding and uses of
configuration space integrals. Some of his long-term projects will attempt to
connect calculus of functors point of view in embedding theory to Khovanov
homology as well as to the study of embeddings of surfaces and the mapping class
group.

Knot and link spaces represent some of the most interesting objects of study in
topology because they are easy to define and visualize and because they are of
interest to physicists and chemists. Some fundamental questions about knots,
such as their classification, or construction of efficient ways of telling them
apart, still generate a wealth of exciting research. The principal
investigator's proposed work intends to bring us closer to answering these
questions. Furthermore, the techniques he plans to use are quite general and
point to new connections between topology, geometry, combinatorics, and physics.
These connections will potentially help answer several important conjectures
about the structure of knot and link spaces and introduce new points of view in
algebraic topology in general.
