
* 1207774
* Computations in Equivariant Homotopy and Algebraic K-Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2012,05/30/2012
* Michael Hill,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2016
* USD 293,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1207774, Principal Investigator: Michael A. Hill

This project seeks to broaden our knowledge of equivariant computations and, by
universality of certain maps, of the homotopy groups of spheres. Equivariant
homotopy calculations are notoriously difficult, hybridizing representation
theory and classical stable homotopy theory in beautiful, and sometimes
mysterious, ways. The recent solution by the principal investigator, Hopkins,
and Ravenel to the Kervaire Invariant One problem introduced several new tools
and techniques to equivariant homotopy, rigidifying earlier homotopical work and
generalizing naturally occurring filtrations. In this project, the PI intends to
use these new, exciting tools to continue making computational inroads in
equivariant homotopy. There are two main approaches: computing equivariant
homotopy groups of the families of spectra introduced by the PI, Hopkins, and
Ravenel, and reconceptualizing parts of the cyclotomic trace approaches to
algebraic K-theory. The former uses slice filtration techniques to tackle
spectra like the Hopkins-Miller spectra, allowing a direct attack on the stable
homotopy groups of spheres from a non-traditional approach. The latter builds on
the norm machinery to rewrite the classical constructions in the equivariant
approaches to algebraic K-theory, recasting them in computationally more
amenable forms.

The project addresses directly the heart of algebraic topology: computing
numbers and invariants to understand spaces. The goal of algebraic topology is
to systematically build a connection between algebraic objects like numbers and
geometric objects like spaces. Equivariant algebraic topology remembers a
collection of symmetries inherent in a space as part of the data, systematically
grouping spaces with the same symmetries, and the numbers and invariants
produced must reflect this. Remembering the extra structure makes richer, but
more complicated, computations, and it allows us to tease apart otherwise
interconnected problems. For example, using equivariant methods, the principal
investigator, Hopkins, and Ravenel solved the Kervaire Invariant One problem,
the oldest outstanding problem in algebraic topology with roots dating back to
the 1930s. This in turn gave information about how we can build spaces out of
simpler ones like spheres. This project aims to build on the techniques
developed in the solution, tackling other computational problems in algebra and
topology.
