
* 1207812
* Floer homology and low-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2012,05/21/2012
* Joshua Greene,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2015
* USD 155,613.00

The principal investigator (PI) will pursue a collection of concrete problems in
low-dimensional topology, using a combination of traditional topological
techniques, Heegaard Floer homology, combinatorics, and whatever else might come
in handy. As a sample list, the PI hopes to address the questions of which
alternating knots have unknotting number one; which alternating knots bound
smoothly slice disks in the four-ball (joint work with Brendan Owens); and which
3-manifolds admit a strong Heegaard diagram (joint work with Adam Levine and
John Luecke). In each of these projects, Heegaard Floer homology provides
important information and sets up a challenging combinatorial problem, which in
turn requires modern methods to solve.

Low-dimensional topology is concerned with the properties of curves, surfaces,
and 3- and 4-dimensional spaces -- objects that we can visualize, though
sometimes with a bit of effort. On one hand, this field has a rich tradition in
the sciences: it owes a lot of its development to physics, both classical and
modern; it impacts biology, where the knotting of DNA plays a significant role;
and it interacts with fields all across mathematics. On the other hand, it has a
distinctly visual nature that is reflected in the arts: for example, through
Celtic knots, motifs in ancient architecture, and Escher's prints. The goal of
the PI's proposal is to study some attractive and simply-stated problems in low-
dimensional topology. In fact, many of these problems focus on the mathematical
properties of Celtic (a.k.a. alternating) knots. While some of these problems
have been around for many decades, they have only recently become accessible
through the advent of sophisticated techniques from nearby fields (Floer
homology and combinatorics). The interplay between these different fields
fascinates the PI.
