
* 1207296
* Quasi-Isometries and Boundaries in Rigidity
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2012,06/26/2012
* Tullia Dymarz,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 156,978.00

This research proposal concerns Gromov's program on the large scale geometry of
finitely generated groups. The main theme present in the PI's research is how
analysis on a suitably defined boundary at infinity can be used to answer
questions about the large scale geometry of certain groups. While the PI plans
to study traditional boundaries of hyperbolic groups the main focus of this
proposal is on boundaries of solvable groups. One of the main tool used by the
PI is recent work of Eskin-Fisher-Whyte and Peng on the structure of quasi-
isometries of certain solvable groups. By studying boundaries of these groups
the PI has contributed to and hopes to expand the understanding of quasi-
isometries between solvable groups as well as lattice envelopes of these groups.
More importantly the PI has been able to contribute to basic questions raised by
the Gromov program. In particular, the PI has providing counter examples to
demonstrate the distinction between quasi-isometric and bilipschitz equivalence.
This is a little understood distinction that the PI plans to explore.

Quasi-isometries provide a notion of similarity between mathematical spaces when
viewed from a far away distance. A useful analogy is to imagine that two forests
composed of different trees will look like indistinguishable green regions when
viewed from a satellite. Alternatively, one can visualize the `large scale
structure' of a space by placing the viewer inside the (infinite) space and
viewing the 'boundary' at infinity. This is much like a viewer gazing out to the
horizon. It is these two perspectives and their interplay that are at the core
of this proposal. Both notions have been fruitful recently in the study of
problems in many areas of mathematics but particularly when the mathematical
spaces arise from algebraic objects (finitely generated groups). The PI's
research focuses on how restricting to specific quasi-isometries can change the
notion of similarity between finitely generated groups as well as how comparing
boundaries of spaces can be used to show two groups are similar.
