
* 1210991
* Geometric and Algebraic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2012,06/28/2012
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 183,618.00

This project examines various aspects of the topology of manifolds: their
classification, their bundles, and their symmetries. The project will focus on
six areas. The first is to give a systematic approach to topological equivariant
rigidity, using tools from surgery theory, algebraic K-and L-theory, and the
Farrell-Jones Conjecture. The second is to study characteristics classes of
matroid bundles (defined by Anderson and Davis) and to apply them to
combinatorial incidence geometry. The third area is to investigate a rigidity
conjecture involving self-homotopy equivalences of 3-manifolds and its
connections with high-dimensional topology. The fourth area is to give the the
classification, up to homeomorphism, of manifolds having the homotopy type of
the total space of certain torus bundles over lens spaces. This is an
application of the Farrell-Jones Conjecture. The fifth area is to compute the
L-groups of a free product of groups, and thereby solve the connected sum
problem - when is a manifold which is homotopy equivalent to a connected sum
itself a connected sum. The last area is to study the algebraic and point-set
topology of actions of p-groups on the torus from the point of view of
homotopical group actions and Smith theory.

Geometric topology is the study of manifolds. An n-dimensional manifold is a set
of points locally modeled on n-dimensional Euclidean space. For instance, a
2-manifold is a surface and looks like a plane near each point. Many physical
phenomenon are represented by manifolds, and as such, understanding the global
structure of a manifold, and what possible manifolds exist, is fundamental to
the sciences, as well as to mathematics. Manifold theory connects with most
areas of mathematics, as well as with physical phenomena such as cosmology,
string theory, and classical and quantum mechanics. To understand and classify
manifold one uses a variety of tools including algebraic topology, bundle
theory, and differential geometry.
