
* 1240028
* Summer Topology and its Applications 2012
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, FOUNDATIONS
* 06/01/2012,06/01/2012
* Brian Martensen,MN,Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2013
* USD 24,000.00

The 27th Annual Summer Conference on Topology and its Applications will be
hosted by the Department of Mathematics & Statistics of Minnesota State
University, Mankato, on July 25-28, 2012. Special sessions are to be offered in
Asymmetric Topology, Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, Geometric Topology,
and Set-Theoretic Topology. Each session has one to two associated plenary
speakers. The conference will also feature workshops in Dynamical Systems and
Geometric Topology. More details and information can be found at:

http://cset.mnsu.edu/mathstat/sumtopo/

The field of Topology, developed as a distinct discipline beginning in the late
19th century in an attempt to provide a flexible framework to answer questions
of a geometric and analytic nature, has broadened in the last one hundred years
to become ubiquitous throughout mathematics and related disciplines. The field
has had great success in connecting with the areas of Algebra, Dynamical
Systems, and Computer Logic, as well as Physics, Economics and Biology. Recent
advances in Asymmetric Topology have found uses in screen pixelization
applications. This series of conferences, which draws a large national and
international audience, has likewise broadened over its history and has
established itself as a successful venue for the dissemination of results and
sharing of ideas among these related disciplines.
