
* 1248071
* INSPIRE: Nonlinear Data Reduction applied to Dense Granular Media
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY, PMP-Particul&MultiphaseProcess, INSPIRE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2012
* Konstantin Mischaikow,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,003.00

This INSPIRE award is partially funded by the Applied Mathematics and the
Topology program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Granular Materials Program in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in
the Engineering Directorate.

It will support work that uniquely combines state of the art experimental
techniques, large scale molecular dynamics simulations, and cutting edge
theoretical developments in topological data analysis for the purpose of
understanding and predicting the behavior of dense granular materials (DGM). In
particular, it is based on the novel proposition of using persistence diagrams,
a relatively new concept in applied algebraic topology, as the fundamental
modeling tool for DGM. The core tasks include the following. (1) Develop an
efficient computational framework for working with persistence diagram data
arising from spatiotemporal systems. (2) Using discrete element simulations
(DEM) and experiments, carry out precise, well-defined, and complete
characterizations of forces and stresses in DGM, including spatial and temporal
variability of a given system and quantification of the differences between
simulations and experiments. (3) Formulation of an optimum combination of
experiments and simulations to be used to analyze a given system, leading to
reliable predictions for the nature and evolution of macroscopic quantities
describing a system including stresses and bulk and shear moduli. (4) Use of
persistence diagrams to characterize spatial and temporal fluctuations,
including the dependence on system size, on the physical dimensions (e.g. 2D
versus 3D), and particle properties such as shape or friction. (5) Study the
topology of the space of persistence diagrams. Characterize the dynamics of DGM
by using purely topological techniques to study time series reconstructed
dynamics.

Granular materials in the dense fluid-like and solid states present one of the
most significant modeling challenges of our times. These materials appear in a
broad spectrum of practical settings from heavy industry to pharmaceuticals. As
such, they are of intense interest to the engineering world. The way in which
grains pack and in which forces are carried in DGM presents a significant puzzle
for the soft condensed matter and statistical physics communities. Associated
with force and packing complexity are challenging mathematical issues related to
the analysis of complex high dimensional multiscale spatiotemporal data. DGM are
inherently high dimensional systems in which geometry plays a fundamental role.
However because of their granular nature they cannot be usefully approximated by
analytic continuum models and thus a clear method of reduction to a tractable
problem is lacking. Our goal is to demonstrate that new ideas associated with
computational topology provide an efficient, faithful and coherent approach to
providing tractable models for the temporal evolution of spatial structures in
DGM. The abstract nature of the topological methods being developed imply that
the tools developed in this context will be applicable to a wide range of
systems demonstrating complex spatiotemporal structures.
