
* 1252992
* CAREER: Heegaard Floer homology and low-dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2013,06/13/2017
* Yi Ni,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2020
* USD 500,001.00

This project studies Heegaard Floer homology and its applications to low-
dimensional topology. Heegaard Floer homology is a package of invariants defined
via methods in gauge theory and symplectic geometry. The PI will investigate the
relationship between Heegaard Floer homology and many other aspects of low-
dimensional topology. More specifically, the PI will study the geography and
botany problems of Heegaard Floer homology. By doing so, the PI hopes to answer
questions about Dehn surgeries and Khovanov homology. The PI will also address
the applications of Floer homology to 4-dimensional topology, for example, the
topology of knot surgeries on the K3 surface.

Topology is a fundamental discipline of mathematics which studies the shape of
spaces. The basic question is whether two spaces have the same shape. Moreover,
if two spaces have different shapes, how different these two shapes are? Can we
transform one space to another by certain simple processes? The techniques
studied in this project give a way to extract information about spaces, thus
answer the previous questions in some cases. This project also aims to make
geometry and topology accessible to a broad audience, including undergraduate
math majors and scholars from other disciplines. The PI will design new courses
on the topics studied in this project. In addition, this project will
incorporate Caltech's SURF program, which provides a chance to undergraduate
students to do research. The PI will also broaden the influence of this field by
mentoring graduate students and postdoctors, organizing seminars and
conferences, teaching short courses in summer schools and workshops.
