
* 1262352
* The 47th Annual Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, FOUNDATIONS
* 03/01/2013,02/20/2013
* Ivan Gotchev,CT,Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,980.00

The 47th Annual Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference will be hosted
by the Mathematical Sciences Department at Central Connecticut State University
from Saturday March 23 through Monday March 25, 2013. The conference will offer
special sessions in Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, General/Set-Theoretic
Topology, Geometric Group Theory, and Geometric Topology/Low Dimensional
Topology, as well as six plenary talks and 12 semi-plenary talks covering the
breadth of the special sessions. The conference is organized by the special
session organizing committees, the conference steering committee, the local
organizing committee and the principal investigator on the grant. The grant
provides funds to support travel for graduate students and young researchers, in
addition to the invited speakers.

The Annual Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference Series is one of the
longest running in mathematics. In the spring of 1967, the first conference was
held at Arizona State University, and it was primarily a conference on general
topology and continuum theory. In the past 45 years, the conference has grown in
size and scope. It has continued to be the most important conference of the year
in set-theoretic topology and continuum theory, while expanding to include the
areas of dynamical systems, geometric group theory, and geometric topology. Over
the years, the conference has made special efforts to broaden participation by
women, underrepresented groups, graduate students, and young researchers, while
expanding to cover a broader section of topology. Many of the most famous
results of the last 45 years have been first announced at this conference. The
conference proceedings will be published in the refereed journal Topology
Proceedings.

Conference website: http://www.ccsu.edu/STDC2013/
