
* 1265735
* Rigidity in negative curvature and quasiconformal analysis
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/08/2012,11/20/2012
* Xiangdong Xie,OH,Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2014
* USD 46,197.00

The PI proposes to investigate the large scale geometry of negatively curved
spaces by using quasiconformal analysis on metric spaces. The proposed research
includes large scale geometry of solvable groups, metric structure on the
boundary of relatively hyperbolic groups, and quasiisometric rigidity of
Hadamard manifolds. The proposed research on solvable groups involves the study
of quasiconformal analysis on nilpotent Lie groups. Although the metrics on the
nilpotent Lie groups are not Riemannian, they are left invariant and admit a
one-parameter family of dilations. They include Carnot metrics and also many
other metrics. Stated in the language of quasiconformal analysis, some of the
goals are: to classify these nilpotent Lie groups up to quasiconformal
equivalence; to show that (in most cases) every quasiconformal map is
biLipschitz. In terms of large scale geometry, the goal is to show that
quasiisometries between (most) negatively curved solvable Lie groups preserve
distance up to an additive constant and sometimes are even at a finite distance
from isometries. If successful, this research will lead to progress on the large
scale geometry of finitely generated solvable groups. The proposed research on
relatively hyperbolic groups will try to determine if there is a canonical
quasiconformal structure on the boundary of relatively hyperbolic groups. % and
the limit sets of geometrically finite groups. It would have applications to
rigidity questions about these groups. The proposed research about Hadamard
manifolds concerns the question whether every quasiisometry between Hadamard
manifolds is at a finite distance from a biLipschitz homeomorphism. The proposed
projects on negatively curved solvable Lie groups and Hadamard manifolds are
continuation of the PI's previous work on these topics. A common theme of these
proposed projects is the interplay between geometry of negatively curved spaces
and analysis on the ideal boundary of these spaces.

The proposed research lies in geometric group theory and geometric analysis. The
questions in geometric group theory often concern the large scale properties of
the spaces or maps, while in analysis the main focus is often the local
properties. Surprisingly, these are related for spaces with negative curvature:
a negatively curved space has an ideal boundary, and the large scale properties
of the spaces are encoded in the local structure of the ideal boundary. The PI
proposes to study the large scale properties of negatively curved spaces by
investigating the ideal boundary using geometric analysis.
