
* 1307505
* Topological methods for Azumaya algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2013,07/16/2013
* David Antieau,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Chen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 101,279.00

The PI will engage in several projects at the border of algebraic geometry and
algebraic topology. Three projects aim to use topological methods to understand
the Brauer group, Azumaya algebras, and more generally torsors on schemes. (1)
The PI will study the extent to which the foundational results of Jackowski,
McClure, and Oliver on maps between classifying spaces of complex algebraic
groups can be extended to finite approximations to these classifying spaces.
Progress on this problem will enable the solution of a host of problems about
when torsors for complex algebraic groups extend from the generic point of a
scheme to the entire scheme. In low dimensions, early progress on this problem
has been used by the PI and Ben Williams to settle an old question of Auslander
and Goldman on the existence of Azumaya maximal orders in unramified division
algebras, where it transpires that there are purely topological obstructions to
the existence of these Azumaya maximal orders. (2) The PI will work toward
computing the Chow groups and singular cohomology of the classifying spaces of
special linear groups by various central subgroups. This has been done in
special cases by Vezzosi and Vistoli. However, greater generality is needed for
most applications. These Chow groups are fundamental objects in algebraic
geometry, controlling the characteristic classes associated to certain torsors
of fundamental importance in the study of the Brauer group. The computations
will be directly useful to the first project, and to the following project. (3)
The PI and Ben Williams previously formulated the topological period-index
problem and established first results. They will continue this study, especially
as it relates to the algebraic period-index conjecture. In particular, their
results in low dimensions suggest a method for disproving the period-index
conjecture, which would be a fundamental advance. Following this idea to its
conclusion is the major aspiration of the first set of projects. A fourth
project aims to continue to build a bridge between higher category theory and
classical algebraic geometry, bringing the formidable techniques of the former
to bear on various questions in the arithmetic of derived categories. For
example, the PI is developing a toolbox using higher category theory that will
allow a purely derived-category proof of Panin's computations of the K-theory of
projective homogeneous spaces, once the existence of certain exceptional objects
on the split forms of these spaces is known.

The PI proposes work in algebraic geometry and algebraic topology, two areas of
modern mathematics. Algebraic geometry is an ancient subject with many
connections to real-world problems. Its goal is to understand the geometry of
solutions sets of polynomial equations, equations of central importance in
various disciplines, such as theoretical physics, cryptography, and the modeling
of dynamical systems like weather. Algebraic topology on the other hand
developed more recently, in the 19th century, and aims to study a general notion
of shape, less rigid than the idea of shape studied in geometry. It has found
striking applications in the last decade, for instance to the analysis of large
data sets that occur in computer vision and cancer research, frequently finding
patterns that more traditional methods of data analysis fail to find. The
proposal of the PI will bring the considerable machinery and insight of
algebraic topology to bear on several questions in algebraic geometry which have
been identified by the community as among the most important.
