
* 1307896
* Extending Kervaire invariant methods in stable homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2013,05/28/2013
* Douglas Ravenel,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2017
* USD 159,729.00

This proposal is about extending the methods that the PI and his coauthors (M.
A. Hill and M. J. Hopkins) developed and used to establish the nonexistence of
elements in the stable homotopy groups of spheres with Kervaire invariant one,
thereby solving a 50 year old problem in algebraic topology. The conclusion of
their main theorem is the opposite of what experts in the field were hoping for
in 1970s. For this reason the theorem raises as many questions as it answers.

Algebraic topology is a collection of tools for studying problems in higher
dimensional geometry. While the ideas are abstract, they have helped scientists
understand the characteristics of electrons and other elementary particles and
provided ideas used a few years ago to solve one of mathematics' most
challenging problems, Fermat's Last Theorem. It is useful for understanding
knots and robotics. Physicists use algebraic topology to try to figure out the
shape of the universe. It helps them understand what they can observe and gives
them tools to imagine what they cannot observe. Its ideas are also central to
"string theory," where physicists conceive of space as having not just three
dimensions but 10 or even more. Topology gives us a way to deal with
10-dimensional objects without actually seeing and touching them.
