
* 1308306
* Homological invariants of manifolds and stratified spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2013,08/30/2013
* Greg Friedman,TX,Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2017
* USD 165,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1308306, Principal Investigator: Greg Friedman

The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to study the topology of manifolds and
stratified spaces using tools related to intersection homology theory and
methods arising in algebraic and geometric topology. Stratified spaces are
usually not quite manifolds - they may possess singularities - but they are
composed of manifold strata. Examples, including algebraic and analytic
varieties and quotients of manifolds by certain group actions, occur naturally
in numerous fields of pure mathematics and in interactions with other sciences.
Intersection homology is a modification of ordinary homology theory for which a
form of Poincare duality holds for stratified spaces. Consequently, such spaces
admit intersection homology analogues of historically important manifold
invariants, such as signatures and characteristic classes, and raise interesting
questions regarding their broader context and applications. The PI proposes
several lines of research in this area. This includes work with James McClure
(Purdue) to apply methods of modern algebraic topology to research on the
algebraic structures of intersection (co)chain complexes, on an intersection
homology version of rational homotopy theory, and on homotopy theory of
stratified spaces; work with Eugenie Hunsicker (Loughborough) on topological
aspects of signature invariants with motivations from geometric analysis; work
with Dev Sinha (University of Oregon) to study concrete aspects of the
E-infinity algebra of cochains on manifolds via linking forms; and the writing
of an introductory textbook on intersection homology.

Broadly speaking, topology is the study of spatial configuration, both in the
physical universe and of abstract spaces that can model real-life phenomena. For
example, a topologist might study how a physical string or protein strand is
knotted in the real three-dimensional world, or he or she might study the
abstract space of positions that a machine could inhabit, allowing for an
arbitrary number of parameters that describe the positions of various
components. The principal investigator's line of research concerns "stratified
spaces" that simultaneously exhibit phenomena in a multitude of dimensions; for
example, a machine's motions might exhibit different numbers of degrees of
freedom depending upon its current position. While these research projects tend
to be purely theoretical, theoretical results percolate over time into
applications; topology, in particular, is currently experiencing a renaissance
of applications to real-world problems. In particular, recent applications of
the topology of stratified spaces have occurred in such applied fields as robot
motion planning, topological data analysis, and statistical biology, as well as
in other theoretical fields, such as string theory physics.
