
* 1308836
* Virtual properties of 3-manifold groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2013,06/12/2013
* Yi Liu,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 109,873.00

Under the grant, the PI will study topology of 3-manifolds in terms their
fundamental groups. The research will be based on recent progress in the Virtual
Fibration Conjecture and the Virtual Haken Conjecture. Ingredients about surface
subsubgroups in 3-manifolds will be summarized and generalized, and will be
applied to approach existing problems including the virtual positivity of
representation volumes and the linearity of 3-manifold groups. The project will
also study the virtual properties of surface automorphisms. This is closely
related to the surface bundle case of Virtual Homological Torsion Conjecture.
The PI proposes to apply methods from geometric group theory, dynamical systems,
representation theory, and low dimension topology.

Spaces and transformations provide an important perspective on mathematically
modelling our world. Natural sciences and certain social sciences utilize them
as abstract tools to understand symmetry of various systems. The PI will study
geometric transformations on 3-dimensional spaces, which form an essential
family for many applications involved in physics, computer sciences, and other
disciplines. This family of transformations have been proved to be powerful and
mathematically comprehensible, thanks to recent solutions of long existing
conjectures. The principal pursuit of this project is to attack several existing
problems in low dimensional topology with the new techniques. Besides, the
project endeavors to theoretically summarize recent development of the area,
making the new ideas more accessible to working scientists from all disciplines.
