
* 1309376
* RUI: Applications of Non-Commutative Algebra to Character Varieties
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2013,11/20/2014
* Sean Lawton,TX,The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 118,167.00

This project concerns moduli spaces of representations of finitely generated
groups into Lie groups. Many moduli spaces of interest arise in this fashion:
flat fiber bundles over a surface, and (parabolic) Higgs bundles are examples.
These spaces are sometimes called character varieties. The study of character
varieties intersects the invariant theory of products of matrix groups, and so
owes much of its structure to the non-commutative ring of generic matrices
(matrices over polynomial indeterminates). Since character varieties may be
considered spaces of equivalence classes of representations of the fundamental
group of a base space (topology) into a Lie group (geometry), they find
applications throughout differential geometry and mathematical physics. The
central goal of the proposed work is to use the strong relationship to non-
commutative ring theory to answer questions about the homotopic, arithmetic, and
dynamical structure of character varieties.

Mathematicians' endeavor to classify mathematical objects is not unlike, for
example, the biologists' endeavor to classify species. The purpose of this
project is to classify and advance the understanding of certain mathematical
objects called "character varieties." Informally, character varieties provide
data which encodes equivalent ways one can associate the flexible shape of a
object to a rigid shape of that same object. For example, a rubber band is a
flexible "circle," but once one stipulates a radius a rigid circle is
determined. The study of the geometry of character varieties in some sense can
be thought of as the "geometry of geometry." In part because of this, character
varieties find applications throughout differential geometry and in mathematical
physics. In this project, the PI and his collaborators and students will use
certain non-symmetrical structures associated with character varieties as a tool
to explore and answer novel questions about their shape, and how their elements
relate to each other by certain motions. Another important part of this project
is the training of undergraduate research assistants in the PI's Experimental
Algebra and Geometry Lab, and the conducting of community outreach activities
which communicate the importance and beauty of pure mathematics.
