
* 1309073
* Contact geometry in dimensions high and low
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2013,06/10/2015
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2017
* USD 288,039.00

The focus of this proposal is to address several fundamental questions in low
and high dimensional contact geometry. In low dimensions, the most basic
question asking which three manifolds admit tight contact structures is still
open as are questions related to the result of various surgery operations on
contact manifolds. As part of this proposal the Principal Investigator will
build on past work studying these questions to, among other things, illuminate
the nature of tight contact structures on hyperbolic manifolds and Legendrian
surgery on tight contact manifolds. In addition, he will extend recent advances
in Legendrian knot theory to not only better understand the structure of such
knots but also to classify contact structures on some families of three
manifolds including some of the much studied and notoriously difficult small
Seifert fibered spaces. In higher dimensions even the existence of contact
structures is not completely understood. Recent progress in higher dimensional
contact geometry makes the time ripe for an intense investigation of these
structures. Namely, a few years ago Niederkrueger introduced the notion of a
plastikstufe in hopes of finding an analog of the famed three dimensional tight
vs. overtwisted dichotomy in all dimensions (other proposed notions, such as
bLobs, have even more recently surfaced) and most recently the Principal
Investigator has completely answered the existence question for contact
structures on five manifolds (as has another team of researchers). Part of the
project will involve addressing the existence of contact structures on all odd
dimensional manifolds as well as investigating notions of overtwistedness in
higher dimensions. The Principal Investigator will also further develop contact
homology computations in higher dimensions and study the elegant conormal
construction in order to apply contact geometric techniques to the study of knot
theory in dimension three and embedding theory more generally.

Contact geometry is a venerable subject that arose as a natural language for
geometric optics, thermodynamics and classical mechanics. One encounters contact
structures everyday when parallel parking a car, skating, or watching the play
of light in a glass of water. Contact geometry has long been studied by
mathematicians in physicists but in the last decade or so it has blossomed into
a remarkably rich and beautiful theory with close ties to the topology of
manifolds (that is the structure of space and space-time), string theory in
modern physics, Riemannian geometry, and fluid dynamics. The Principal
Investigator will illuminate the connection between contact geometry and
Riemannian geometry and the topology of manifolds. He will also explore basic
and fundamental questions concerning the existence and uniqueness of contact
structures and their submanifolds in high dimensions. In addition the Principal
Investigator will continue working with a large group of graduate students and
organize conferences and seminars to help educate the next generation of
researchers and create fertile environments in which new ideas and
collaborations can grow.
