
* 1313541
* Conference Proposal: Geometric Topology in Cortona
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2013,02/20/2013
* David Futer,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2014
* USD 45,000.00

The conference entitled "Geometric Topology in Cortona: Interactions of quantum
topology and hyperbolic geometry" will be held in Cortona, Italy, on June 3-8,
2013. This conference will focus on two areas of low-dimensional topology that
have had significant overlap in recent years. In particular, the conference will
concentrate on the interaction between hyperbolic geometry and quantum topology.
In the last two decades, both of these areas have seen significant progress. In
hyperbolic geometry, several longstanding conjectures concerning the geometric
structure of 3-manifolds and their covers have been proved. On the quantum side,
families of TQFTs have been constructed and shown to be related to quantum
invariants such as the Jones polynomial. There is increasing evidence that many
quantum invariants have connections to hyperbolic geometry, and there are
several open conjectures in these directions, including the Volume Conjecture
and its variants. This conference will bring together outstanding international
researchers in both fields.

This conference has three central goals. First, it will stimulate dialogue among
an international group of mathematicians, by bringing together leading experts
from the US and other countries to discuss cutting edge research. Second, it
will promote an exchange of ideas and collaboration among hyperbolic geometers
and quantum topologists, leading to further integration of these two fields.
Finally, it will expose graduate students and early career mathematicians to the
important developments in these areas. Both junior and senior mathematicians
will be given an opportunity to learn of new research and present their results
to a broad audience. We expect that this will be a major international
conference. More information is available on the conference website:
http://www.dm.unipi.it/~martelli/Cortona/Cortona.html.
