
* 1322142
* 2013 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conferences
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2013,02/20/2013
* Jeremy Van Horn-Morris,AR,University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2015
* USD 24,022.00

The 2013 Redbud Geometry/Topology Conferences will be held March 8-10, 2013 at
the University of Arkansas, and Fall 2013 at Oklahoma State University. These
conferences will continue the biannual Redbud Geometry/Topology conference
series for 2013. The spring 2013 conference will focus on connections between
different areas of low dimensional topology, including Heegaard Floer homology,
symplectic and contact geometry, 3- and 4-manifolds, knot theory and mapping
class groups. The spring conference also includes a graduate workshop, held
Friday, March 8, 2013. The fall 2013 conference will predominantly consist of
talks by early-career mathematicians from Arkansas, Oklahoma and surrounding
states. It will feature talks on a range of topics in topology and geometric
group theory, based around the research interests of faculty at the three
schools.

These meetings continue the series of Redbud conferences held in Fall 2011,
Spring 2012, and Fall 2012 at the University of Arkansas, Oklahoma State
University and the University of Oklahoma, respectively. By all accounts, these
conferences were a success, bringing many outstanding researchers from across
the country to the area and creating connections between researchers among these
institutions, and to those from around the country. The Redbud conferences serve
to bring nationally recognized researchers to the Arkansas and Oklahoma areas
and to broaden connections between the areas schools. We hope and expect the
conference series to continue and grow in the coming years. The conference
website is: http://comp.uark.edu/~jv002/redbud/.
