
* 1350037
* CAREER: Extending and unifying modern homological invariants in low dimensional topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2014,04/19/2016
* Sucharit Sarkar,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Shuguang Wang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 270,001.00

The project will concentrate on two modern homological knot invariants: Khovanov
homology and knot Floer homology. Both invariants associate chain complexes to
knots whose chain homotopy types (and consequently, homology groups) are knot
invariants. This project has two major research goals. The first goal is to
extend various aspects of these homological invariants to stable homotopy types,
i.e., construct new knot invariant topological spaces (well-defined up to stable
homotopy equivalences) whose homology groups are the existing invariants. This
will produce higher structures on the homological invariants which will be
useful for studying certain geometric properties of knots, such as their four-
ball genus. The second goal of this project is to study the relationship between
the homological invariants. The project seeks to find new spectral sequences,
and combinatorial reformulations of the existing spectral sequences, from the
Khovanov homology invariants to the knot Floer homology invariants. This will
lead to a better understanding of why these two invariants coming from very
different origins share so many similarities.

Topology is the branch of mathematics that studies shapes of spaces; and low
dimensional topology concentrates on spaces up to dimension four. Knot theory is
an important sub-field of low dimensional topology where one studies one-
dimensional objects inside three-dimensional spaces, for example, knotted pieces
of strings inside the (three-dimensional Euclidean) space that we live in. In
addition to being an extremely valuable tool in low dimensional topology, knot
theory has also proven to be useful in real world applications: from analysing
knotting in DNA to studying mixing in liquids, and from estimating energies of
orbits inside a magnetic field to creating new data encryption schemes. A
fundamental problem in knot theory is the knot isotopy problem: to determine if
a given knot can transform into another one without tearing or crossing itself
(such a transformation is called a knot isotopy). Knot invariants are
mathematical objects, such as numbers or groups, that one associates to knots,
and which remain unchanged during such a knot isotopy. Therefore, knot
invariants are used extensively in the knot isotopy problem: if one finds some
knot invariant that takes different values on the two given knots, then one
concludes that the two knots are not isotopic. The current project is based on
knot theory, and it seeks to study properties of certain previously known knot
invariants, and to extend them to construct new knot invariants. The project
will lead to dispersion of mathematical knowledge, particularly in the area of
low-dimensional topology, via a variety of means. This project will fund
undergraduate students for summer research, week-long workshops on low-
dimensional topology, and a wiki-based website on knot theory.
