
* 1358638
* HOMOLOGY THEORIES FOR TANGLES AND BORDERED 3-MANIFOLDS
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/30/2012,09/04/2014
* Dylan Thurston,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2015
* USD 88,168.00

Heegaard Floer homology is a new and powerful invariant of 3-manifolds and knots
in them. Among many other benefits, it detects the knot genus (the least
complicated surface whose boundary is the knot), and in particular, whether a
knot is non-trivial. It is a homology theory, and like many homology theories
the Euler characteristic is interesting: for knots, the Euler characteristic is
one of the oldest knot invariants, the Alexander polynomial. Heegaard Floer
homology is part of a family of recent homology theories whose Euler
characteristic gives other knot polynomials. But it can be hard to compute, and
is defined by ad-hoc rules rather than a concise set of properties. In this
project, we will develop a theory of bordered homology invariants: extend the
Heegaard Floer homology and other homology theories to objects (knots or
3-manifolds) with boundary, so that when a knot or manifold is split into pieces
the invariant for the whole can be computed from the invariants for the pieces.
Among other benefits, this will make the theory more computable, and give axioms
for the theory.

Although knot theory has been studied for many centuries, some of the most
elementary questions, such as finding the least complicated surface whose
boundary lies on the knot, are still not easy to answer. Heegaard Floer homology
is one recent theory that answers this and many other questions in knot theory
and topology. However, it is hard to compute even for relatively small knots. In
this project, I and my collaborators will extend Heegaard Floer homology (and
other related theories) so that they can be computed for pieces of a knot and
then built up to the complete knot. This promises to provide a great
computational and theoretical tool. Throughout the project, accessibility will
be emphasized, and the project will be integrated with, for instance, an
undergraduate research program.
