
* 1406327
* RUI: Structure and computations in motivic and chromatic homotopy
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2014,05/30/2014
* Kyle Ormsby,OR,Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 172,146.00

The research conducted under this grant will study the interface between two
fields of mathematics: homotopy theory and algebraic geometry. Since the
introduction of motivic homotopy theory by F. Morel and V. Voevodsky, it has
been possible to use homotopy theoretic methods to study schemes (rigid
geometric objects controlled by algebraic equations, important to topics as far-
ranging as the theory of numbers and the laws controlling our physical
universe). Meanwhile chromatic homotopy theory and topological modular forms
provide tools for transferring algebro-geometric data into topology and homotopy
theory. This research will work at the intersection of these fields, using
algebraic geometry and homotopy theory to inform each other. By incorporating
portions of this program into the thesis curriculum at Reed College, this
research will enhance the educational experience of Reed's students, exposing a
diverse population of undergraduates to research-level mathematics.

Ormsby proposes a four-fold program for studying chromatic and motivic homotopy
theory. First, furthering joint work with J. Heller, he will explicate the
fashion in which Galois theory controls a particularly tractable part of the
stable motivic homotopy category. Second, continuing joint work with M. Behrens,
N. Stapleton, and V. Stojanoska, he will use bivariable modular forms and the
Adams spectral sequence to study cooperations in topological modular forms.
Third, he plans to study the convergence properties of the motivic slice
spectral sequence over infinite-cohomological dimension fields, ultimately
leading to computations in stable motivic homotopy sheaves. Finally, he plans to
introduce a theory of spectral presheaves with framed transfers and study their
relation to foundational questions about the stable motivic homotopy category.
