
* 1406093
* RUI: Legendrian Submanifolds in Contact and Smooth Topology
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2014,08/06/2014
* Joshua Sabloff,PA,Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2018
* USD 143,193.00

Symplectic topology is a rich field of mathematics with roots in classical
physics that has blossomed into a central mathematical field that combines
features of geometry (the science of measurement) and topology (the study of the
shape of space). This field has a variety of applications including fluid
mechanics, differential equations, and the study of the possible shapes of the
3-dimensional space and the 4-dimensional space-time in which we live. The goal
of this project is to achieve a better understanding of how symplectic and
contact topology sit between geometry and topology, thereby strengthening the
foundation for the aforementioned applications. The project's research
activities will increase participation and mentoring of students from
undergraduate institutions in the critical STEM pipeline. The project's
activities will also encourage the exchange of ideas between faculty, graduate
students, and undergraduates, thereby providing additional means of bringing
undergraduates into the research process. Research with undergraduates will also
serve as a pedagogical laboratory for integrating ideas arising in mathematical
research into the PI's courses at all levels of the curriculum.

Approaching symplectic topology (and its sister field contact topology) through
a topological lens has given rise to a young and thriving discipline with
interesting questions that explore the boundary between flexibility (when the
symplectic world behaves topologically) and rigidity (when the symplectic world
behaves geometrically). This project sets forth a program to answer fundamental
flexibility and rigidity questions about Legendrian and Lagrangian submanifolds.
A number of the projects are concrete and easy to explain, and hence appeal to
the imagination of a wide mathematical audience. The proposed research is framed
by three themes. The first is a focus on the global properties of the space of
Legendrian submanifolds, with specific goals of introducing new quantitative
techniques into the study of Lagrangian cobordisms and beginning the study of
homotopy groups of spaces of higher dimensional Legendrians. The second theme
seeks to link Legendrian and smooth topology, using the Lagrangian cobordism
relation to give meaning to certain quantum knot invariants and the conormal
construction to connect Legendrian and smooth invariants. The final theme
emphasizes investigations into the scope and structure of Legendrian invariants,
with one project, in particular, poised to uncover a new type of algebraic
pattern for Legendrian Contact Homology.
