
* 1406376
* Geometry and dynamics of outer automorphism groups of free groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2014,05/24/2016
* Lee Mosher,NJ,Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2018
* USD 259,362.00

Geometry group theory is the study of geometric objects and their groups of
symmetries using mathematical tools such as algebra, topology, and analysis,
with a special emphasis on "large scale" or "quasi-isometric" tools which are
used in studies of a geometric object as if viewing it through more and more
powerful telescopes. In this project the PI will apply the methods of geometric
group theory to the study of hidden symmetries of finite networks known to
topologists as "graphs". These groups of hidden symmetries are known as "outer
automorphism groups of free groups". One outcome of this project will be to
solve important problems in the large scale geometry of outer automorphism
groups of free groups and through these solutions to produce new tools of large
scale geometry for broad use by the geometric group theory community. Another
outcome will be to build tools for a new study of the dynamical properties of
outer automorphism groups of free groups.

Outer automorphism groups of finite rank free groups, denoted Out(F_n), were
first examined in the 1930's by Nielsen and Whitehead. Interest in Out(F_n) has
expanded rapidly in recent decades with the development of geometric tools such
as: the Culler-Vogtmann outer space; and the relative train track maps of
Bestvina-Feighn-Handel. More recently Out(F_n) is being studied using quasi-
isometric geometry, an effort in which the principal investigator has played a
leading role. In this project the PI will study actions of finitely generated
subgroups of Out(F_n) on hyperbolic metric spaces, attempting to build for
Out(F_n) an analogue of the hierarchy theory for mapping class groups of
surfaces that was built in the 1990's by Masur and Minsky. As applications, and
as guides to building a useful hierarchy theory, the PI plans to study and
resolve various problems in the large scale geometry of Out(F_n) including:
computation of the 2nd bounded cohomology of finitely generated subgroups of
Out(F_n); and early investigations into quasi-isometric rigidity for Out(F_n).
The PI also plans to carry out early investigations of certain
Out(F_n)-invariant dynamical systems that are analogous to the Teichmuller
geodesic flow of a surface and its invariant sets.
