
* 1406871
* Curves, Knots, Hilbert schemes, and the Hitchin system
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2014,05/25/2016
* Vivek Shende,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 306,000.00

This research project explores the discovery, by the PI and his collaborators,
of surprising interconnections between seemingly disparate questions in
mathematics. As always with such discoveries, this understanding facilitates
dialogue between previously disconnected fields, with the consequence that well
understood structures in one area may be profitably translated into another.
Such confluences also offer ideal training grounds for graduate students: there
are many new, exciting, and unexplored questions on which to work; at the same
time, the answers clarify old and established fields of knowledge.

In particular the project centers around a conjecture (due to the PI and
collaborators) equating certain algebrao-geometric invariants of plane curve
singularities with topological invariants of knots determined by the
singularities. Specifically, the former is the local contribution of the
singular curve to motivic or categorified Donaldson-Thomas theory, and the
latter are the Khovanov-Rozansky homologies. The research project aims at a
proof by passing through two other subjects: the theory of Legendrian knots and
the non-abelian Hodge correspondence. This intersection of algebraic geometry,
symplectic geometry, and low dimensional topology is the only place in
mathematics where the quantum SU(n) invariants and their categorifications have
ever been seen as coming from the geometry of a knot in space, as opposed to
from its planar projections. In addition, the research touches meaningfully on
many subjects of present mathematical interest: enumerative geometry as
influenced by string theory, the Hitchin system, Khovanov-Rozansky homology, the
Cherednik algebra and its representations, legendrian knots and symplectic field
theory, and 3-manifold invariants. It may be expected to advance some of these
separately by exploiting their connections. In particular the project aims to
make progress on the "P = W" conjecture in nonabelian Hodge theory, and on the
question in symplectic field theory of whether all representations of the
Chekanov-Eliashberg dga come from geometry.

The award is co-funded by the Algebra and Number Theory and the Topology
programs.
