
* 1407394
* Topological and geometric invariants from representation theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2014,06/17/2014
* Joshua Sussan,NY,CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 145,000.00

Representation theory, originating in the work of mathematicians such as Issai
Schur and Ferdinand Frobenius at the end of the 19th century, studies how the
structure of algebraic objects (such as finite groups or Lie algebras) can be
captured by simpler, linear objects, in particular, matrices. A theme common to
all of the goals of this project is the use of representation theory to study
geometric spaces. Three dimensional topological quantum field theories, quantum
link invariants, and vertex operators were all developed in the 1980s and 1990s
using various algebraic inputs. One main objective of this project is to lift
these constructions to higher dimensions through the use of algebraic structures
from representation theory. This objective is part of a program known as
categorification.

The program of categorification was introduced by Louis Crane and Igor Frenkel.
Generally speaking, the aim is that vector spaces should be replaced by
categories and actions on vector spaces should be replaced by actions of
functors on categories. The categories involved in this project are of a
representation theoretic or combinatorial nature. New category-theoretic ideas
need to be developed in order to achieve the most ambitious goals of the
categorification program. Another part of this project is the application of
representation-theoretic techniques to the classification problem of certain
algebraic varieties equipped with a group action. The four areas of this project
are the following: (1) categorification of the Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant, (2)
categorification of the Turaev-Viro invariant, (3) categorification of Lie
superalgebras, and (4) understanding the multiplicative structure of the
coordinate rings of affine spherical varieties.
