
* 1419500
* CAREER: Representation theory of symplectic singularities
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 12/01/2013,09/14/2017
* Benjamin Webster,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 215,453.00

The PI plans to research the representation theory of deformation quantizations
of symplectic singularities. The long term research objective of this program is
proving the conjecture of the PI and his collaborators that there is a duality
operation on symplectic singularities. At moment, the most important property of
this proposed duality is its effect on the representation theory of associated
algebras: "categories O" attached to the singularities should be Koszul dual
(that is, induce a very special equivalence of categories). Many special cases
of this duality are well-understood, but what links them remains to be
investigated. This research is also tied up in the exploration of individual
examples of these singularities; in these our proposal would be a
"geometrification" and "categorification" of well-known dualities in
mathematics, such as Schur-Weyl duality, rank-level duality and Gale duality.
Our perspective also provides a fruitful approach to topics as diverse as the
representation theory of symplectic reflection algebras and the Rouquier-
Khovanov-Lauda categorification of quantum groups, and has applications as far
afield as low-dimensional topology.

One of the most shocking discoveries of the 20th century was the discovery of
quantum mechanics, and the introduction of non-commuting observables into
physics. Mathematicians have built on these observations to create an abstract
theory of "deformation quantization" and "noncommutative geometry." The PI's
work is about the relationships between the geometry of classical limits of
noncommutative spaces on one hand, and state spaces that could describe related
physical systems on the other. The PI further proposes an educational component
which creates a website platform for mathematical exposition, based on
Wordpress. This will make blogs, wikis, and a whole range of of websites that
don?t quite fit in those categories, and more closely resemble a dynamic version
of a homepage freely and easily available to the mathematical community in a
professional setting.

This award is cofunded by the Algebra and Number Theory program and the Topology
program.
