
* 1435788
* Georgia Topology Conference, May 21-25, 2014
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2014,04/28/2014
* Gordana Matic,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2018
* USD 78,720.00

This award supports three annual "Georgia Topology Conference" meetings to be
held at The University of Georgia in Athens, GA on May 21-25, 2014, and
subsequently in May 2015 and May 2016. Topology can be viewed as the study of
the structure and shape of the space we live in, particularly of the properties
of the space that are not changed as the space is continuously deformed. There
are deep relationships between topology, geometry, and physics, as well as
applications to topics such as fluid dynamics, robotics, and image analysis. It
is this diversity of approaches to central problems that has always energized
research in topology.

The Georgia Topology Conference is an annual event that has been organized by
topologists at the University of Georgia over the past half-century. An
important aspect of this conference is that the organizers have consistently
stressed the participation of new and recent doctoral recipients as speakers and
encouraged participation by graduate students. With a format featuring the
participation of several senior mathematicians and a larger group of junior
researchers, this conference series plays a significant role in both
disseminating the newest research and preparing graduate students and postdocs
for a successful career in mathematics. The conference encourages and supports
participation by members of under-represented groups. The Georgia Topology
Conference in 2014 will be centered on the theme of automorphisms of surfaces.

More information can be found on the conference web site
http://www.math.uga.edu/~topology/
