
* 1502135
* Gokova Geometry/Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2015,10/17/2019
* Selman Akbulut,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2020
* USD 90,000.00

Gokova Geometry-Topology Conference will be held during the last week of May of
each year in Hotel Yucelen's conference facilities in Gokova/Turkey. The annual
international Gokova Geometry-Topology Conferences was founded in 1992 with the
purpose of creating a lively informal environment where the latest results of
Geometry and Topology are discussed by active world-renowned experts and junior
researchers along with enthusiastic graduate students. Many junior now-well-
known mathematicians of the field got their early international exposure in
these friendly conferences. These conferences aim to increase participation of
junior researchers and experts from US. Gokova conferences will continue to
provide a platform for exchanging ideas between American, European and Asian
mathematicians in timely fashion.

The focus topics for each conference are determined by the Scientific Committee
during the previous year based on the major scientific breakthroughs that occur
in the field, and on availability of outstanding speakers to present them to a
broad audience of geometers and topologists. The list of the topics of current
interest that the organizers hope to explore via mini-courses and/or lecture
series in the next few years include: C. Manolescu's solution of the
triangulation conjecture (Manolescu will be giving a minicourse in 2015
meeting); Flexibility phenomena in symplectic and contact topology (Y.
Eliashberg, E. Murphy, and collaborators,one of them will be minicourse);
Geometric approaches to mirror symmetry and extensions of the Strominger-Yau-
Zaslow conjecture (D. Auroux, K. Fukaya, M. Abouzaid, T. Ekholm); Corks,
surgeries, and exotic 4-manifolds (Akbulut, Yasui, Ruberman); Refined
enumerations and knot theory (Cherednik, Goettsche, Shende). More information
can be found on the conference web page. http://gokovagt.org/
