
* 1505586
* Heegaard Floer homology: algebraic curves, knot genera, and double null-concordance
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2015,03/15/2021
* Charles Livingston,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2022
* USD 232,676.00

Problems related to finding solutions to polynomials equations arose in ancient
Greek mathematics. The advent of coordinate geometry led to a better
understanding of the nature of such problems, and the introduction of complex
numbers provided an important new perspective. In this way, determining the
nature of a curve in the plane defined as the solution set of a polynomial
equation with two variables is related to the problem of understanding surfaces
in four dimensional space. The Principal Investigator is investigating
topological properties of the surfaces that arise. It has been observed that the
local properties of these surfaces relate to knots; this project includes
continuing research on four-dimensional aspects of classical knot theory.
Coupled with his research in knot theory, the Principal Investigator maintains a
website devoted to providing students and researchers access to current
information about knots. In addition to assisting people working in knot theory
(both pure mathematicians and applied), the website serves as an important
educational tool, reaching students around the world.

A homogenous polynomial equation with three variables defines a complex curve in
two-dimensional complex projective space. Recent work of the Principal
Investigator, done jointly with Borodzik and Borodzik-Hedden, has restricted the
possibilities for singularities in the case that the curve is topologically a
sphere or torus. The approach was to understand the Heegaard Floer homology of
the boundary of a neighborhood of the curve. Constraints on these homology
groups arising from the complement of the curve in turn constrain the
singularities the arise. Developing this further is one goal of the Principal
Investigator's research. In studying singularities of complex curves, one is led
naturally to studying the four-genus of knots. When restricted to torus knots,
the topic is well understood. Working with Van Cott, the Principal Investigator
is applying a combination of classical techniques and Heegaard Floer theory to
understand the four-genus of connected sums of torus knots, beginning with
linear combinations of a pair of torus knots. Independent of this work, the
Principal Investigator is also trying to extend his previous work with Gilmer
concerning the non-orientable four-genus of knots; one goal is to apply Heegaard
Floer theory to build new examples of knots with large nonorientable four-ball
genus.
