
* 1509141
* Homological Mirror Symmetry for Homogeneous Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2015,07/05/2017
* Yanki Lekili,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 199,044.00

The principal investigator's main research interests lie in symplectic topology.
Symplectic topology is concerned with global structures of symplectic manifolds,
a class of spaces that appeared first as the phase space in classical mechanics.
Gromov developed a theory of pseudoholomorphic curves, which has led to a number
of advancements in symplectic topology, including a class of symplectic
invariants now known as Gromov-Witten invariants. More sophisticated invariants,
namely Fukaya categories, are the subject of mainstream research. Much of this
research arises from predictions made by physicists under the name of mirror
symmetry, an area of both mathematics and physics that remains largely
conjectural. These conjectures are striking as they have been understood to
predict a rather general correspondence between symplectic geometry and
algebraic geometry - a huge field of mathematics whose roots go back to ancient
times. Various questions one may ask about the geometry of a symplectic manifold
can be answered by studying instead the algebraic geometry of a different
manifold (its "mirror"), and vice-versa.

This project will be concerned with a study of a mirror theory to the classical
Bott-Borel-Weil construction in algebraic geometry. Bott-Borel-Weil gives a
geometric description of all finite dimensional, irreducible representations of
semi-simple Lie groups in terms of equivariant vector bundles on the
corresponding homogeneous spaces. The latter are Fano varieties, for which
Kontsevich's homological mirror symmetry has been studied extensively over the
past decade. In particular, the predicted mirror partner to such varieties is an
explicitly known Landau-Ginzburg model. Homological mirror symmetry suggests
that there should be Lagrangian submanifolds, mirroring the equivariant vector
bundles, and Floer cohomology of pairs of such Lagrangians should form the
underlying vector space of a representation of the Lie group. In a recent work
(jointly with J. Pascaleff), PI defined the notion of an equivariant Lagrangian
brane where equivariance is to be understood with respect to an algebraic action
of a Lie algebra on the mirror variety. In addition, the simplest non-trivial
example of the aforementioned mirror theory to Bott-Borel-Weil construction was
worked out. The current project will extend these constructions to the case of
an arbitrary semisimple Lie algebra with the main motivation being the
identification of a canonical basis of representations coming from intersections
of Lagrangian submanifolds.
