
* 1510640
* Aspects of non-positive curvature
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2015,06/01/2015
* Jean-Francois Lafont,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2018
* USD 220,466.00

Abstract Award: DMS 1510640, Principal Investigator: Jean-Francois R. Lafont

The main goal of this project is to study spaces of negative (or more generally,
non-positive) curvature. Negatively curved spaces are ones which, at every point
and every pair of directions, look like the surface of a saddle. While this type
of space might sound odd, it is in fact pervasive in mathematics. For these
spaces, there is a tight link between the geometry (quantitative features of the
space) and the topology (qualitative features of the space). In addition, these
spaces have some very interesting dynamical systems associated to them, where
one can study how objects move over time. As a result, the study of these spaces
provides a melting pot for different viewpoints and methods, making for a rich
field of study. This project plans on using these three different approaches
(geometry, topology, dynamics) to shed some light on these spaces.

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to work on a series of projects that are
centered around the notion of non-positive curvature. The PI's projects loosely
fall into three broad categories: geometry, topology, and dynamics. On the
geometric side of things, the PI plans on focusing on the distinction, for
manifolds, between Riemannian non-positive curvature and metric non-positive
curvature. The PI also proposes to study discrete versions of Gromov's systolic
inequality. Another project involves studying the relation of almost-isometry
for groups and spaces. On the topological side of things, the PI plans on giving
combinatorial formulas for the topological K-theory of 3-dimensional hyperbolic
reflection groups. The PI will also classify Gromov hyperbolic groups with
Sierpinski curve boundary. Another project concerns hyperbolization and the sign
of the Euler characteristic. Finally, the PI plans on studying the topology of
Anosov splittings. For the dynamical aspects of this proposal, the PI wants to
establish marked length rigidity for Fuchsian buildings. He also wants to show
that certain aspherical manifolds cannot support Anosov diffeomorphisms. Another
project is to show the geodesic flow on locally CAT(-1) spaces has the
specification property.
