
* 1510034
* Geometry, group theory, and dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/2015,06/04/2015
* Christopher Leininger,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 336,141.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1510034, Principal Investigator: Christopher J. Leininger

To study the long-term behavior of an evolving physical or geometric system one
can look at its "cross sections." For example, to analyze a fluid flowing
throughout a closed system, we might deposit tracers into the fluid at a
particular location then examine how it has been mixed, distorted, or changed
when (and if) it returns. We can also try to predict how the behavior of the
"first-return" to the starting location-called a cross section-might influence
or predict the behavior at some other cross section. One goal of this project is
to study the evolution of certain classes of abstract mathematical systems,
similar in many ways to the fluid flow just described, which arise from
geometric and algebraic considerations. Previous work of the PI with S. Dowdall
and I. Kapovich provides structural results which relate the cross sections and
their first-returns to one another and to the original system. The PI will
continue this analysis with Dowdall and Kapovich and pursue deeper connections
between different cross sections and with the ambient system. The PI's work with
Dowdall and Kapovich, past and future, is motivated by the foundational work of
W. Thurston, D. Fried, and C. McMullen in a more classical setting, but diverges
in fundamental and striking ways. The PI will also continue his analysis of the
classical setting with Agol and Margalit investigating further connections and
generalizations that might provide a unified theory.

This project involves aspects of geometry, topology, group theory, and dynamics.
The central objects are surface homeomorphisms and train track maps for free
groups automorphisms. The PI will continue his work with Dowdall and Kapovich,
analyzing free-by-cyclic groups via special semi-flows on 2-complexes. In
addition to strengthening the connection between different cross sections, for
example proving that full-irreducibility for monodromies is a property shared by
all or none of the sections, he will also tie together all the monodromies with
an action of the entire group on a tree and connect the Cannon-Thurston maps to
each other. With Margalit and Agol-Margalit, the PI will continue to analyze the
classical setting of suspension flows of pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms in an
attempt to understand all systoles of moduli spaces. In his work with Kent,
Bestvina-Bromberg-Kent, and others, the PI will continue his geometric analysis
of subgroups of the mapping class group and convex cocompactness.
