
* 1510091
* Some Questions in Low-Dimensional and Contact Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2015,08/17/2015
* Olga Plamenevskaya,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2019
* USD 169,947.00

This project aims to carry out research on several interrelated topics in
contact and low-dimensional topology. A "contact structure'' is an extra
geometric structure on a manifold (these structures originate from physics); the
study of contact structures and knots in contact manifolds draws on ideas from
different fields (geometry, algebra, combinatorics). This project will
contribute to the development of these areas, especially to geometry of
manifolds. The main part of the project concerns the investigation of "right-
handed'' and "left-handed'' properties of certain knots. Related ideas often
appear in the broader context of geometry, algebra, and physics.

This project will focus on two different topics. The first topic concerns knot
theory and contact topology in dimension 3, and is related to knot invariants of
gauge-theoretic and combinatorial nature. The project's goal is to develop
properties and applications for a special class of transverse knots (those with
certain "positivity" properties); the PI expects to find relations between
algebraic properties of corresponding braids, behavior of invariants from knot
Floer and Khovanov homology (including an invariant introduced by the PI in
2006), properties of symplectic surfaces (cobordisms) connecting the knots, and
rigidity of their branched double covers. This investigation develops a novel
approach (with a focus on braid group orderings and the braid monodromy) but
also continues the PI's past research. The PI also plans to continue studying
flexible phenomena in higher-dimensional contact topology and expects to
contribute to this rapidly developing area. The goal is to better understand
properties of rigid/flexible contact manifolds, developing analogs of existing
results in dimension 3.
