
* 1543617
* Knots in Washington XLI: a Conference Series on Knot Theory and its Ramifications; November 13-15, 2015
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2015,07/13/2015
* Jozef Przytycki,DC,George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 83,998.00

There will be six conferences over the next three-year period. This is a
continuation of a very successful conference series "Knots in Washington", with
a conference held every semester in the greater Washington DC area since Fall
1995. The first conference funded under this grant (and the 51st conference in
the series) will be held in Fall 2015. The series will provide opportunity for
researchers in the area to share their latest ideas and to collaborate with each
other. The presentations will include plenary talks by distinguished
researchers, as well as short talks by various participants. Graduate students
and recent PhDs will also be encouraged to attend. Over the years, we have
attracted a large number of postdocs, graduate students, and even some
undergraduate students. In the greater Washington DC area, the series helps to
bring together the relevant researchers, and to boost research activities in the
region. Internationally, "Knots in Washington" has attracted researchers from
all over the world, and is now considered a major conference in knot theory and
low-dimensional topology. We expect to publish conference proceedings (as we did
in the past) containing cutting-edge research papers and lecture notes that will
be suitable for research mathematicians, students, and readers with background
in other exact sciences, including physics, computer science, biology, and
chemistry.

The next conference will focus on the connections between Khovanov homology,
homology of distributive structures, Yang-Baxter homology, and Quantum
Computing, as well as on the general idea of categorification, including
categorification of skein modules. There have been exciting new developments in
the area of knot theory and 3-manifold topology in the last 35 years -- from
Jones polynomial and quantum invariants of 3-manifolds, through Vassiliev
invariants, topological quantum field theories, to relations with gauge theory
type invariants in 4-dimensional topology (e.g., Donaldson, Witten). More
recently, a new development in quantum topology has emerged in the form of
Khovanov homology, a generalization of the Jones type polynomials to homology of
chain complexes that significantly generalizes the invariants. Also, the
categorification of the Kauffman bracket skein module of 3-manifolds has been
proposed and developed for some manifolds. The relation to Hochschild homology
of algebras has been discovered and studied. The (quantum) complexity of
computing the Jones polynomial and Turaev-Viro invariants have been analyzed.
Knots in Washington will provide a place for researchers in the above mentioned
areas to communicate with each other and work together. The organizers will
strive to be at the frontier of new developments in knot theory and its
ramifications. Distinguished researchers will give plenary talks surveying the
state of knowledge related to Khovanov homology. The choice of conference topics
will also reflect the strength of the topology group at the George Washington
University. Conference Web Page: http://home.gwu.edu/~przytyck/knots/index.html
