
* 1606290
* Stable stems - the computation of stable homotopy groups of spheres
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2016,09/08/2016
* Daniel Isaksen,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 166,831.00

Award: DMS 1606290, Principal Investigator: Daniel C. Isaksen

High-dimensional spheres are the basic building blocks of all geometric objects.
It turns out that spheres of different dimensions can fit together in only
certain combinations to create more complicated geometric objects. The
computation of stable homotopy groups is essentially the same as counting these
combinations. This computation has been a major topic of research since the
middle of the 20th century. This work belongs to the field of homotopy theory,
which is a technique for studying geometric objects up to certain kinds of
deformations. Motivic homotopy theory is a version of homotopy theory that
applies to problems in algebraic geometry. This project exploits the
similarities and differences between classical homotopy theory and motivic
homotopy theory to compute stable homotopy groups.

The computation of stable homotopy groups of the sphere spectrum is among the
most fundamental problems in homotopy theory. The projects goals are to apply
Adams spectral sequences at the prime 2 to compute: (1) classical stable
homotopy groups; (2) motivic stable homotopy groups over C; (3) motivic stable
homotopy groups over R; and (4) C2-equivariant stable homotopy groups. These
four computations are closely interrelated. Their connections reveal structure
that is not apparent within just one type of stable homotopy group. At face
value, the computation of the C2-equivariant Adams spectral sequence presents
unmanageable technical complexities. There is a path to C2-equivariant
computations that proceeds through intermediate stages of C-motivic and
R-motivic calculations. At each stage, new complexities arise, but they are
manageable when taken one at a time. The first step is to compute algebraic Ext
groups that serve as the E2-page of the Adams spectral sequence. These Ext
groups are in themselves quite complicated, and typically are obtained with an
auxiliary spectral sequence. Since this part of the problem is entirely
algebraic, computers can be used to great effect here. The second step is to
compute Adams differentials and hidden extensions. This process usually requires
subtle work with Toda brackets and is no longer algebraic. Several techniques
will be employed: (a) brute force computation in a range of dimensions; (b)
machine-assisted computation to produce algebraic data and to organize the many
individual computational facts into a consistent whole; (c) description of the
global structure of stable homotopy groups by means of periodicity operators;
and (d) comparison between the Adams-Novikov and Adams spectral sequences.
