
* 1607744
* Spatial Graphs and Their Application to Complex Molecular Structures
* DMS,Genetic Mechanisms, TOPOLOGY, Cross-BIO Activities, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2016,03/18/2022
* Erica Flapan,CA,Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2022
* USD 197,044.00

The broad goal of this research project is to use the tools of topology and
geometry to help molecular biologists and chemists better understand the
structure and behavior of DNA, proteins, and complex synthetic molecules. The
topological model under study would help molecular biologists by simplifying the
analysis of the site-specific recombination mechanism for closed circular DNA
molecules. The investigator also aims to identify the forms of knots, links, and
non-planar graphs that arise in proteins, and to model how these complex
structures may have occurred. This information may offer valuable insights into
protein folding mechanisms and degradation pathways. Synthetic organic molecules
are normally too small to see with an electron microscope; when chemists
synthesize a complex structure they use data from nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy to provide evidence that the molecular structure has a
particular form. Since these structures are large enough to be somewhat
flexible, both topology and geometry have to be taken into account when
comparing the symmetry properties of the NMR data to those of a physical model.
The investigator is working with organic chemists to identify different types of
symmetries exhibited by complex structures and to design new structures with
interesting symmetry properties.

In contrast with knots and links, whose topology depends exclusively on their
embedding in the three dimensional sphere, the intrinsic structure of some
graphs can affect the topological properties of every embedding of the graph in
a given three dimensional manifold. For example, some graphs have the property
that for any embedding G of the graph in a three-manifold M, there is no
orientation reversing homeomorphism of the pair (M,G). Such a graph is said to
be intrinsically chiral in M. The investigator will work on characterizing which
graphs are intrinsically chiral in the three-sphere and in other three-
dimensional manifolds, as well as determining other properties of embedded
graphs which are independent of the particular embedding of the graph. The
project draws on three-manifold results including Jaco-Shalen and Johannson
characteristic decompositions, Mostow's rigidity theorem, Thurstons'
hyperbolization theorem, and the classification of Seifert manifolds, as well as
techniques from knot theory and the theory of tangles.
