
* 1607616
* Automorphism Groups and Morse Boundaries
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2016,07/11/2018
* Ruth Charney,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 408,740.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1607616, Principal Investigator: Ruth Charney

Mathematics is used to model physical systems and to analyze data sets.
Increasingly, these models take the form of geometric objects. This project
focuses on a class of geometric objects that arise as models in a number of
contexts, including robotics and genetics. Geometric properties of these models
and their symmetry groups are reflected in properties of the physical systems.
Questions may involve either local geometry (what happens near a particular
point) or large-scale geometry (the structure of the object viewed from a
distance). This project concerns large-scale geometry. By introducing a new
notion of a "boundary" for the geometries in question, we are able to identify
and quantify certain types of behavior, known as hyperbolic behavior. The study
of these boundaries, and their implications for the geometry and symmetry of the
objects in question, is the main theme of this project.

Boundaries of geodesic metric spaces have played an important role in the study
of hyperbolic groups, for example in proving rigidity theorems and dynamical
properties. Boundaries can also be defined for CAT(0) spaces, however they are
not quasi-isometry invariant, hence do not give a well-defined boundary for a
CAT(0) group. In recent work, the principal investigator and Sultan introduced a
new boundary, called the Morse boundary, for CAT(0) spaces which is quasi-
isometry invariant and behaves more like the boundary of a hyperbolic space.
Subsequently, Cordes generalized this construction to obtain a Morse boundary
for any proper geodesic metric space. This offers a potentially powerful new
tool for studying large classes of groups, such as acylindrically hyperbolic
groups. The first part of this project will investigate properties of these
boundaries and their implications for the groups in question. The second part of
the project concerns automorphism groups of right-angled Artin groups (RAAGs).
Automorphism groups of free groups, mapping class groups, and linear groups have
many properties in common. Automorphism groups of RAAGs give a context in which
to study these commonalities. As Teichmuller space has been central to the study
of mapping class groups, Culler and Vogtmann's Outer space has been a
fundamental tool in the study of automorphism groups of free groups. Similarly,
analogues of the curve complex of a surface have been introduced for free groups
and shown to be hyperbolic. The second part of this project seeks to find an
analogous Outer Space for RAAGs and to study generalizations of the free factor
and free splitting complexes for all RAAGs.
