
* 1608596
* Conference Travel Funding: Alpine Conference on Algebraic and Applied Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2016,12/21/2015
* Brenda Johnson,NY,Union College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2017
* USD 34,160.00

The Alpine Conference on Algebraic and Applied Topology will take place August
15th through August 21st in Saas-Almagell, Switzerland. The conference will
bring together experts in both the theoretical aspects of algebraic topology and
the growing range of scientific applications of topology. The conference program
will consist of lectures by the invited plenary speakers, together with
contributed talks from other conference participants. The plenary speakers will
inform participants about recent advances in their fields, and provide insight
into possible directions for future work. All participants will have the
opportunity to discuss their work with and receive feedback from others experts
in the field, to continue existing and form new collaborations, and to learn
more about potentially useful tools and techniques outside their areas of
expertise. This award will ensure that the US algebraic topology community is
well-represented at this important conference, and, in particular, that early-
career topologists from the US have the opportunity to participate.

The invited plenary speakers for the conference are Agnes Beaudry (Chicago),
Andrew Blumberg (UT-Austin), Pedro Boavida de Brito (Louvain-la-Neuve), David
Chataur (Lille), Cristina Costoya (Coruna), Emanuele Dotto (MIT), John Greenlees
(Sheffield), John Harer (Duke), Lars Hesselholt (Copenhagen), Marc Hoyois (MIT),
Nitu Kitchloo (Johns Hopkins), Vidit Nanda (Penn), and Vesna Stojanoska (UIUC).
As evidenced by the choice of plenary speakers, the conference will cover a
broad spectrum of subjects within algebraic topology, including chromatic and
stable homotopy theory, manifolds and functor calculus, K-theory, homotopy
theory and algebraic geometry, equivariant stable homotopy theory and
commutative algebra, applications of homotopy theory to group theory, and
operads and rational homotopy theory. In addition, this conference will feature
an emphasis on the use of techniques from algebraic topology in applications,
including data analysis, shape recognition, and networks. This conference will
enable researchers to survey the state of the art in algebraic topology, provide
theoretical algebraic topologists a forum in which to learn about recently
developed applications of topology, and give applied topologists an opportunity
to become acquainted with the latest theoretical results and methods.

Additional information the conference can be found at the conference website:
http://www.math.univ-paris13.fr/arolla2016/.
