
* 1608684
* Submanifolds and Metrics in Contact Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2016,07/02/2016
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2019
* USD 317,582.00

Contact structures on manifolds are natural objects, born over two centuries
ago, in the work of Huygens, Hamilton, and Jacobi, on geometric optics. They
have been studied by many mathematicians and seem to touch on diverse areas of
mathematics and physics, but only in the last few decades have they moved into
the foreground of mathematics. This is due to the remarkable breakthroughs in
contact topology, resulting in a rich and beautiful theory with many
applications. Studying subsets and their interactions with such structures was
instrumental in the understanding of three-dimensional spaces, and it led to
profound progress. The Principal Investigator will now extend this to higher
dimensions, where this exploration is likely to prove equally illuminating. The
Principal Investigator will also continue to study properties of contact
structures on low-dimensional spaces and their interaction with topology and
Riemannian geometry, and he will train the next generation of researchers by
working with a large group of graduate students and organizing conferences and
seminars.

The research supported by this award will focus on problems centered around
three broad topics: the interactions of contact geometry and topology in low
dimensions, properties and constructions of contact manifolds in higher
dimensions, and connections between contact geometry and the more familiar
Riemannian geometry. In low dimensions the main motivating question is to
determine which three-manifolds admit a tight contact structure. Currently quite
a bit is known about this question, but very little is known about it for
hyperbolic homology spheres. This problem will be studied using a variety of
techniques, from convex surfaces, to holomorphic curves and Riemannian geometry.
In addition, understanding interactions between various properties a contact
structure can have will be studied. While much is known about contact geometry
in low dimensions, there is very little known in higher dimensions. The
principal investigator will study constructions and properties of high-
dimensional contact manifolds. The starting point for this will be the study of
isotropic and contact submanifolds of contact manifolds. Such considerations
have led to a wealth of information in low-dimensions and it is expected to be
similarly fruitful in higher dimensions as well. In the past few years there
have been some interesting and subtle connections between contact geometry and
Riemannian geometry. The Principal Investigator will explore this further hoping
to find contact geometric analogs of classical results relating topology to
Riemannian geometry.
