
* 1611786
* Chromatic homotopy - stable and unstable
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2016,07/11/2018
* Mark Behrens,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2020
* USD 327,078.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1611786, Principal Investigator: Mark J. Behrens

This project aims to address major problems in the field of algebraic topology.
Topology is the study of geometry (in any number of dimensions) where you
identify one geometric object with another if one can be deformed into the
other. The goal of algebraic topology is to ascribe discrete algebraic
invariants to these geometric objects to distinguish their topological types. In
this way, distinguishing geometric objects is reduced to algebraic computations.
Such algebraic computations are desirable, because they can be handled by a
computer, for example. An early success of algebraic topology was the
classification of all possible surfaces (2-dimensional objects) by means of
Euler characteristic (a number, defined by Euler in the 18th century) and
orientability (e.g., a Mobius strip is nonorientable). By contrast, the
situation in higher dimensions is much more intractable, and is the subject of
active research. Understanding the topological type of geometric objects is a
fundamental act of scientific/mathematical inquiry, comparable to the study of
prime numbers, or the classification of the fundamental particles that
constitute matter and carry forces. However, there are also important
applications of algebraic topology. We live in a 3-dimensional universe
(4-dimensions if you include time). What is the shape of this universe?
Addressing this question requires a working knowledge of the possible shapes in
3 or 4 dimensions. The fundamental interactions of matter and forces in particle
physics is governed by quantum field theory. The global behavior of the
partition functions of such theories involves topological considerations. Such
considerations are impossible to avoid in the context of string theory, as a
moving string traces out a surface. Topological computations have recently been
applied to solve problems in solid state physics. Also, data involving the
interrelation of a large number of variables naturally traces out a high
dimensional geometric object in a higher dimensional space. The study of such
data-sets using algebraic topology is the subject of the new and active field of
topological data analysis.

The specific projects proposed are aimed at shedding light on many problems in
algebraic topology surrounding the homotopy groups of spheres, chromatic
homotopy theory, and topological modular forms (tmf). The principal investigator
(PI) and his collaborators will engage in a project to develop the tmf-based
Adams Spectral Sequence to the point where it can be actually used for
calculations. The classical Adams spectral sequence has succeeded in computing
the first 60 stable stems. We expect that since tmf is a much more sensitive
cohomology theory, when properly developed, its associated Adams spectral
sequence could push these computations into the 90s, which would shed light on
the only remaining case of the Kervaire Invariant Problem, in dimension 126. The
PI also plans on using the tmf-based Adams spectral sequence to investigate the
Telescope Conjecture at chromatic level 2. Unstable homotopy will also be
studied through the chromatic lens, using a generalization of Quillen-Sullivan
rational homotopy theory based on topological Andre-Quillen cohomology.
Computations in stable homotopy theory at generic primes using ultra-filters
will be investigated using Drinfeld Modules. The Chromatic Splitting Conjecture
will be investigated using Goodwillie calculus. The PI will also study the
conjectural relationship between the Ochanine genus, topological modular forms,
and smooth structures on loop spaces of spheres.
