
* 1611851
* Geometry of manifolds with large volume
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2016,06/07/2018
* Ian Biringer,MA,Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2021
* USD 227,683.00

A thin rubber sphere can be stretched, pushed in, and otherwise distorted so
that its roundness is lost. For instance, one can contract the equator to
transform the round sphere into an hourglass. While the neck of the hourglass
does not look much like a round sphere anymore, the two bulbs are still pretty
round. The celebrated Gauss-Bonnet theorem says that in some precise sense, no
matter how the sphere is distorted, the average geometry of the result will
still be round. Mathematicians view this result as an example where the topology
of an object (i.e., the fact that it was produced by distorting a round sphere)
constrains its geometry. The broad theme of this proposal is to develop similar
results pertaining to higher dimensional abstract geometric objects.

Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, proved by Perelman in 2003, states that
every closed three-manifold can be cut into pieces, each of which admits one of
eight types of homogenous metrics. Of these pieces, only the hyperbolic three-
manifolds have not been classified. The full statement of the Perelman's result
includes topological conditions that characterize when a closed three-manifold M
admits a hyperbolic metric. Mostow's Rigidity Theorem implies that a hyperbolic
metric on such an M is unique, if it exists, so it is natural to try to extract
concrete geometric information about the metric from the topology of M.
Effective geometrization, studied by the PI and his collaborators, is a program
to extract concrete geometric information about a hyperbolic metric on a three-
dimensional manifold from its topology. A large part of this project involves
finding a description of the geometry of M given only that the number of
elements needed to generate the fundamental group of M is bounded, or that M has
a topological decomposition with certain characteristics. The key technique is
to understand a sequence of closed hyperbolic three-manifolds asymptotically by
passing to geometric limits. This perspective will also be applied outside of
hyperbolic geometry, in the study of the growth of Betti numbers in sequences of
higher rank locally symmetric spaces, in a program inspired by an active field
in graph theory.
