
* 1612473
* Groups acting on hyperbolic spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/15/2016,09/08/2016
* Denis Osin,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 215,368.00

Award: DMS 1612473, Principal Investigator: Denis Osin

Geometric group theory studies algebraic objects (groups) by visualizing them as
sets of transformations of geometric objects (metric spaces). In the 1980s,
Gromov revolutionized the field by introducing the notion of a hyperbolic space
and outlining a broad program of study of isometry groups of such spaces.
Intensive work in this direction has resulted in the rich theory of hyperbolic
and relatively hyperbolic groups. A further generalization, the class of
acylindrically hyperbolic groups, was recently suggested by the Principal
investigator; it received considerable attention in the papers of the PI and
others over the past few years. The main goal of the proposed project is to
continue this work and to make further advances in the study of groups acting on
hyperbolic spaces.

More specifically, the proposed project consists of 4 parts. The main objective
of the first part is to better understand the relation between various
manifestations of negative curvature in geometry, analysis, and topological
dynamics. The second part is devoted to the study of group theoretic Dehn
surgery, an algebraic generalization of Thurston's theory of hyperbolic Dehn
filling introduced in earlier papers of the PI. The PI suggests some further
directions with potential applications to the study of group von Neumann
algebras. The third part is focused on applications of geometric methods to the
study of permutation groups. In particular, the PI proposes a way of solving
several long standing open problems about factorizable groups. In the last part,
the PI defines the poset of actions of a given group on hyperbolic spaces and
proposes several natural questions about it. One direction of particular
interest here is the study of various rigidity phenomena analogous to the marked
length spectrum rigidity of hyperbolic manifolds.
