
* 1612162
* Young Topologists Meeting 2016
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2016,02/10/2016
* Cary Malkiewich,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2017
* USD 29,400.00

This travel grant provides partial support for U.S. participation in the Young
Topologists Meeting 2016, held at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark, July
4th-8th, 2016. The Young Topologists Meeting (YTM) is an annual European
conference focused on the work of graduate students and young researchers in
topology, that brings in participants from all over the world. At the YTM,
junior topologists present their work to a large international audience, and
also attend mini-courses taught by senior topologists. The conference provides
opportunities for the participants to meet new colleagues and mentors, and to
form research collaborations. Its open and supportive atmosphere encourages
young mathematicians, including those from underrepresented groups, to pursue
research careers in topology.

The YTM is an annual event, first started in 2007, and alternating between
Copenhagen, Denmark and Lausanne, Switzerland. The conference features parallel
sessions of contributed talks by graduate students and young researchers,
covering a broad spectrum of topics in topology. In addition to these talks,
there will be mini-courses by three senior topologists, discussing the
connections between algebraic topology and other fields, including
representation theory and K-theory, geometric topology, and mathematical
physics. This year Akhil Mathew (Harvard University, US) will give a course on
Mackey structure and algebraic K-theory. Oscar Randall-Williams (Cambridge
University, UK) and Nathalie Wahl (University of Copenhagen, Denmark) will give
courses on homological stability, diffeomorphism groups, cobordism categories,
and topological field theories. The conference web page is available at
http://www.math.ku.dk/english/research/conferences/2016/ytm2016/
