
* 1613279
* Knot Concordance and Metric Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2016,07/11/2016
* Shelly Harvey,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 309,945.00

This research project concerns low-dimensional topology, which studies the
properties of spaces called manifolds that locally look like the world we live
in. Many of the mathematical tools successfully used to study high-dimensional
manifolds do not apply to manifolds in four or fewer dimensions, and important
fundamental problems remain unresolved. This project studies knots and links,
knotted circular strings in three-dimensional space. Three-dimensional manifolds
can be mathematically represented by framed links, where the so-called framings
are instructions to modify the space near the link. As a consequence, the study
of knots and links is a fundamental tool in understanding three-dimensional
manifolds. In this project, the investigator aims to get a better understanding
of how knots behave as they move through time as a fourth dimension. This line
of investigation constitutes an important subfield of low-dimensional topology
known as concordance. An algebraic operation with properties similar to the
addition of numbers can be performed on the collection of knots, and this leads
to the construction of an algebraic object known as the concordance group. The
concordance group is an extremely complicated entity, which is poorly understood
despite great efforts by many mathematicians. To gain perspective on its
structure, the investigator will introduce a notion of distance and investigate
how certain geometric operations change this distance.

The primary goal of this project is to gain a better understanding of knot and
link concordance. The investigator will do this by studying the concordance
group as both an abelian group with associated filtrations, such as the
n-solvable and bipolar filtrations, and also as a metric space with discrete and
non-discrete metrics. Specific projects are as follows: (1) show that the "other
half'" of the n-solvable filtration is nontrivial; (2) determine if successive
quotients of the n-solvable filtration of the link concordance group are
abelian; (3) understand the relationship between the Milnor invariants of
derivatives of a knot and the concordance class of the knot; (4) view the smooth
knot concordance group as a metric space and study natural geometric operators
acting on it (in particular, show that there is a non-discrete metric on the
subgroup of topologically slice knots T and, in addition, show that the
successive quotients of the bipolar filtration are nontrivial on T); (5) define
the knot complex and study its algebraic topology.
