
* 1615056
* Geometric Topology and Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2016,09/08/2016
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 223,718.00

Award: DMS 1615056, Principal Investigator: James F. Davis

Major branches of theoretical mathematics include topology, algebra, geometry,
analysis, and combinatorics. This project weaves these various threads together.
The major focus is the study of manifolds, which are sets of points locally
modeled on Euclidean space. Sample manifolds in dimension 2 are given by a
plane, the surface of a torus, and the surface of a sphere. However manifolds
exist in all dimensions, and their consideration leads to a rich variety of
examples and uses a rich variety of tools. This project focuses on manifolds
which are analytically simple but topologically complex. The connection between
the disparate fields mentioned above means that one can use topology as a
oracle, producing interesting questions, examples, and research in other areas
of theoretical mathematics. Manifold theory connects with most areas of
mathematics, as well as physical phenomena such as cosmology, string theory, and
classical and quantum mechanics.

The principal investigator proposes six projects. The first is the bordism of
L2-acyclic manifolds. This connects with low-dimensional topology (knot
concordance), with algebra (Hilberts 17th problem and the Witt group of function
fields), with high-dimensional topology (a new form of surgery theory), and
analysis (amenable groups and L2-betti numbers). The second gives a systematic
approach to topological equivariant rigidity, using tools from surgery theory,
stratified spaces, algebraic K-and L-theory, and the Farrell-Jones Conjecture.
The third is to study and apply combinatorial characteristic classes based on
oriented matroids. The fourth is the Nielsen Realization question, where
progress in now possible due to the Farrell-Jones conjecture and the
understanding of manifolds whose fundamental groups are infinite with torsion.
The fifth is foundational work in algebraic L-theory, in particular the
computation of the L-theory of the polynomial ring in n variables with integral
coefficients and the group ring of a free product of groups. The sixth is to
study Brieskorn manifolds produced by algebraic geometry, and, in turn, to use
algebraic geometry to study these manifolds. These problems are all interrelated
with each other; the basic theme being classification of manifolds, their
bundles, and their symmetries.
