
* 1619908
* Workshop for Women in Computational Topology
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Algorithmic Foundations
* 06/15/2016,06/13/2016
* Lori Ziegelmeier,MN,Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support participants attending the first Workshop for Women in
Computational Topology. Computational topology is a new and exciting field
emerging at the intersection of mathematics and computer science, with
applications in areas such as big data, image recognition, and medical imaging,
among many others. Traditionally, representation of women in these research
areas is quite low, and attrition rates are high at all levels. This award will
allow the creation of a network of junior and senior women in this research
area, a strategy which has proven invaluable to broadening participation in such
areas. Participants will spend a week at the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications, providing a critical opportunity for research collaboration as
well as networking and mentoring for women.

Computational topology brings together tools from topology, geometry,
algorithms, and statistics in order to tackle a range of problems from
applications that include graphics, sensor networks, medical imaging, materials
engineering, GIS, big data analysis, and many others. This workshop will form a
series of working groups that will tackle open problems posed by senior women
researchers in computational topology on topics ranging from computing optimal
mappings between surfaces to investigating open problems related to persistent
homology to applying techniques to new applications. Results from the workshop
will be published in an AWM Springer volume, and follow-up events will be
organized in conjunction with AWM to continue to grow the network.
