
* 1619569
* Mid-Atlantic Topology Symposium: New Directions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2016,01/07/2016
* Jack Morava,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2017
* USD 12,000.00

The Mathematics Department at Johns Hopkins University is hosting a "Mid-
Atlantic Topology Symposium: New Directions" at the Homewood campus in
Baltimore, Maryland, Saturday-Sunday, March 12-13 2016. This meeting is inspired
by a similar conference which took place in Spring 2015 at the University of
Virginia. The PIs intend to establish a tradition of such meetings. Algebraic
topology, geometry, and category theory are in the midst of a generational shift
of language, techniques and paradigms, rooted in new ideas about higher
homotopy-theoretic structures in geometry, physics, category theory, and data
analysis. These fields are in ferment, with a forefront defined by a younger
generation of researchers who bring new ideas from higher algebra to classical
areas of geometry, physics, and applied mathematics. This conference is intended
to help clarify the shifting boundaries and intersections in these closely
related fields. Recent developments in computer science, physics, and big data
are changing profoundly our notions of what constitutes geometry; in response,
ideas from homotopy and category theory have provided new algebraic methods for
(re)organizing our understanding of these questions, and how to approach them.

The conference will focus on a developing new global language for both geometry
and algebra, with connections to fields such as the following:

1. arithmetic geometry (new approaches to motives, for example, via motivic
homotopy theory; new techniques in K-theory via Hochschild and cyclic homology;
homotopy-theoretic methods in automorphic forms, with applications to classical
homotopy theory)

2. geometric quantum field theory, for example, through various cobordism
hypotheses (via chiral homology and related not-so-commutative ring spectra)

3. category theory (e.g., through Voevodsky's univalent foundations project and
related work on homotopy type theory in computer science, and involving
foundational work in and applications of higher category theory

Demographic and intellectual developments in these areas have brought a diverse
population of new researchers into the field, and the organizers hope that the
conference will foster and encourage this development. The roster of speakers
emphasizes junior researchers and diversity, but makes no compromises with the
strength of the work under discussion. The speakers exemplify ground-breaking
work in new directions, which points the way toward a new synthesis of algebra
and geometry. This conference is an opportunity to expose graduate students and
new researchers to these developments, and could have significant impact on
their careers. A list of speakers and other details can be found at the
conference website

http://www.math.jhu.edu/matc/
