
* 1624050
* Conference Proposal: Geometric and topological aspects of the representation theory of finite groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2016,02/22/2016
* Srikanth Iyengar,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 38,880.00

The summer school and workshop "Geometric and topological aspects of the
representation theory of finite groups" will take place July 27 to August 5,
2016 at the Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences in Vancouver,
Canada. The summer school will take place July 27-30 and the workshop will take
place August 1-5. Representation theory of finite groups is a very rich subject
with connections to many areas of mathematics. The subject seeks to understand
the ways in which an abstract collection of operators can be expressed as
transformations on a space. Striking developments in this field have recently
been made by researchers in Europe. A major aim of the scheduled events is to
provide an opportunity for graduate students, postdocs, and early-career
researchers to learn about these developments directly from the sources. An
additional aim is to facilitate new collaborations. This project will support
the participation of US-based researchers (predominantly graduate students and
recent PhDs) in the summer school and workshop.

The scientific focus of the summer school and workshop is the representation
theory of finite groups and related algebraic structures, with an emphasis on
the modular case. This is an active area of research in the US and abroad, with
mathematicians on different continents working on different aspects of the
subject. The summer school will be centered around four lecture series: Rational
Cohomology and Support for Linear Algebraic Groups (Eric Friedlander); Group
Actions via Homotopy Theory (Jesper Grodal); Local Representation Theory (Radha
Kessar); and Endo-trivial Modules for Infinite Groups (Peter Symonds). Taken
together, these topics cover a broad range of current research on modular
representation theory of finite groups. The workshop will consist of twenty-
three lectures by international scholars who are are known for their seminal
contributions and for their ability to communicate mathematics effectively. The
lectures from the summer school and workshop will be submitted for publication.
The webpage for the summer school and workshop is
http://www.pims.math.ca/scientific-event/160727-psswgatartofg.
