
* 1624301
* Geometric Group Theory and Low-Dimensional Topology: Recent Connections and Advances
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2016,04/21/2016
* Alan Reid,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This NSF award provides partial support for U.S. based mathematicians to
participate in an advanced school and workshop on "Geometric Group Theory and
Low-Dimensional Topology: Recent Connections and Advances," to be held at ICTP,
Trieste, Italy, 23 May - 3 June 2016. The proposed activity is a mix of "hot
topics" that would afford tremendous opportunities to mathematicians at all
career stages to interact and generate new ideas. The advanced school will
expose graduate students to a diverse array research topics. Introducing both US
based and international students to leading experts from across the globe should
have a profound effect on cultivating mathematics in the US and in the
developing world. The potential for fostering initial contacts and interactions
that lead to closer connections between US based mathematicians and those in the
developing world is a long term benefit for faculty and students.

The main topics to be covered at this advanced school and workshop include
character varieties and deformation of geometric structures, effective geometry
and topology of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, left orderability and Heegaard Floer
theory, the mapping class group action on Teichmuller space and the curve
complex, dynamics on these spaces and virtually special cube complexes and
groups. There have been important developments in these areas recently, for
example: the impact of geometric group theory in the work of Wise and
subsequently Agol's resolution of the famous "virtual conjectures" in 3-manifold
topology. The event website is: http://indico.ictp.it/event/7646/.
