
* 1638464
* Summer School on Surgery and the Classification of Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2016,06/23/2016
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2017
* USD 21,392.00

This award provides partial support towards the travel of US-based early-career
mathematicians to the "Summer School on Surgery and the Classification of
Manifolds" held at the University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, on July 18-22,
2016. This international event is sponsored by the Pacific Institute of
Mathematical Sciences (PIMS) Collaborative Research Group (CRG) in Applied,
Algebraic, and Geometric Topology. Manifolds are geometric objects that locally
resemble flat space. For example, the surface of a doughnut is a two-dimensional
manifold called a torus. The technique of surgery, which involves cutting and
pasting pieces of manifolds, allows a transition from questions in geometry to
quantifiable and easier questions in algebra. The technique of surgery is a
central area of mathematics, but it is quite difficult to learn because it draws
on many other areas. This summer school is an educational outreach program
designed to make the techniques of surgery and manifold topology accessible to a
wide range of graduate students and junior mathematicians. The program includes
lectures by experts, mini-lectures by participants on background topics, and
exercise sessions mentored by experts. Graduate students, junior faculty, women,
minorities, and persons with disabilities are especially encouraged to
participate and to apply for support.

Classification of manifolds is a central area of geometric topology and
intersects with many other fields, including analysis, geometry, algebra, and
group theory. This summer school aims to stimulate education and research in
classification of manifolds and related areas of mathematics. Participants will
have diverse mathematical backgrounds, with knowledge in geometric topology,
algebraic topology, geometric group theory, differential geometry, and geometric
functional analysis. Depending on interest, participants will have different
take-aways from the summer school. A geometric topologist may learn about handle
analysis and the specifics of the topology of manifolds. An algebraic topologist
might learn about how classifying spaces, generalized (co)homology theories, and
algebraic K-theory are used in practice. A geometer might learn about metrics of
positive scalar curvature and tools for the topological classification of
manifolds with geometric structure. A geometric group theorist might learn about
applications of (co)homology of groups and large scale geometry. A geometric
functional analyst would learn about a world parallel to that of C*-algebras and
noncommutative geometry. The website of the summer school is
http://www.pims.math.ca/scientific-event/160718-ssscm
