
* 1652600
* CAREER: Model-Independent Foundations for Higher Infinity-Categories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2017,08/23/2021
* Emily Riehl,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 429,598.00

As the objects that mathematicians study increase in complexity, more
sophisticated tools are required to organize and manipulate the transformations
between them: category theory, the formal study of mathematical objects and
their transformations, is being supplanted by (higher) infinity-category theory,
where morphisms exist in each dimension. A major challenge in this area is that
the fundamental notion of "higher infinity-category" is schematic, and thus
technical developments rely upon explicit models, each of which can be quite
complicated to specify. The PI will conduct three interwoven projects that
advance the model-independent foundations for higher infinity-category theory,
generalizing known results from the quasi-categorical model for infinity-
categories to other models while simultaneously simplifying several technical
proofs, as is often the case when one employs a judiciously chosen abstraction.
The PI plans to co-write a book to make the model-independent foundations of
infinity-category theory accessible to novices and present the new proof
techniques developed in this program. The PI has written two books already, both
of which are freely available online, and has a record of innovative pedagogy
and conference organization. The PI will pursue further educational initiatives,
developing a new discursive introduction to mathematical proof for
undergraduates, expanding her work on campus as a departmental diversity
representative, and facilitating a conversation on professional norms within the
mathematics community through a conference followed by an edited volume of
essays.

The first proposed project, joint with Verity, proves that all infinity-
categorical notions are "model-independent." Hence any theorem proven with the
aid of any model of infinity-categories will apply to them all. Together with
Verity, the PI has introduced the notion of an infinity-cosmos, a universe in
which (higher) infinity-categories live as objects, and has shown that the
theory of infinity-categories can be developed from these axioms. This work
describes a "synthetic" approach to the theory of infinity-categories in
contrast to prior "analytic" approaches. A second proposed project, joint with
Shulman, will develop a parallel synthetic theory of infinity-categories in
homotopy type theory, a new univalent foundations for mathematics that
conjecturally expresses the internal logic of an infinity-topos. The third
proposed project, again joint with Verity, is to generalize from infinity-
categories to higher infinity-categories by investigating the various infinity-
cosmoi whose objects are complicial sets, a particularly economical model of
higher infinity-categories that the PI suspects will ultimately lead to a model-
independent theory.
