
* 1654522
* Generalized scissors congruence
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2016,08/03/2016
* Inna Zakharevich,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 176,794.00

The study of scissors congruence has two major influences. The first is purely
geometric, asking which shapes can be cut up and rearranged into one another.
For example, given 250 sq ft of carpet, is it always possible to carpet a 250 sq
ft room with it? One may think that this depends on the shape of the room, but
it actually does not: assuming that both the carpet and the room have straight
sides, it is always possible. However, this is no longer true with three
dimensions: if you have a 100 cu in box to fill with foam rubber and I give you
100 cu in of foam rubber, you may not be able to fill up the box because the
rubber may be the wrong shape. Generalizing these problems to other dimensions
and geometries is very difficult, and very little is known about the answers.
The second influence is more philosophical: as mathematicians, we often address
problems by "cutting" them up into smaller problems, solving each of the smaller
problems and the reassembling the solutions. However, there is always an
important last step: figuring out whether there is a unique way to reassemble a
solution to the large problem, or whether there are many. The current project on
scissors congruence addresses these issues simultaneously by constructing a
framework for "cutting" and "pasting" together different kinds of "objects," be
they shapes or mathematical objects. This framework allows us to analyze all
such questions together and learn more about the difficulties that arise when
reassembling solutions. In addition, it has applications in many different
subfields of mathematics, including algebraic geometry, logic, number theory and
category theory, producing a novel viewpoint from which to unify different
problems.

A scissors congruence problem is the problem of classifying certain objects
(such as definable sets, varieties, or polytopes) up to decomposition and
isomorphism. Using previously developed techniques for turning a scissors
congruence problem into a spectrum, this project continues analyzing scissors
congruence problems through the lens of stable homotopy theory. This project has
three general objectives: (1) analyzing the Grothendieck ring of varieties using
the higher homotopical information present in the scissors congruence spectrum,
(2) extending results of Goncharov relating mixed Tate motives to spherical
scissors congruence groups to scissors congruence spectra, and (3) exploring the
possibility of using scissors congruence spectra for developing spectrum-valued
motivic integration. By generalizing classical maps between scissors congruence
problems to scissors congruence spectra we hope to produce new geometric and
algebraic invariants which will extend understanding of these problems.
