
* 1707524
* Conference on low-dimensional topology and geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/15/2017,04/11/2017
* Spencer Dowdall,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides travel support for speakers and
participants in the Conference on Low-dimensional Topology and Geometry held at
Vanderbilt University from May 15 to May 19, 2017. Topology and geometry are
central areas of mathematics that have been the focus of active research for
centuries. Topology concerns the mathematical properties of spaces ranging from
the physical, like the surface of a doughnut, to the abstract, like the space of
configurations of robots in a factory or the space of functions that satisfy a
differential equation. Geometry concerns abstract or concrete notions distance
or length, such as the amount of energy to move between two configurations of
robots. Topology and geometry enjoy particularly rich interactions in low
dimensions, and these connections have been a source of profound discoveries in
both fields. The main objective of the conference is to bring together leading
experts who have made substantial contributions in low-dimensional topology and
geometry and to provide a platform to present recent results and propose future
directions of research. The conference is organized in conjunction with the 32nd
Shanks Lecture, which will be delivered by Professor Ian Agol (University of
California, Berkeley). This award provides opportunities for mathematicians from
underrepresented groups and researchers that are early in their career or lack
other sources of travel support to attend and participate in the conference.

The conference will focus on important developments in low-dimensional topology
and geometry, with emphasis on the powerful negative curvature and combinatorial
techniques that have driven many recent advances. Topics will include, but are
not limited to, hyperbolic 3-manifolds, moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces,
mapping class groups, the geometry and topology of curves on surfaces, surface
bundles, Gromov-hyperbolic simplicial complexes, and CAT(0) cube complexes. The
activities will include nineteen keynote talks and the Shanks lecture, with
ample time for questions and discussion. The combination of topics and speakers
will attract numerous participants and will afford students and recent PhDs an
excellent opportunity to interact with and learn from leaders in these fields.
More information is available at the conference website:
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/shanks2017/
