
* 1707857
* Gauge Theory, Floer Homology, and Invariants of Low-Dimensional Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2017,04/23/2019
* Jianfeng Lin,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2019
* USD 152,805.00

This NSF award funds research to study three- and four-dimensional spaces with
knotted curves and surfaces embedded within them. Such objects are of particular
interest to scientists because of their connection to our physical world and the
space-time continuum. These studies will deepen the understanding of our
universe. Moreover, the theory of knotted curves has seen broad applications in
other fields of science, for example, in investigations of the structure of DNA
and that of protein molecules. In recent years, several new techniques have been
introduced to study these low dimensional spaces. This project will be devoted
to further developing the techniques, providing surprising insights and proving
unexpected relationships between existing theories. In collaborative research,
the PI will explore new invariants that would help us distinguish between
different spaces.

This project is devoted to enhancing the power of gauge theory and Floer
homology and applying these tools to the study of three- and four-dimensional
manifolds. In the first part of this project, joint with Tirasan Khandhawit and
Hirofumi Sasahira, the PI will further develop the theory of unfolded Seiberg-
Witten Floer spectrum invariants for general three-manifolds and use it to draw
new conclusions regarding four-manifolds. In the second part of this project,
joint with Daniel Ruberman and Nikolai Saveliev, the PI will carry out research
on invariants of four-manifolds with homology identical to the space obtained as
a product of a circle with a three sphere, with surprising applications in the
study of the three-dimensional homology cobordism group. In the third part of
this project, the PI will seek for a sheaf theoretic description of invariants
from gauge theory, with the goal to make these invariants more flexible and
powerful.
