
* 1708705
* Totally Geodesic Subvarieties in the Moduli Space of Riemann Surfaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2017
* Ronen Mukamel,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2019
* USD 172,999.00

In this NSF funded research, the principal investigator seeks to address
fundamental challenges in the study of dynamical systems in general, and
trajectories of a ball moving in polygons in particular. Dynamical systems are
mathematical objects which evolve in time, and they are ubiquitous in the
applications of mathematics. Whenever mathematics is used to predict the future,
e.g. to predict the weather, the stock market, or the behavior of particles in a
solution, a dynamical system is involved. The dynamical systems in the real
world, like those just mentioned, are often extraordinarily complex. The
principal investigator will study a simple class of dynamical systems modeled on
ideal billiards in polygons with a view towards understanding the complicated
dynamical systems that occur in applications. The principal investigator will
work to uncover and categorize the range of dynamical behaviors possible in
billiard systems, and will continue his research exploring connections between
billiards and the theory of numbers. In addition, the principal investigator
will continue his educational, mentoring, and outreach activities to promote the
broader impacts of his work.

This project seeks to address fundamental challenges in the study of dynamics on
Riemann surfaces and their moduli spaces. These subjects have connections with
many areas of mathematics and important applications to the classification of
mapping classes, the dynamics of rational maps and trajectories of a ball moving
in polygons in polygons. Of particular importance are the special subvarieties
of moduli space which are invariant under the geodesic flow. Such subvarieties
are rare and their origins are mysterious. The principal investigator will
pursue two lines of research. First, the principal investigator and his
coauthors will give new constructions of special subvarieties. Second, the
principal investigator will investigate connections between special subvarieties
and number theory, with the particular goal of understanding the arithmetic
geometry of these spaces.
