
* 1708249
* Geometric Aspects Knot and 3-manifold Invariants
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2017,05/04/2017
* Efstratia Kalfagianni,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2021
* USD 280,000.00

The research in this NSF funded project lies in the area of three-dimensional
topology, where the central objects of study are spaces called three-
manifolds.  A three-manifold is a space that locally looks like the ordinary
three-dimensional space but whose global structure may be complicated. An
important part of three-dimensional topology is also the study of knots, or in
other words, loops embedded in some tangled way in three-manifolds. The solution
of a well-known problem known as Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture has
established that three-manifolds, and complements of knots in them, decompose
into pieces that admit explicit geometries. One of the most common and most
interesting geometries that appear in this setting is hyperbolic geometry.  In
practice, three-manifolds are often given in terms of combinatorial topological
descriptions and it is both natural and important to seek for ways to deduce
geometric information from these descriptions. One of the ways that topologists
have been approaching the study of three-manifolds is through the construction
and study of objects called invariants. In the last few decades, ideas that
originated in quantum physics have led mathematicians to the discovery of a
variety of subtle and powerful invariants of knots and three-
manifolds.  Understanding the connections of topological and combinatorial
quantities and invariants to detailed geometric structures, arising from
Thurston's picture, is a central and important goal of low dimensional
topology.  The main theme of this project is to establish such connections and
to explore their ramifications and applications to topology  as well as other
areas of mathematics.

The project aims to establish intrinsic connections between geometry and
topological descriptions, properties, and quantum invariants of links and three-
manifolds. One part of the project will continue the PI's study of the relations
between Jones-type link polynomials, the topology of essential surfaces in link
complements and hyperbolic geometry. Another part, will study the Turaev-Viro
three-manifold invariants, their relations to other quantum invariants and the
connections of their asymptotics to hyperbolic geometry. A third part will
develop methods for recognizing geometric structures on three-manifolds from
purely combinatorial input, and derive estimates on geometric quantities from
topological data.  A fourth part will study skein link theory in three-
manifolds, its invariants, and its interaction with geometric decompositions of
3-manifolds.  The project also involves research problems  for graduate students
currently working with the PI.
