
* 1708361
* Hierarchy Theory for Automorphism and Outer Automorphism Groups of Free Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2017,06/17/2019
* Lee Mosher,NJ,Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2021
* USD 290,675.00

The study of symmetry dates to ancient times - classic theorems on Platonic
solids are found in Euclid's "Elements." Medieval artisans decorated the walls
of the Alhambra palace with beautiful depictions of planar symmetries also
known, in modern language, as 2-dimensional crystallographic groups. There is
great power in abstraction, and the study of symmetry leaped forward in the mid
19th century when mathematicians formulated the abstract concept of a group.
These advances enabled a flowering of applications to science, such as the use
of 3-dimensional crystallographic groups to explore the atomic structure of
crystalline arrays. Modern geometric group theory is a vast abstraction of the
study of crystallographic groups. The research accomplished under this award
will advance our understanding of geometric group theory by focusing on a class
of groups at the current frontier of knowledge, namely the automorphism and
outer automorphism groups of free groups. These groups encode symmetries and
other relations amongst networks which mathematicians call graphs. Work under
this award will involve construction of new models of relations and symmetries
amongst graphs, leading to the discovery and proof of new theorems in geometric
group theory. Some of this work will be carried out by graduate students under
the advisement of the principal investigator, and mathematical monographs aimed
at beginning graduate students will be produced to aid in their training and for
use by the broader mathematical community.

Research activity under this award (expected to be joint work with Michael
Handel of CUNY) will focus on studying the large scale geometry of the groups
Aut(F) and Out(F), the automorphism and outer automorphism groups of a free
group F of finite rank. In large scale geometry one studies a group by its
actions on various geometries, focusing not on small scale features of those
geometries, but instead on differences and commonalities of large scale
features. Under this award Aut(F) and Out(F) will be studied by developing
hierarchy theories for these groups, in analogy to hierarchy theories used so
successfully to study the large scale geometry of mapping class groups of
surfaces. Constructing a hierarchy theory requires, at a minimum, actions of the
group and various of its subgroups on hyperbolic geodesic metric spaces. Some
things are known already about a hierarchy for Out(F), including actions
representing the top of a hierarchy. But there remain many large gaps in our
knowledge of this topic. To plug gaps in the middle of an Out(F) hierarchy, one
strategy to be pursued under this award will be constructing actions
representing the top of Aut(A) hierarchies for free factors A of F. Another
strategy will be constructing actions that encode Dehn twist behavior, needed to
plug gaps at the bottom of an Out(F) hierarchy. Medium term applications are
expected to reveal geometric properties of word and conjugacy problems for
Out(F). Longer term applications may include shedding light on deep conjectures
about finite asymptotic dimension and quasi-isometric rigidity of Out(F).
Graduate work done under this award is expected to extend hierarchy methods
beyond outer automorphism groups of free groups to include broader categories of
outer automorphism groups.
