
* 1709016
* Floer Homology, Concordance, and Complex Curves
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2017,06/24/2021
* Matthew Hedden,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2022
* USD 411,607.00

This project will study topological and geometric objects, using a broad array
of tools from modern mathematics. A theme central to the project is deepening
our understanding of 4-dimensional aspects of "knotting," an area which attempts
to understand and quantify the method by which strings become tangled and
knotted in space. In addition to a fundamental role that knot theory plays in
topology, its has deep interactions with many seemingly unconnected areas of
mathematics and physics, and even to areas such as polymer science and biology.
One of the primary aims of the project is to understand both how knots evolve
over time and the surfaces that they bound in 4-dimensional space. Imagine a
movie in which a piece of string freely moves in space, becoming more or less
tangled over time. Further, imagine that at some frames in the movie more
drastic phenomena occur such as the appearance or disappearance of a new loop of
string or the gluing of two segments of the string together. Such a movie is
called a "cobordism," and using this idea one can treat knotted pieces of string
in much the same way that we treat numbers; namely, one can add and subtract
knots in an algebraic way. Understanding this arithmetic turns out to have deep
implications for the study of 4-dimensional space, one of the most difficult and
least understood areas of mathematics. Primary goals in this vein include
understanding knotted curves whose cobordisms arise from complex polynomials and
probing the aforementioned algebraic structures using tools inspired by
mathematical physics. In addition to its mathematical goals, the project will
contribute to the organization of conferences and workshops, and provide
critical support for students.

Knot theory and its 4-dimensional aspects play a fundamental role throughout the
project and can be viewed as its primary focus. Specific goals include
determining the faithfulness of geometric maps between concordance and cobordism
groups, topological characterizations of knots that bound complex curves in
Stein domains, and the development of algebraic tools to facilitate computations
of subtle invariant of knots, tangles, and 3-manifolds defined by way of
Lagrangian Floer homology and non-abelian gauge theory. The project crosses
boundaries between topology, analysis, algebra, and combinatorics, and uses
techniques from homological algebra, gauge theory, knot theory, contact
geometry, and the theory of pseudo-holomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds.
