
* 1711089
* Geometry and Dynamics in Surfaces and Free Group Extensions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2017,05/17/2017
* Spencer Dowdall,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2022
* USD 169,930.00

The algebraic properties of the symmetries of an object are encoded by the
mathematical structure known as a group. Formally, a group is simply a set
equipped with a binary operation that satisfies two axioms formalizing the
concept of undoing the operation. Mathematicians are concerned both with the
overarching abstract algebraic structures that arise from these rules, and with
concrete examples that have natural significance, such as the set of rigid
motions of the plane, the configurations of a Rubik's cube, or the symmetries of
a polyhedron. Here free groups, which have a particularly simple algebraic
structure in which there is the minimal possible cancellation, play an essential
role as building blocks from which many other groups are built. Free group
extensions are a basic example of this sort of construction. Yet, despite being
built from well-understood pieces, free group extensions remain rather
mysterious. This project will investigate dynamical, algebraic, and geometric
aspects of free group extensions and combine these perspectives to illuminate
the broad structure of these groups. This expands on the investigator's prior
work with collaborators exploring and relating the different ways a given group
may be built as a free-by-cyclic group, as well as work on the coarse negative
curvature of certain free group extensions.

This project will focus on aspects of geometry, topology, algebra, and dynamics
in the context of free group automorphisms and surface homeomorphisms. The
investigator will continue his work with collaborators analyzing splittings of
free-by-cyclic groups via the dynamics of certain semi-flows on 2-complexes. A
main goal is to tie together all the monodromies of the different splittings via
a uniformized action of the entire group on a tree and to use this to define
canonical algebraic invariants and relate all the Cannon-Thurston maps to each
other. In addition to strengthening these connections, the project will work to
prove that the property of having a fully irreducible monodromy is shared by
either all or none of the splittings of the group. Continuing his work with a
collaborator, the investigator will study the geometry of general free group
extensions and work to characterize Gromov hyperbolicity and establish rigidity
results for this class of groups. With regard to the study of surface
homeomorphisms, the investigator will work with collaborators to show that all
small-dilatation pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms have the simple structure
predicted by the symmetry conjecture. Finally, the investigator will study
large-scale geometric and dynamical properties of the Teichmuller space of a
surface with an aim towards calculating expected thinness of triangles and
lattice point asymptotics for natural sets of surface homeomorphisms.
