
* 1711100
* Extensions of Heegaard Floer Homology and Applications to Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2017,07/18/2017
* Ina Petkova,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2020
* USD 210,294.00

Low-dimensional topology studies the shapes of spaces in dimensions one through
four, and has applications ranging from physics and cosmology (the shape of the
universe) to biochemistry (understanding the behavior of knotted DNA). Closely
related to the study of 3- and 4-dimensional spaces is the study of knots (loops
tied in space). In the early 2000s, Ozsvath and Szabo developed a package of
powerful invariants for knots and 3- and 4-dimensional spaces, generally known
as Heegaard-Floer homology. Heegaard-Floer homology has since taken a major
place in low-dimensional topology, and has helped obtain a lot of new results
and settle numerous old conjectures. The PI and her collaborator have developed
a new algebraic technique for studying the variant for knots (knot Floer
homology), by cutting a knot into pieces called tangles, and studying the
individual pieces and their gluing. This NSF funded project seeks to develop
further this new tool called tangle Floer homology, and use it to study knot
theory problems and to better understand the relation between various knot
invariants. The PI will aim to involve undergraduate and graduate students in
aspects of the project that have combinatorial and computational nature, and
will continue to promote mathematics to a broader audience. Specific components
of the project are to: 1) fully develop the ''minus" version of tangle Floer
homology and introduce new concordance invariants, as well as extend tangle
Floer homology to integer coefficients; 2) understand and develop the
connections between knot Floer homology and quantum algebra, in order to relate
existing knot invariants as well as obtain new ones; 3) use tangle Floer
homology to carry out computations in knot Floer homology and to study problems
on knot and link concordance, mutation, string links, and periodic knots.
