
* 1719564
* Travel Support for Young Topologists Meeting - Stockholm, Sweden - July 2017
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2017,05/25/2017
* Sarah Yeakel,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This travel grant provides partial support for U.S. participation in the Young
Topologists Meeting 2017, held in Stockholm, Sweden by the Royal Institute of
Technology and Stockholm University, July 3rd-7th, 2017. The Young Topologists
Meeting (YTM) is an annual European conference focused on the work of graduate
students and young researchers in topology that brings in participants from all
over the world. At the YTM, junior topologists present their work to a large
international audience, and also attend mini-courses taught by senior
topologists. The conference provides opportunities for the participants to meet
new colleagues and mentors, to learn about current progress of researchers in
their fields, and to form research collaborations. Its open and supportive
atmosphere encourages young mathematicians, including those from
underrepresented groups, to pursue research careers in topology.

The YTM is an annual event, first started in 2007, which traditionally
alternates between Copenhagen, Denmark and Lausanne, Switzerland until 2017 when
it will be hosted in Stockholm, Sweden. The conference features parallel
sessions of contributed talks by graduate students and young researchers,
covering a broad spectrum of topics in topology. In addition to these talks,
there will be mini-courses by two senior topologists, focusing in particular on
techniques that expose underlying structure and connections in algebraic
topology and in general on new applications, avenues of research, and open
problems. This year the mini-courses will be on group homology and stability
("Topology interacting with number theory, representation theory, and algebraic
geometry") and on the comparison of the differential graded world and spectra
("The equivalence of differential graded modules and HZ-module spectra,
applications, and generalizations"). More details are available on the
conference web page: https://www.math-stockholm.se/konferenser-och-akti/young-
topologists-meeting-2017-1.670396
