
* 1725563
* Computational Chromatic Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2016,01/11/2017
* Agnes Beaudry,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2020
* USD 144,208.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1612020, Principal Investigator: Agnes Beaudry

The project supported by this grant is part of a large scale effort to
understand the homotopy groups of spheres, one of the fundamental problems in
algebraic topology. The spheres, which are among the simplest geometric objects,
are building blocks for more complex entities. The homotopy groups of spheres,
which are used to study the connections between these basic components, are
collections of continuous functions between spheres considered up to
deformations. Many problems in other fields, especially differential topology,
have been reduced to the study of these groups, which is notoriously difficult.
However, a bridge has been built between algebraic geometry and algebraic
topology that allows us to use sophisticated algebraic theory to enable
calculations of the homotopy groups of spheres. This bridge is known as
chromatic homotopy theory. This project studies two of the most important
structural conjectures in this field, the telescope and chromatic splitting
conjectures. It has a strong computational component that will provide data to
help study these two fundamental problems.

Chromatic homotopy theory uses higher analogues of K-theory which give rise to
higher periodicity in the stable homotopy groups of spheres. The chromatic
splitting conjecture is an attempt at explaining the relationship between
different periodicities. Recently, the PI has disproved a special case of this
conjecture. In a project with Goerss and Henn, the PI aims to explain this
failure and reformulate the conjecture. In a related project with Xu, the PI
plans to compute the homotopy groups of the K(2)-local sphere at the prime two.
These computations use self-dual resolutions which appear to be related to
Brown-Commenetz duality and the structure of the K(2)-local Picard group. The PI
plans to study this connection with Bobkova, Goerss and Henn. A parallel part of
the project is to study periodicity in relation to the telescope conjecture. In
work with Behrens, Bhattacharya, Culver and Xu, the PI plans to detect periodic
elements using a resolution of the sphere by topological modular forms. The
telescope conjecture gives a connection between periodic elements detected by
such methods and those detected by the K(2)-local sphere. Comparing the two
computations may shed light on this conjecture.
