
* 1748644
* Conference: L2-Invariants and their Analogues in Positive Characteristic
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2018,11/20/2017
* Mark Sapir,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides partial funding for U.S. based
researchers to participate in a mathematical research and training program that
will take place at Instituto de Ciencias Matematicas (ICMAT) in Madrid, Spain,
from February 19, 2018 to June 15, 2018. This is a well-timed and ambitious
program to bring together specialists as well as beginning researchers to study
objects known as L2 invariants and their applications. These invariants draw on
many areas of mathematics, such as Algebra, Analysis, Geometry and Topology, and
in turn provide extremely useful tools to study unsolved problems in these
areas. The objective of the program is two-fold: to train a new generation of
leading researchers, and to facilitate advanced research. In order to achieve
these goals, the program will begin with a two-week long introductory school
aimed at early career researchers, such as graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, followed by several week-long advanced courses, and end with a closing
workshop. Throughout, it will include weakly research and study seminars.
Priority for funding is given to early career researchers. Historically, the
theory of L2-invariants has its origin in the works of M. Atiyah, in which he
proposed an extension of the Atiyah-Singer index theory of elliptic differential
operators on compact manifolds to the non-compact case. The modern definition of
these invariants is more algebraic and uses the language of CW-complexes. The
analogue of the first L2-Betti number in positive characteristic, the
p-gradient, was introduced by M. Lackenby in his study of hyperbolic 3-manifold
groups. The study of L2-invariants is linked to topology, geometry, global
analysis, operator theory, ring theory, group theory and K-theory. This program
aims to reunite leading specialists in these areas in an exciting research
environment at the ICMAT. It is a great opportunity to train young researchers
in an area which has been successful in addressing important problems, such as
the Baum-Connes conjecture and the Hanna Neumann conjecture, and is an important
source of tools and ideas for attacking intriguing open problems in many areas
of mathematics. More information is available at the program website at:
https://www.icmat.es/rt/l2invariants2018/
