
* 1749013
* CAREER: Branes in the Moduli Space of Higgs Bundles
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 06/01/2018,06/27/2022
* Laura Schaposnik,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This National Science Foundation CAREER award supports research in an area of
mathematics that provides powerful tools to tackle problems in geometry and
mathematical physics. Building on her successful NSF-funded research, the PI
will work with topological objects known as Higgs bundles, and their
corresponding spaces of flat connections. The driving themes for the educational
component of the project are inclusion of underrepresented groups, building a
community of researchers in the USA, and outreach to K-12. The PI will organize
several yearly workshops aimed at graduate students and young researchers, with
attention paid to welcoming minorities. The PI, together with her collaborators,
will undertake research towards understanding the appearance of Lagrangian
submanifolds of the moduli space of Higgs bundles supporting holomorphic sheaves
(A-branes) and their dual spaces (B-branes). The overarching goal of the project
is to obtain a geometric classification and to perform a thorough study of
branes in the derived category of coherent sheaves and the Fukaya category of
the moduli spaces of Higgs bundles, to extend the novel methods to other
hyperkahler spaces, and to understand their implications for the geometric
Langlands program. To this aim, the PI shall develop new tools to construct
naturally arising families of branes not only within flat connections and Higgs
bundles, but also in other hyperkahler settings. Moreover, the PI shall explore
different geometric structures appearing through branes, including the study of
hyperpolygons and automorphism groups, and further nonabelianization of spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
