
* 1758087
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Trisections -- New Directions in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2017,09/05/2017
* Jeffrey Meier,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2019
* USD 127,790.00

Topology is the study of spaces in a broad sense, from the three-dimensional
space and four-dimensional space-time in which we live, to very high dimensional
spaces such as the space of all possible configurations of a robot with numerous
complicated joints. Smooth topology uses the tools of calculus to understand and
classify these spaces; intriguingly, different dimensions behave very
differently when looked at through the lens of calculus. Most surprisingly,
foundational problems have been solved in dimensions less than and greater than
four, but stubbornly resist attack in the space-time in which we actually live.
This project brings together a group of researchers, with a diverse set of
skills and experience, to help tackle these fundamental problems in smooth four-
dimensional topology, by utilizing a key new idea about how to decompose
(trisect) four-dimensional spaces into elementary building blocks. In
particular, the study of trisections allows exporting many successful ideas from
three-dimensional topology to four-dimensional topology. Along with the study of
four-dimensional spaces in their own right, the investigators will also study
the ways in which lower-dimensional spaces can be embedded in dimension four, in
analogy with the study of knots as embeddings of circles in three-dimensional
space. Using these tools and analogies, this focused research group aims to
develop new ways to distinguish four-dimensional objects, new four-dimensional
constructions, and new applications of four-dimensional results to topology and
geometry in other settings and dimensions.

The smooth topology of four-dimensional manifolds remains one of the greatest
mysteries in topology, as evidenced by open questions such as the Poincare and
Schoenflies conjectures, which have been solved in all dimensions other than
four. This focused research group aims to breathe new life into this important
field of study by exploiting a striking new perspective on four-manifolds: Every
four-manifold decomposes into three simple pieces, and this trisection is unique
up to a natural stabilization. The setup exactly parallels the three-dimensional
theory of Heegaard splittings, setting the table for an interesting and valuable
exchange of ideas between dimensions three and four. Many extremely rich
theories have been developed over the last few decades in low-dimensional
topology, such as contact topology, Heegaard Floer homology, Heegaard splittings
and bridge splittings, Khovanov homology, Dehn surgery, curve complexes, and
thin position. These ideas now have the potential to interact with the theory of
trisections. The focus of this project is the development of these connections
into a comprehensive theory that solves important problems in four-dimensional
topology.
