
* 1763675
* Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry Winter School
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2018,07/20/2018
* Bryden Cais,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

With support from this award, the Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry will
continue its series of annual "Winter Schools" in 2019 taking place March 2-6,
2019 at the University of Arizona in Tucson, AZ. Since its founding in 1997, the
primary activity of the Southwest Center is the Arizona Winter School (AWS), an
annual meeting which has become a prominent national event and provides high-
level training and research experience for graduate students in arithmetic
geometry and related areas. The AWS is organized around a different central
topic each year and features a set of courses and accompanying research projects
carefully designed and delivered by leading and emerging experts. The result is
a unique fusion of traditional mathematics conference and intensive research
workshop: the speakers organize courses of four or five lectures, provide
lecture notes in advance, and propose research projects for graduate students to
work on during the meeting. Nightly working sessions on these projects and on
separate problem sets are run by the speakers and postdoctoral fellows. On the
last day, students present their findings to the participants of the meeting.
The result is a particularly intense and focused five days of mathematical
activity for everyone involved. At the AWS, connections among peers are formed,
and mentoring relationships between students and senior researchers are
developed. Subsequent collaborations between participants at all levels are the
norm. Students make concrete strides toward becoming research mathematicians,
post-doctoral assistants gain valuable mentoring experience in their academic
careers, and faculty develop new interests and see new connections that lead to
important published results. The Southwest Center website shares reusable
content from the Winter Schools, including lecture notes, project descriptions,
and audio and video of lectures (both live-streamed and permanently archived).
Through these thorough records, the dialogues begun at the AWS are extended to
the greater community, and the efforts of the AWS participants are made freely
and indefinitely available to all. More information about the upcoming and past
Arizona Winter School programs can be found at the Southwest Center's website:
http://swc.math.arizona.edu/

The 2019 AWS will be held on the topic of Topology and Arithmetic, exploring the
boundary of higher homotopy theory and arithmetic geometry. The development and
maturation of higher category/homotopy theory is one of the most significant
achievements in topology in the last decade, and has recently found striking
applications to number theory and arithmetic geometry. The earliest applications
were to topological quantum field theories, cobordisms, and elliptic cohomology;
even here, the interaction between generalized cohomology theories and formal
groups yielded results of interest to arithmetic geometry (especially, the
elucidation of the geometry of Lubin--Tate and Gross--Hopkins moduli spaces of
formal groups). More recent progress abounds. Gaitsgory--Lurie study Tamagawa
numbers (a fundamental invariant of algebraic groups over global fields) via
topological techniques. Bhatt--Morrow--Scholze establish the existence of a
weight filtration on topological Hochschild homology whose graded pieces are
related both to classical cohomology theories (de Rham, crystalline) and to
integral p-adic Hodge theory. Work of Wickelgren and others develop arithmetic
aspects of A1-homotopy theory, extending some enumerative problems from the
complex numbers to other fields. The 2019 Winter School will focus on exposition
of applications and connections to arithmetic geometry, rather than the
development of a general theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
