
* 1807558
* A Topological Approach to Questions in Dynamical Systems
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2018,08/08/2018
* Lex Oversteegen,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,998.00

Mathematical models are widely used to understand the world around us and to
predict how changes in the parameters will affect the future. Understanding the
long-term behavior of models is an important scientific endeavor. In dynamical
systems, a research sub-area in mathematics, one studies such mathematical
models and attempts to understand their long-term behavior as well as
consequences of changes in parameters. A standard approach to studying
complicated mathematical models is to perturb them to simpler models and to show
that certain conclusions for the simpler models are also valid for the more
complicated models. Research funded by this award will contribute to the
solution of three main problems that address basic aspects of dynamical systems
and offer insights for the creation of new models. Many mathematical models are
based on homogeneous spaces. In recent work, the investigator and his
collaborators provided a complete classification of homogeneous plane continua,
solving a problem that dates back to the 1920s. In this project these techniques
will be exploited to address classification of all one-dimensional homogeneous
continua. Parameter spaces are in general extremely complicated and very little
is known about them. Thurston showed that the parameter space of complex
polynomials of degree two can be modeled by the space of degree two invariant
laminations. This combinatorial model is simpler than the Mandelbrot set and is
completely described. Every complex polynomial of degree two corresponds to a
single point in this combinatorial model and its location in the combinatorial
model determines the topological dynamics of the polynomial. In another
direction, the investigator will focus on understanding the topology and
geometry of the spaces of invariant laminations of higher degrees, which is the
first step in extending Thurston's work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
