
* 1810893
* Higher Structure in Low-Dimensional Floer Theories
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2018,07/19/2020
* Robert Lipshitz,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 230,000.00

Humanity has been interested in the geometry of three-dimensional spaces since
long before recorded history; since Einstein's work on general relativity, the
geometry of four-dimensional spaces has also been of central importance, with
applications now as ubiquitous as the global positioning system. Mathematicians
have divided the study of spaces into two parts: qualitative questions (like
whether a space has a hole in it), which is the field of topology, and
quantitative questions (like the diameter of the hole), which is the field of
geometry. Most, though not all, applications require quantitative answers, but
before one can start on quantitative answers---the geometry---one needs to
understand the qualitative behavior---low-dimensional topology, the focus of
this National Science Foundation funded project. Indeed, in four-dimensions,
even many of the most basic topological questions remain unanswered---questions
about how many different simple spaces there are, how spaces can be cut up into
simpler pieces, and what kinds of surfaces one can fit in given four-dimensional
spaces. By using relations with other parts of mathematics and high-energy
physics, this proposal seeks to advance human understanding by developing tools
to answer some of these basic questions. This project, which focuses on
applications of symplectic topology, algebraic topology, and representation
theory to low-dimensional topology, has four interrelated goals. The first goal
is to extend Lipshitz-Ozsváth-Thurston's "bordered Heegaard Floer homology"
invariant of three-manifolds with boundary from the "hat" variant to the richer
"minus" variant, for three-manifolds with torus boundary. The second goal is to
prove a higher naturality result for Heegaard Floer homology, giving a functor
from an appropriate quasi-category of decorated cobordisms to the quasi-category
of chain complexes. The third goal is to prove new localization results relating
the Heegaard Floer homology of a space with the Heegaard Floer homology of its
branched covers. The fourth is to extend Lipshitz-Sarkar's stable homotopy
refinement of Khovanov homology to cobordisms between knots and to other
variants of Khovanov homology, including Lee homology. These tools are expected
to have applications to concordance, homology cobordism, and other problems at
the interface of three- and four-dimensional topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
