
* 1811428
* Random Algebraic Topology
* DMS,PROBABILITY, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2018,05/21/2020
* Takashi Owada,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 158,936.00

This project involves two areas of mathematics, probability and algebraic
topology. The significant interaction between these areas has recently begun
with "applied" algebraic topology, finding a wide range of applications in
sensor networks, bioinformatics, computational chemistry, manifold learning,
linguistics, and cosmology. This is due to the fact that many of the data set
handled by applied topologists are based on a random sample from a larger
population or contain different types of errors. Failure to capture the
stochastic nature of topological data can result in a serious misunderstanding
of the topology of the system. For example, the layer of extraneous topologies
triggered by heavy-tailed errors, as a phenomena analogous to that of audio
crackle in temporal signal analysis, will make it very hard to recover an
underlying topology of the system. Another example includes topology on non-
Euclidean spaces, especially those negatively curved. One good motivation for
this study lies in its tree-like structure as a result of negative curvature. By
virtue of this structure, the resulting non-Euclidean model can potentially be
employed for analyses of various complex networks in physics, computer science,
and cosmology. Combining topological concepts with the notion of randomness,
this projects aims to properly understand random topology of the system. This
project addresses research questions on random algebraic topology. Despite its
recent development, most of the studies on random algebraic topology do not pay
sufficient attentions to how heaviness or lightness of the tail of probability
distributions affects the topology. One of the main focuses is on topological
crackle - the layered structure of topological elements, typically caused by a
heavy-tailed distribution. Although topological crackle has been recognized, at
least empirically, in the statistical manifold learning, this project
investigates it thoroughly from a probabilistic viewpoint. In light of the
involvement of heavy-tailed distributions, extreme value theory (EVT) will be
selected as a main tool for this study. Relying on EVT, the PI aims to establish
a theoretical foundation for a graphical descriptor of the birth and death of
topological cycles, called persistence diagram. One of the main focuses is on
the random configuration of points in the persistence diagram by regarding them
as a random closed set and discussing their asymptotics in terms of the Fell
topology. As the second main topic, the project attempts to investigate random
topology on the negatively curved non-Euclidean space. The PI mainly deals with
a theoretical question: How do the parameters of the hyperbolic space, including
its negative curvature, characterize the random topology? As expected, new
phenomena will be uncovered that are never seen in the usual Euclidean setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
