
* 1811941
* Mapping Class Groups and Polynomials
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2018,08/03/2018
* Dan Margalit,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 202,999.00

The main goal of this project is to study surfaces and their symmetries. A
surface is a two-dimensional space, in other words, a two-dimensional version of
the world we live in. Surfaces come in many shapes (for instance the surface of
a ball is different from the surface of a doughnut) and they arise in many
varied contexts, from physics to robotics to data analysis to quantum field
theory. The symmetries of a surface form a beautiful and rich theory that has
been the focus of intense study over the past century. The close connection
between those symmetries and hyperbolic geometry facilitates the investigation
of some questions that are not obviously geometric, such as algorithms for
working with these groups.

The mapping class group of a surface is the group of homotopy classes of
orientation-preserving homeomorphisms of the surface. Among other things, the
mapping class group encodes the outer automorphism group of the surface
fundamental group, the (orbifold) fundamental group of the moduli space of the
surface, and the isomorphism types of surface bundles over arbitrary spaces. The
mapping class group also has connections to many, many areas of mathematics,
including dynamics, group theory, number theory, quantum field theory,
representation theory, and algebraic geometry, just to name a few. Goals of this
research program include these: (1) Establish a quadratic-time algorithm for the
conjugacy problem in the mapping class group. Work done under prior NSF support
developed a quadratic-time algorithm for the Nielsen-Thurston type of a mapping
class, and an extension of that theory is expected to give similar speed for the
conjugacy problem. (2) Understand polynomials from the point of view of mapping
class groups, including a new approach to the question of which branched covers
of surfaces come from polynomials. (3) Describe the structure of an arbitrary
normal subgroup of the mapping class group. For instance, descriptions are
available of the normal closures of many types of elements, and new examples
have been found of finitely generated right-angled Artin subgroups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
