
* 1811846
* Euler Products and Homological Densities via Factorization Homology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2018,05/10/2018
* Jesse Wolfson,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 152,995.00

Particles moving around in a space are a basic object of study in topology, and
can be thought of as a common abstract model for how cars move on roads
(hopefully without colliding!), or how cells move around each other in the
bloodstream. In prior work, the PI and his collaborators discovered surprising
patterns linking particles moving in space with how collections of numbers
factor into primes. This National Science Foundation funded project aims to give
a conceptual explanation for these links, which will hopefully shed light both
on problems in topology and problems in algebra and number theory.

The PI will further study homological densities, first introduced in joint work
of the PI with Benson Farb and Melanie Wood. Homological densities provide a new
topological invariant, suggested by a natural extension of Weil's "number
field/function field" dictionary, and demonstrating previously unrecognized
relationships between configuration spaces of manifolds and spaces of 0-cycles
(generalizing configuration spaces). The PI plans to carry out four key prongs
of research: 1) construct topological objects (i.e. spaces or rational homotopy
types) such that the limiting homological densities are intrinsic invariants of
these objects; 2) provide a topological mechanism responsible for the
coincidences observed by the PI, Farb and Wood, which would explain the efficacy
of the heuristics from arithmetic; 3) use the knowledge gained from 1) and 2) to
formulate a topological analogue of a zeta function, for which the densities
above are special values; and 4) extend the above coincidences from spaces of
0-cycles to spaces of divisors. The PI proposes that factorization homology
should provide a unified approach to the first three problems, and that the
evidence gained from these should inform the approach to the fourth. The PI also
plans to investigate spaces of divisors following the principle articulated by
Ellenberg, Venkatesh, and Westerland in their proof of the Cohen--Lenstra
heuristics for function fields. With Farb, the PI has shown that a strong form
of their principle holds for configuration spaces. He proposes to extend this to
spaces of divisors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
