
* 1811900
* Heegaard Floer Homology and Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2018,06/03/2020
* Yi Ni,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 203,000.00

Topology is a fundamental discipline of mathematics which studies the shape of
spaces. The basic question is whether two spaces have the same shape. Moreover,
if two spaces have different shapes, how different are the two shapes? Can we
transform one space to another by certain simple processes? How is a space
contained in higher dimensional spaces? Such questions are fundamental in modern
mathematics, and are important to other disciplines such as physics, chemistry,
and biology. This National Science Foundation funded project will study and
develop techniques that help extract information about spaces, and thus answer
such questions for some cases. This project also aims to make geometry and
topology accessible to a broad audience, including undergraduate mathematics
majors and scholars from other disciplines. The project will incorporate
Caltech's SURF program, which facilitates undergraduate research. The PI will
help broaden the influence of this field by mentoring graduate students and
postdocs, organizing seminars and conferences, teaching short courses in summer
schools and workshops.

This project focuses on Heegaard Floer homology and its applications to low-
dimensional topology. Heegaard Floer homology is a package of invariants defined
via methods in gauge theory and symplectic geometry. The PI will investigate the
relationship between Heegaard Floer homology and many other aspects of low-
dimensional topology. In particular, the PI will study the generalization of
Gabai's Property R theorem to null-homotopic knots in 3-manifolds. By doing so,
the PI hopes to explore the relationship between Heegaard Floer homology and
fundamental groups of 3-manifolds. Another problem the PI plans to attack is the
classification of finite surgeries on knots in the 3-sphere. The PI will also
address the applications of Floer homology and virtual techniques to
4-dimensional topology, for example, the topology of knot surgeries on the K3
surface.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
