
* 1812055
* Collaborative Research: Factorization Homology, Deformation Theory, and Duality
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2018,06/08/2020
* David Ayala,MT,Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2022
* USD 213,878.00

This project develops the geometric study of models of space-time, toward
mathematical forms of fundamental concepts in particle physics. Two principal
concepts from the theory of quantum fields are those of locality and duality.
Locality generalizes the idea that there should not be so-called action at a
distance in a complete quantum theory of nature. Duality occurs in two seemingly
different quantum theories being fundamentally the same. The present project
develops mathematical formulations of locality and duality in terms of a new
theory of factorization homology. Factorization homology provides a mathematical
means of articulating a physical theory on all of space-time in terms of physics
in very small subregions, within which physics can be simplified in terms of
combinatorics and higher-dimensional graph theory.

This project develops the theory of factorization homology for variants of
higher categories, and applications thereof to mathematical physics and
differential topology. This theory can be thought of as the study of sheaves on
moduli spaces of stratifications. One goal is to use factorization homology with
adjoints to prove the cobordism hypothesis of Baez--Dolan and Lurie, which
asserts that topological quantum field theories in the sense of Atiyah's axioms
are uniquely determined by their value on a point. This would show that such a
topological quantum field theory on space-time X comes from a sheaf on the
moduli space of stratifications of X, and thus that the notion of locality can
be understood in terms of the topology of such moduli spaces. A second goal is
to show that this moduli space of stratifications of a manifold X satisfies an
infinite-dimensional form of Poincar? duality. This would then give rise to a
duality among topological physical theories on X, once expressed as sheaves on
the aforementioned moduli space. This duality is a form of Koszul duality for
topological physical theories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
