
* 1812216
* Deformation Spaces of Geometric Structures
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2018,07/24/2018
* Jeffrey Danciger,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 194,242.00

A geometric manifold is an abstract mathematical object designed to model the
space we live in. The concept also encompasses the notion of a space-time in the
theory of relativity, as well as phase spaces, configuration spaces, and other
useful structures in physics. While empirical physics is dedicated to measuring
the precise features (e.g. shape, size, etc.) of our universe, the question of
what possible features could the universe have, subject to certain laws, is a
mathematical one. The data comprising the answer to such a question is called a
moduli space; it is a topological space whose points are the possible geometric
manifolds of a certain type and whose topology organizes those geometric
manifolds into families whose features vary continuously. This project addresses
important questions about many different classes of low-dimensional geometric
manifolds and their moduli. The main focus is the study of manifolds modeled on
real projective geometry and affine geometry, two classical geometries with just
the right amount of symmetry to allow for large interesting moduli spaces with
mysterious but tractable behavior.

This project weaves together ideas from a cross-section of mathematics and
physics, including geometry, topology, group theory, dynamics, and relativity. A
recently introduced notion of convex cocompactness for discrete subgroups of the
real projective general linear group acting on projective space extends the
definition of classical convex cocompact Kleinian groups and other examples, but
is general enough to describe large open regions in the space of finitely
generated discrete groups that were left unexplored by other methods. A
connection has been identified between this notion and Labourie's notion of
Anosov subgroup, and the convex cocompact subgroups studied here involve many
interesting deformation space for non-hyperbolic discrete subgroups. Another
line of work studies Margulis spacetimes as geometric limits of anti de Sitter
spacetimes, with consequences for geometry, topology, and deformation theory.
Connections between hyperbolic and anti de Sitter geometry in dimension three
are particularly promising.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
