
* 1812021
* Group Geometry and Mapping Class Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2018,05/15/2018
* Johanna Mangahas,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2023
* USD 173,620.00

The mathematical notion of a group captures a fundamental mechanism whose
examples include addition, multiplication, rotations in space, and more. Any
group can be described as the symmetries of some object, where the group
operation comes from combining symmetries. In this and many other ways, groups
are deeply related to geometric and topological spaces, and are spaces in their
own right. Geometric group theory grows out of this insight. The research in
this project centers on subgroups of mapping class groups, which are infinite
groups arising from symmetries of topological surfaces. Their subgroups include
all right-angled Artin groups, which are themselves fundamental objects. For
example, notice that order never matters in addition, always matters in
concatenation (a songbird is not a birdsong), and only sometimes matters in
multiplication (no between ordinary numbers, yes between the matrices of linear
algebra). Right-angled Artin groups include and interpolate between the first
two extremes. Both mapping class groups and right-angled Artin groups are
important in geometric group theory, and rich enough that their study has
applications to larger families of groups, as well as to low-dimensional
manifolds. As fundamental mathematics, work in geometric group theory has
potential for practical benefits to society. The work of geometric group
theorists, building road maps for groups, has had ramifications to cryptography,
which is based on the difficulty of retracing one's steps. In addition, right-
angled Artin groups are relevant to any algorithmic task in which order matters
between some steps and not between others, a well-documented example being robot
motion planning.

This project is a geometrically-oriented investigation of three interrelated
families of subgroups of mapping class groups: right-angled Artin groups, normal
subgroups, and 'convex cocompact' or 'stable' subgroups. The goal of the project
is to advance knowledge both specific to mapping class groups and relevant to
geometric group theory overall. Among normal subgroups, the project aims to
understand the spectrum from free, infinite-rank normal subgroups (whose group
of automorphisms is large as possible), to normal subgroups with automorphism
group consisting of the mapping class group itself (that is, as small as
possible), with right-angled Artin groups appearing as normal subgroups between
these two extremes. Objects with automorphism group equal to the mapping class
group can be considered geometric models for the mapping class group. This work
aims to further elucidate what such geometric models may be. The project also
aims to advance the study of convex cocompact subgroups of the mapping class
group, and their generalizations to other kinds of groups, including right-
angled Artin groups, and more generally, groups acting on CAT(0) spaces. The
approaches to be employed rely on group actions on various interesting spaces,
including CAT(0) cube complexes, curve complexes of surfaces, projection
complexes, and "rotating family" machinery within groups acting on hyperbolic
spaces. The latter two are axiomatic constructions, so that results about
mapping class subgroups acting on these complexes readily translate to more
general settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
