
* 1833189
* Topology Conferences at Georgia Tech
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2019,04/15/2019
* Jennifer Hom,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2023
* USD 74,999.00

This award provides partial support for three editions of the Tech Topology
Conference, beginning with the meeting at Georgia Tech in Atlanta on December
7-9, 2018, the eighth conference in the series. The conference provides an
opportunity for topologists from around the country to convene for a weekend of
talks on the latest developments in the field. The speakers, selected for the
quality of their results, their presentation skills, and their contributions to
promoting a diverse and inclusive environment, range from internationally
renowned mathematicians to rising young stars. The conference features seven
hour-long talks, complemented by three lightning talk sessions, which give
junior researchers the opportunity to give a five minute presentation on their
work. The schedule includes ample time for informal discussions amongst
participants and speakers, providing opportunities for mentorship and
collaboration. The grant will help support the travel expenses of graduate
students, early career researchers, and speakers.

This year's Tech Topology Conference will focus on geometric group theory and
low-dimensional topology. These are both very active fields of research, both in
the Southeast and beyond; four of this year's seven speakers are based in the
Southeast. The conference serves as an opportunity to bring leading researchers
to the Southeast and highlight the some of the recent results obtained by junior
researchers in the region. The conference organizer will continue posting notes
from the talks online in order to make materials from the conference publicly
available. The conference website can be found at http://ttc.gatech.edu

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
