
* 1839968
* RTG: Geometry and Topology at the University of Virginia
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2019,07/05/2022
* Thomas Mark,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,298,378.00

This project funds research training for postdocs, graduate students, and
undergraduate students at the University of Virginia (UVa), through a variety of
vertically connected activities united by the mathematical themes of geometry
and topology. The major activities supported by this project are: an expanded
and formalized program of undergraduate research; traineeships for graduate
students that allow greater immersion in the innovative research-directed
coursework in geometry and topology at UVa; additional geometry/topology
postdoctoral associates that both enhance the research environment of the
department and benefit from training and mentorship opportunities; a series of
annual conferences continuing a recent successful model; and a regional
collaborative research initiative that brings graduate students, postdocs and
faculty from UVa and regional schools together in teams for intensive training
and collaboration aimed at particular problems in geometry or topology.

The scope of research in geometry and topology at UVa includes stable homotopy
theory and group cohomology, homotopy theory of higher algebraic structures,
geometric group theory, hyperbolic geometry and character varieties, low-
dimensional geometry and topology, gauge theory, and quantum topology. All 6
geometry/topology faculty at UVa form the group leading the RTG project. Of
these, two are full professors, two associate professors and two assistant
professors; two are women and three joined the UVa math department within the
last three years. This diversity of research interest, seniority, and background
will be an advantage in recruiting talented candidates for each of the supported
activities. The enhanced training for postdoctoral associates and graduate
students in geometry and topology allowed by this project will enable them to
develop their own research programs and establish robust professional networks
outside of the UVa mathematics department. The project will also provide
essential mentoring experience for postdocs and graduate students, who will be
closely involved in undergraduate research supported by this grant. The variety
of conferences and research activities supported by this project will enable a
lively exchange of ideas between active researchers in all stages of their
careers, provide a milieu for forging productive collaborative relationships,
and train younger mathematicians and students in the modern research directions
of geometry and topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
