
* 1841221
* RUI: Skeins on Surfaces
* DMS,Genetic Mechanisms, TOPOLOGY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2018,07/11/2018
* Helen Wong,CA,Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,998.00

On the main, this research project lies in the broad interdisciplinary area
between geometric topology and quantum physics. Many of the motivating
conjectures come from physics, and their mathematical solutions would be of
interest to theoretical physicists. A second part of the project concerns the
topological characteristics of biopolymers like DNA and proteins. This can be
important from a pharmaceutical perspective, as some drugs can be designed to
target topological characteristics which affect specific biological functions.
Besides its research goals, the project has a strong educational component. Many
of the proposed problems are intended for research with undergraduate students.
Through her research, teaching and other outreach activities, the PI intends to
expand the reach of mathematics, for example to historically under-represented
groups and to other audiences not usually exposed to cutting edge mathematics.

This project will explore the extent to which the Kauffman skein algebra and its
generalizations can serve as intermediaries between quantum topology and
hyperbolic geometry. The PI will study the representation theory of the Kauffman
skein algebra, paying particular attention to the representation coming from the
Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev theory. The long-term, overarching goal is to
construct and classify all representations of the Kauffman skein algebra, a goal
which this project will advance. The project considers the algebraic structure
of the Kauffman skein algebra and of its generalizations (e.g., ones that allow
arcs on the surface). In addition, the project includes problems investigating
which types of topologically complex structures, like knots, links, and non-
planar graphs, are possible in biopolymers like DNA and proteins.
