
* 1844516
* CAREER: Geometric and Topological Approaches to Group Actions in Low Dimensions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,02/07/2019
* Kathryn Mann,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 54,168.00

This project concerns actions of infinite groups on manifolds, an area bridging
and uniting many areas of mathematics (topology, geometric group theory,
foliation theory, and topological dynamics). The Principal Investigator (PI)
will study basic mathematical objects by studying their symmetries, and by
studying how the objects change under transformations: this is the study of
group actions. The project will describe and distinguish rigid behavior, where
small perturbations to a system of transformations do not qualitatively change
the long-term outcome, versus unstable or chaotic behavior, which is highly
sensitive to perturbation. Variations on this problem arise all around us, as we
seek to understand the long-term behavior of mathematical models of real world
objects ranging from weather patterns, to ocean currents, to the configuration
space of a mechanical system. When the objects of interest are highly complex or
not easily parametrized, these problems are difficult to approach, and the PI's
program centers on several new techniques to render rigidity problems tractable.
The project also involves the introduction of active-learning courses for
undergraduate mathematics students, including a program to train graduate
students in teaching methods, and a major workshop on effectively communicating
mathematics across research areas with the aim of increasing communication
between mathematicians in disparate fields.

A major guiding principle in the PI's work is that rigidity of group actions,
in the sense of topological dynamics, is often the result of an underlying
geometric structure. One example of this phenomenon is the PI's recent results
on foliated circle bundles over surfaces, where it is shown that every rigid
such bundle is geometric. This project builds on this success of this program,
extending this theme to new contexts and applications. The PI will continue work
on flat bundles and rigid monodromy group actions, using techniques from
foliation theory and coarse geometry in negative curvature to study boundary
actions. Another strand of this project involves an investigation of rigidity of
infinite discrete groups acting on the circle through the topology of spaces of
circular orders, following work of A. Navas. Finally, the PI will adapt
techniques from geometric group theory to the new context of non-locally compact
groups, applying this this to study the dynamics of group actions on surfaces,
and refining the notion of distortion and growth in transformation groups
introduced by Gromov.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
