
* 1848346
* CAREER: Geometric Structures, Character Varieties, and Higher Teichmuller Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,08/30/2022
* Sara Maloni,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 353,434.00

In his Erlanger program of 1872, Felix Klein defined geometry to be the study of
properties of a space which are invariant under its group of symmetries. It was
Charles Ehresmann in 1935 who started the study of deformation spaces of
geometric structures, asking which "shapes" can be "locally modeled" on a
certain geometry. In 1982 William Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, now a
theorem, thanks to Grigori Perelman, renewed the interest in locally homogeneous
spaces, that is spaces that look the same at each point. The PI proposes to
study families of structures on manifolds and how they change when one perturbs
them, focusing in particular on geometric and dynamical aspects. As a broader
impact, the PI wants to develop a more inclusive environment for undergraduate
students, graduate students, postdocs and early career mathematicians. She
proposes to organize: a Directed Reading Program which pairs undergraduate
students with graduate mentors for independent projects; a Women in Geometry and
Topology network with a website, annual dinners at conferences and summer
retreats where participants will start mutual collaborations; a Mid-Atlantic
Math Alliance Program to build a regional community of mentors who will work
with underrepresented minority students to help them succeed in their careers;
Log Cabin Conferences gathering a small group of researchers (many early career)
in a remote location to learn a new topic in a collaborative atmosphere. In
addition, she plans to continue organize the Diversity Lecture Series, an annual
Sonia Day for middle school girls, the Math Club for undergraduate students at
UVa, to be faculty advisor for the AWM Student Chapter, mentor for the AWM
program and for the Math Alliance program, to organize the Geometry Seminar, the
Virginia Topology Conference and annual graduate reading courses.

Hyperbolic structures are the prototypical example of geometric structures with
interesting deformation spaces. The PI wants to use results and techniques
developed in the context of hyperbolic structures for studying other geometric
structures. For example, she plans to investigate analogue structures in anti-de
Sitter space. A lot of deformation spaces arise from spaces of representations
of the fundamental group of a manifold into a Lie group, so the PI is also
planning to continue the study of the dynamical decomposition of character
varieties of free groups, and of fundamental groups of hyperbolic manifolds with
compressible boundary. Finally, the PI wants to study "higher Teichmueller
theory," that is "nice'" representations of a surface group into Lie groups of
higher real rank, and Anosov representations, which are a dynamical analogue of
locally homogeneous geometric structures. Since Anosov representations turn out
to be generalizations of convex cocompact subgroups of rank one Lie groups to
the context of discrete subgroups of Lie groups of higher rank, the PI plans to
use techniques developed for Kleinian groups in order to study limits of Anosov
representations. Differently from classical Teichmuller theory, it is not known,
in general, if these representations are holonomies of geometric structures. The
PI wants to study this question, together with the description of limits of
these representations and a different topology on these spaces, the geometric
topology. The PI thinks that results and techniques coming from differential
geometry and low-dimensional topology will inspire new research directions with
deep connections with dynamical systems, Lie theory, complex analysis, and even
algebraic geometry, number theory, representation theory, and physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
