
* 1853989
* FRG: Collaborative Research: von Neumann Algebras Associated to Groups Acting on Hyperbolic Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2019,05/22/2019
* Denis Osin,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 493,447.00

The study of von Neumann algebras was initiated in the 1930s and 1940s by F.
Murray and J. von Neumann as a mathematical tool to understand particle physics.
Subsequently, it became an independent discipline that has stimulated the
development of powerful mathematical theories and bringing valuable insight to
physics (statistical mechanics), biology (DNA structure), and engineering (cell
phone network design). Von Neumann algebras are highly interdisciplinary in
nature as they arise canonically from simpler mathematical structures, such as
symmetries and actions, often present in many areas of mathematics. Over time
their study remained closely connected with various topics in dynamical systems,
measured group theory, and more recently geometric group theory. This project
investigates several major open problems inspired by the rich interaction
between operator algebras and the aforementioned fields.

This research project explores new horizons in the classification of group von
Neumann algebras. The first objective of the project is to advance Connes'
rigidity conjecture, a major wide-open problem predicting that ICC property (T)
groups are completely recognizable from their von Neumann algebras
(W*-superrigid). The PIs proposed several natural constructions of W*-superrigid
property (T) groups based on new developments in geometric group theory and
deformation/rigidity theory. The second objective of the project revolves around
the study of prime II1 factors. The main focus is to understand the relationship
between various manifestations of negative curvature in group theory and
primeness aspects of the corresponding group factor. The results arising from
this project are expected to reveal significant cross-pollination between,
geometric group theory, ergodic theory, random walks, C*-algebras, and von
Neumann algebras. The PIs intend to organize a series of workshops aimed at
stimulating collaboration between experts in these fields. To promote the career
development of graduate students the proposal also involves a student exchange
program between the participating institutions aimed at exposing students to
different expertise and research environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
