
* 1854705
* Collaborative Research: Computational Topology and Categorification of Cancer Genomic Data: Theory and Algorithms
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, CDS&E-MSS
* 07/01/2019,08/20/2021
* Radmila Sazdanovic,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Society is generating data at an unprecedented rate, currently estimated at 2.5
quintillion bytes daily. Many of these data sets are notably complex,
particularly because they often involve interdependencies which are difficult to
identify. In the field of cancer genomics, thousands of measurements can be
obtained with the objective of discovering molecular signatures that
characterize biological processes. However, advances in this area have been
limited due to major computational challenges involved in identifying the
structures that are present in both healthy and cancerous cells. This project
aims to develop new topological methods to detect hidden dependencies within and
across different types of data obtained from breast cancer patients. The project
will intensively train three graduate students each year in these novel methods
and expand the undergraduate and graduate curricula in data analysis and applied
topology. Results and materials will be broadly disseminated to the scientific
community through publications in open access and standard journals, conference
presentations, and open source software. Results will be also shared with the
public, including teachers and students in grades 10th to 12th, through training
courses and art exhibits.

Genomic technologies have revolutionized the field of genetics over the past
decade, providing new methods for identifying thousands of genetic/molecular
signals associated to specific phenotypes. Among these methods, Genome Wide
Association Studies have accelerated the identification of specific genetic
elements by testing thousands of genetic loci simultaneously. These approaches,
however, are less useful for identifying co-occurrences of and interactions
among genetic elements, conditions that appear to be ubiquitous in living
organisms. To address this gap, the PIs will develop new mathematical methods to
enable the identification of interactions among genetic elements in cancer,
thereby testing the hypothesis that many cancer phenotypes are regulated by co-
occurring genetic events. Using the combined tools of modern topological and
data analyses, including machine learning techniques, the research team will
identify such co-occurrences by: analyzing generators of homology groups,
implementing a computational data-driven theory of fiber bundles, and developing
new models of cancer evolution using Khovanov-type categorification methods. The
ultimate goal of this project is to develop new computational tools in time
series analysis that help identify hidden interdependencies of data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
