
* 1901591
* Junior Topologists Meeting 2019
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2019,04/03/2019
* Beren Sanders,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support for U.S. participation in the Young
Topologists Meeting 2019, held at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Lausanne (EPFL) in Switzerland, July 22-26, 2019. The Young Topologists Meeting
(YTM) is an annual European conference which focuses on the work of graduate
students and early career researchers in topology that brings together
participants from all over the world. At the YTM, junior topologists present
their work to a large international audience and also attend mini-courses taught
by senior topologists. The conference provides opportunities for the
participants to meet new colleagues and mentors, to form research
collaborations, and to learn about current developments in the field. Its open
and supportive atmosphere encourages early career mathematicians, including
those from underrepresented groups, to pursue research careers in topology.

The YTM is an annual event, first started in 2007, which traditionally
alternates between Copenhagen, Denmark and Lausanne, Switzerland (with an
exception in 2017 when it was held in Stockholm, Sweden). The conference
features parallel sessions of contributed talks by graduate students and early
career researchers covering a broad spectrum of topics in topology. In addition
to these talks, there will be mini-courses by two senior topologists on two
current threads of research in pure and applied topology. This year, Julie
Bergner (University of Virginia) will give a mini-course on the homotopical
notion of 2-Segal spaces, while Vidit Nanda (University of Oxford) will give a
mini-course on topological data analysis. More details are available on the
conference web page: https://ytm2019.epfl.ch/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
