
* 1902092
* Homotopical Methods in Higher Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Aaron Lauda,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 235,000.00

The study of symmetry is a fundamental tool for understanding the world around
us, as well as the mathematical frameworks we use to describe it. As we push the
boundaries of our understanding of mathematics and explore the frontiers of
theoretical physics, it is becoming increasingly clear that a more refined
notion of symmetry is required for the next generation of theories. The
mathematical exploration and development of these types of "higher" symmetries
reveals structure and form in any system where they are present, reducing
degrees of uncertainty in these system and bringing progress within reach. While
a great deal of progress has been made developing these higher symmetries, the
razor's edge of current understanding has revealed that the most exciting
applications will require a more flexible theory than has been previously
developed. This project will fill this knowledge gap by providing a robust
approach to higher symmetries, capable of describing more complex phenomena and
supplying the requisite framework to facilitate the most pressing applications.
This award will also support the training and professional development of
graduate students and postdocs. This project utilizes homotopical methods to
expand existing technology in the field of higher representation theory. The
primary aim is to expand the notion of categorified quantum group from its
additive framework to a more robust and homotopically flavored theory that is
better adapted for solving the most pressing open problems in the area. In
particular, such a framework will shed light on tensor products of higher
representations, lead to a richer higher representation theory that allows for
infinite dimensional representations, and provide direct applications to stable
refinements in link homology. This award will also support the training and
professional development of graduate students and postdocs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
