
* 1903429
* Categorical Methods for Classical, Equivariant, and Motivic Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,06/26/2019
* Beren Sanders,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 219,006.00

Classical homotopy theory studies the shape of space in a very coarse, flexible
and approximate sense. Rigid geometric notions such as distance and curvature
play no role; instead, at heart is the notion that one space can be continuously
deformed into another. Over the last 50 years the methods and scope of homotopy
theory have been significantly generalized and expanded as mathematicians have
realized that there are many situations where analogous notions of "continuous
deformation" can be found or defined. Indeed we now know that there are many
different homotopy theories to be found in mathematics and that they arise in a
wide range of mathematical disciplines. In this project, the PI aims to apply
the methods of tensor triangular geometry to four distinct but thematically-
related problems in classical, equivariant, and motivic homotopy theory. The
problems the proposal aims to solve are significant questions in their
respective subjects and yet the techniques proposed to tackle these problems are
not mainstream methods from the heart of algebraic topology. The general
approach used is extremely interdisciplinary, using the platform of tensor
triangulated categories to pass ideas and techniques between diverse
mathematical subjects. Indeed, the proposed work will strengthen the
interconnectedness of modern mathematics by transferring ideas and techniques
between algebraic topology, algebraic geometry and representation theory.
Moreover, the proposed research program will extend and develop the techniques
of tensor triangular geometry, a broad research program which aims to develop
algebro-geometric methods for reasoning about a wide variety of homotopy
theories arising throughout mathematics.

In the first project, the PI aims to continue recent momentum in understanding
the spectrum of equivariant stable homotopy theory with the goal of completing
the computation of the spectrum for all finite groups and for pursuing
generalizations to the case of compact Lie groups. The second project proposes a
method to prove a twenty-year-old conjecture of Palmieri concerning the
classification of modules over the Steenrod algebra, an important object of
classical algebraic topology that has been intensely studied for over sixty
years. In the third project, the PI shall use a strategy to compute the spectrum
of an important piece of the motivic stable homotopy category. Finally, the PI
will also use a categorical approach to the Picard group of motivic stable
homotopy categories, which has the potential to clarify what little is known
about these groups. A common theme in the proposed methods is the generalization
and application of methods which have been successful in modular representation
theory by passing through the unifying world of tensor triangulated categories.
A second common theme is the use of an analogue of the etale topology in tensor
triangular geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
