
* 1904197
* 2019 Arches Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2019
* Jeremy Brazas,PA,West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2020
* USD 19,640.00

This NSF award provides support for the second Arches Topology Conference, to be
held in Springdale, UT in April 2019. In the past two decades, ideas from
geometric group theory and topological group theory have motivated many of the
significant advances in the study of algebraic topology of spaces with
nontrivial local structure. Additionally, topological spaces associated with the
coarse geometry of a group often have nontrivial local algebraic topology. This
conference will bring together international and domestic experts in algebraic
topology and geometric group theory to share the state of the art knowledge on
the interactions between these two fields. This award will support travel
expenses for graduate students and early career researchers. The purpose of the
2019 conference is to provide an intimate setting for leading experts and junior
mathematicians to share their research and develop new collaborations. Students
will be introduced to the themes of the conference and techniques used in
research and will have opportunities to interact with experienced
mathematicians. The scientific focus of the 2019 conference will be the use of
methods from covering space theory to study fundamental groups of spaces without
a universal cover. To support this focus, topics featured at the 2019 conference
will include: algebraic topology of Peano continua, boundaries of groups and the
fundamental group at infinity, CAT(0) groups and associated spaces, and
topological groups and automatic continuity. Approximately 20 speakers will
present and each day will include time for collaboration on new research. The
conference website is at: https://math.byu.edu/~curtkent/arches/2019.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
