
* 1904913
* Actions of Relatively Hyperbolic Groups on Cube Complexes
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2019,06/15/2021
* Daniel Groves,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 423,000.00

In mathematics, a "group" is an algebraic object which encodes the symmetries of
an object. As such, group theory provides an algebraic language and a set of
techniques for studying problems throughout mathematics. In recent years, some
of the most important problems in 3-dimensional geometry (such as the Virtual
Haken Conjecture) have been solved by Agol, using results from geometric group
theory, and particularly the work of Wise, as well as that of Kahn, Markovic,
Haglund, Hsu, Bergeron, Manning and the principal investigator. A key
organizational principle is to understand spaces by cutting them along subspaces
of one lower dimension. For example, one understands 3-dimensional spaces by
cutting along surfaces (two dimensional spaces). This is the context of "Haken"
3-manifolds and of the Virtual Haken Conjecture. It turns out that the way to
arrange the cutting subspaces of one lower dimension is via spaces made out of
cubes. The major focus of this project is to understand the symmetry groups of
these cube complexes, to build new tools to study them and to apply these new
tools to many problems in geometry and group theory. The award provides support
of training graduate students through research.

In the first two parts of the project, we study relatively hyperbolic groups
acting cocompactly on CAT(0) cube complexes. In the case the action is proper,
Manning and the principal investigator intend to prove a version of Agol's
Theorem, that all such groups are virtually special. Along with Einstein, the
principal investigator will develop the theory of "relatively proper" actions of
relatively hyperbolic groups on CAT(0) cube complexes, a context much more
broadly applicable than the setting of proper and cocompact actions. We intend
to prove versions of Agol's Theorem, and of Wise's Quasi-convex Hierarchy
Theorem in this setting, and also to show that the proper and cocompact theory
is a subset of the relatively proper theory. In the final part of this work, we
will pursue applications of this theory to questions about hyperbolic and
relatively hyperbolic groups with planar boundary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
