
* 1904074
* Symplectic Surfaces, Lefschetz Fibrations, and Arboreal Skeleta
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,06/07/2021
* Laura Starkston,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 203,855.00

This award supports research in a rapidly growing field of mathematics known as
symplectic topology that grew out of studying Hamilton's equations of motion in
physics. Position and momentum coordinates are recorded in a higher dimensional
space and the equations connecting position and momentum are kept track of in a
geometric structure on the space. Powerful techniques were developed in the
1980s and 1990s to study these symplectic geometric spaces, but many fundamental
questions remain unsolved. For example, we do not yet understand all of the
surfaces that can be found inside these spaces. This project will explore such
fundamental questions and develop new techniques for understanding symplectic
spaces and for extracting their properties. The PI will share these new
techniques with diverse groups of young mathematicians to bring the entering
generation of students into cutting edge research. Activities included in this
project will provide training in effective communication for students, to
promote global collaborations, to engage the public in mathematics, and to
ensure our scientific progress can effectively build off of work done by our
predecessors and peers.

There are three main scientific goals of this project. The first is to make
progress on the longstanding symplectic isotopy problem, studying symplectic
surfaces in the complex projective plane. The new approach proposed is to reduce
to singular surfaces, which allow one to obtain large degrees without large
genus and thus avoid the technical roadblock that stalled progress in the early
2000s. The second goal is to utilize Lefschetz fibrations to study questions
arising in algebraic geometry and singularity theory from the symplectic
topological perspective. Lefschetz fibrations have been an effective tool to
construct and calculate invariants of symplectic manifolds, and the PI plans to
apply this effective tool to open conjectures and new lines of research related
to complex algebraic geometry. The third goal is to develop the emerging
technique of arboreal skeleta to study Weinstein manifolds through topological
methods utilizing a simple collection of singularity types. The PI has begun
initial stages of this program in a recently published paper and will continue
development of the theory and applications particularly in low dimensions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
