
* 1905717
* Extensions of Modern Homological Invariants in Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,05/26/2022
* Sucharit Sarkar,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,581.00

Topology is the branch of mathematics that studies shapes of spaces. Topology
has several real-world applications, such as studying DNA knotting, constructing
new data encryption algorithms, analyzing large data sets, motion planning for
robotics, and developing quantum field theories in physics, to name a few. Due
to a famous theorem by Smale, topology in higher dimensions is somewhat simpler
than topology in lower dimensions. Therefore, it is interesting to concentrate
only on spaces up to dimension four; this sub-field is called low-dimensional
topology. These low-dimensions also correspond to the spaces that we live in---
we live in a three-dimensional space, and if one includes time, in a four-
dimensional spacetime---making low-dimensional topology even more pertinent. In
low-dimensional topology, we are specifically interested in knot theory, where
one studies one-dimensional objects inside three-dimensional spaces, such as
knotted pieces of strings. Knot theory is a fundamentally important topic in
low-dimensional topology, and it is also an integral part of many of the real-
world topological applications. Knot theory studies whether a knot can be
transformed into another without tearing or crossing itself (such a
transformation is called an isotopy), and if not, what sort of modifications
need to be made to ensure they become isotopic. Knot invariants are mathematical
objects (such as numbers or groups) associated to knots which remain unchanged
during such an isotopy, and consequently, are extensively used in studying
knots. The current project is focused on knot theory and will explore existing
knot invariants and construct new ones.

This project will concentrate on two modern families of knot invariants in low-
dimensional topology, knot Floer homology and Khovanov homology, which have been
employed for a variety of applications ever since their discovery at the turn of
the millennium. The main aim of the project is to construct new extensions, such
as spatial refinements, of various versions of these existing invariants.
Specifically, the project has the following four goals: construct further
spatial refinements of Khovanov homology invariants and their perturbations;
construct a spatial refinement of knot Floer homology using grid presentations;
study group actions on Lagrangian Floer homology; and construct new
combinatorial spectral sequences from Khovanov homology. Additionally, several
activities combining research with educational and other broader impacts will be
organized as part of this project, such as increasing mathematical awareness and
interest among children at Los Angeles Math Circle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
