
* 1905437
* RUI: The Geometry of Arithmetic Locally Symmetric Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Benjamin Linowitz,OH,Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2023
* USD 176,562.00

The study of arithmetic groups has its origins in Gauss' work on quadratic forms
and has been an active area of research for well over a century. This project
will draw upon ideas and techniques from group theory, number theory, geometry
and topology in order to study arithmetic groups and the geometry of their
associated locally symmetric spaces. Special attention will be paid to
arithmetic hyperbolic reflection groups. Reflection groups are ubiquitous in
mathematics and, like arithmetic groups, have been studied since the nineteenth
century. Poincare's work on hyperbolic reflection groups in dimension 2 played a
prominent role in the work of Klein on discrete groups of isometries of the
hyperbolic plane, and analogous results for hyperbolic three-space played an
important role in Thurston's work on the geometrization of three-dimensional
manifolds. Throughout their history hyperbolic reflection groups have been an
important source of motivating examples for those studying more general classes
of discrete groups of isometries. This project will employ recent advancements
in algebraic and analytic number theory in order to further our knowledge of
reflection groups.

The Principal Investigator's (PI) work as part of this project will study
arithmetic locally symmetric spaces in two contexts: (1) the case of hyperbolic
reflection groups, and (2) systolic geometry. Seminal work of Vinberg in the
1980s initiated a program to classify those hyperbolic reflection groups which
are arithmetic. By bringing together tools from the spectral theory of
hyperbolic manifolds, analytic number theory and the arithmetic theory of
quadratic forms the PI and his collaborators will make progress towards the
complete classification of congruence arithmetic hyperbolic reflection groups.
The PI will also study the systolic geometry of arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds.
The systole of a manifold is the least length of a closed geodesic on the
manifold. One of the biggest open problems concerning the systolic geometry of
arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds is the Short Geodesic Conjecture, which asserts
that there is a universal positive lower bound for their systoles. As part of
this project the PI will prove that the probability that a commensurability
class of arithmetic hyperbolic manifolds contains a representative with systole
less than any fixed threshold is zero.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
