
* 1906236
* New Tools in Chromatic Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Nathaniel Stapleton,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2023
* USD 168,544.00

Much of modern mathematics is concerned with the intricate interactions between
different areas inside of mathematics. One of the primary goals of this project
is to use ideas from logic in order to compare topology and algebra. An area of
topology called chromatic homotopy theory studies spaces by ``factoring" them
into prime parts in the same way that an integer has a prime factorization.
Using ideas from logic, we can understand the collection of prime spaces as the
prime tends to infinity. It turns out that the resulting collection of spaces
can be completely understood using only algebra. This idea is quite new and we
hope to develop it into a full theory. This will allow for purely algebraic
results to have important topological consequences. Another primary goal of this
project is to use topology to build a new bridge between geometry and algebra.
This is a familiar story to mathematicians. Classically, certain geometric
objects called vector bundles were used to produce an important algebraic
invariant of spaces. This algebraic invariant was generalized in the 80's, but
in the process of generalization the connection to geometry was somewhat lost.
On the other hand, the generalization has a beautiful relationship to an area of
algebra called arithmetic geometry. Further developing this relationship with
arithmetic geometry should expose part of the geometry that was lost.

The PI plans to develop new tools in chromatic homotopy theory that provide both
conceptual and computational insight while revealing chromatic homotopy theory
as the support for a bridge between geometry and arithmetic geometry. These
tools include a geometric construction of Morava E-theory in terms of Stolz--
Teichner field theories, a description of the asymptotic behavior of chromatic
homotopy theory that introduces Drinfeld elliptic modules into chromatic
calculations, and a fusion-system-like combinatorial description of the
classifying spaces of finite groups when localized at a chromatic prime leading
to the resolution of a conjecture of Ravenel's. These tools are all built on
insights gained from the PI's work on and applications of transchromatic
homotopy theory. Because of this, the PI will also continue to develop
transchromatic homotopy theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
