
* 1906095
* Hyperbolic Geometry and the Mapping Class Group
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,06/19/2019
* Kenneth Bromberg,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 282,480.00

Two and three-dimensional spaces are some of the most fundamental objects
studied by mathematicians. One approach to study them is to realize them as
geometric objects and then use the geometry to study the spaces. The three most
common geometries are first, the classical Euclidean or flat geometry, and then
the non-Euclidean: spherical and hyperbolic geometries. It has been known since
the late 1800s that most two-dimensional spaces, or in other words: surfaces,
exhibit hyperbolic geometry. Thurston's groundbreaking work in the 1970s showed
that "most" three dimensional spaces, called three-manifolds, also have
hyperbolic geometry. This is the motivation for this project's focus on spaces
with hyperbolic geometry. It includes many sub-projects suitable for training
graduate students to work in this area.

This project will study several questions on the geometry of hyperbolic three-
manifolds building on PI's prior work. One of the central topics is the study of
"renormalized volume". The PI and his collaborators recently initiated a study
of the gradient flow of the renormalized volume function which has shown to be
an extremely useful tool for understanding the geometry of hyperbolic three-
manifolds. In another direction, the PI and his collaborators will continue
their work in geometric group theory to understand actions of the mapping class
group on CAT(0) cube complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
