
* 1906281
* Homotopical Algebraic Structures in Algebraic K-theory and Functor Calculus
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,08/22/2022
* Julia Bergner,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2024
* USD 146,835.00

One area of interest in the field of homotopy theory is the study of algebraic
operations, for example operations that behave like multiplication, but in which
the many possible ways of multiplying different elements can form a geometric
shape. This research is concerned with more complicated algebraic structures, in
which we not only have operations, but operations between operations, and so
forth. Such structures have a number of applications, but there are many
possible ways to describe them, and much of the project is concerned with
developing such descriptions and showing that they are essentially equivalent to
one another. In a related project, The PI will use these kinds of foundational
tools to make new connections between the fields of algebraic K-theory and
representation theory. In the latter, certain algebraic structures called Hall
algebras bear several similarities to those that appear in K-theory, yet a
precise relationship is still unknown. Some new examples suggest a path for
making a more explicit comparison. A third project, which is being done in
collaboration with four other women through the Women in Topology program, is
concerned with applying some of these methods to structures which resemble the
Taylor series which appear in calculus. In addition to this program for
supporting junior women researchers, the activities of this proposal also
include supporting graduate students, developing research with undergraduate
students, and participating in programs to promote further diversity in the
mathematics community.

This research is concerned with developing and applying different models for
homotopical categorical structures in three main directions. In the first, the
PI will seek to give a full description of all models for higher homotopical
categories given by multisimplicial and globular diagrams of simplicial sets.
Such models are given by Segal conditions and either discreteness or
completeness conditions; most current work emphasizes completeness but we seek
to incorporate models with discreteness, and in particular consider in which
cases we can use a combination of the two kinds of conditions. The second
direction is to look at applications of 2-Segal spaces in algebraic K-theory.
These structures are known to arise via the Waldhausen S-construction, but how
they can actually be used in algebraic K-theory is yet to be investigated. The
PI will give an explicit comparison between 2-Segal spaces and the CGW-
categories of Campbell and Zakharevich, and to develop the analogues of their
abelian CGW-categories. Because 2-Segal spaces are also deeply connected to Hall
algebra constructions, we seek to understand how CGW-categories fit into this
picture, and more broadly just what Hall algebras have to do with algebraic
K-theory. Finally, the PI will look at model category structures in discrete and
abelian functor calculus, with the goal of comparison to other kinds of functor
calculus for which model structures have also been developed, as well as of
strengthening classification results for homogeneous functors. This last project
will be done as part of the Women in Topology workshop, in collaboration with
four other women, three of whom are junior researchers. This project includes
support for graduate students working on related problems and ideas for
undergraduate research projects which would facilitate students learning more
about these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
