
* 1906235
* Heegaard Splitting and Topology of 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,06/14/2021
* Tao Li,MA,Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,585.00

Three-manifolds are objects modeled on the three-dimensional space that we live
in. A donut and the spatial universe are both examples of three-manifolds. These
objects arise naturally in many contexts in physical and other natural sciences,
and can be used to model many interesting phenomena. The main goal of this
project is to study the mathematical properties of three-manifolds. The PI plans
to investigate some central questions in a branch of mathematics, known as low
dimensional topology. These questions are concerned with how three-manifolds
change under certain maps as well as operations called surgeries. The major tool
that the PI uses is a topological structure called Heegaard splitting, which is
a decomposition of a complicated three-manifold into simpler pieces along a two-
dimensional surface. This research targets some of the fundamental questions in
low-dimensional topology and knot theory. It also has a potential impact on
other areas of scientific investigations, such as the topological structures of
DNA. In this project, the PI will study the topology of three-manifolds. The
project has three major parts. The first part is to explore a new approach to
proving the Berge Conjecture. The Berge Conjecture can be divided into two
halves: the first half is to prove the Berge Conjecture for knots with tunnel
number one, and the second half is to show that if a nontrivial knot in the
three-sphere admits a lens-space Dehn surgery, then the knot must have tunnel
number one. The PI and his collaborators have carried out an in-depth study on
the first half. The same approach may lead to a proof of the second half of the
Berge Conjecture. The second part of the research is to study a long-standing
conjecture concerning Heegaard genus and degree-one map. The PI will investigate
this conjecture using special type of surgeries. The objective of the last part
of the research is to study several fundamental questions in three-manifold
topology concerning Heegaard splittings and curve complex. The PI plans to
develop new tools and use techniques from his previous work to achieve these
goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
