
* 1906260
* Low-Dimensional and Contact Topology of Links of Surface Singularities
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,05/18/2021
* Olga Plamenevskaya,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 198,706.00

This project focuses on several interrelated topics in geometry of surfaces in
dimensions three and four. On a complex surface defined by algebraic equations,
a cusp-like sharp point in an otherwise smooth region is called an isolated
singularity. In nature, singularities occur when sudden changes or catastrophic
events happen, thus the study of singularities from various viewpoints is
important to all branches of science. In geometry, an object known as the link
of singularity encircles the sharp point on the surface; this object resembles a
sphere in the absence of a sharp point but typically has a complicated shape
encoding properties of the singularity. The PI will study the properties of such
shapes and the additional structures they support. A particular focus will be on
collections of planes called contact structures that arise in physics.
Plamenevskaya's research will contribute to several areas of mathematics: low-
dimensional topology, symplectic and contact topology, algebraic geometry, and
combinatorics. Her other activities related to the project will make significant
contributions to undergraduate education and graduate and postdoctoral training.
Plamenevskaya is working to increase awareness of current research in topology
among undergraduate students, as well as contribute to participation of women in
mathematics. She co-organizes research seminars, conferences, and workshops for
a diverse audience, from graduate students to distinguished researchers.
Specifically, the PI will work with the canonical contact structure induced by
the complex tangencies on the link of singularity. A particular goal of the
project is to understand the relation between Stein fillings/cobordisms of such
contact structures and smoothings/deformations of the surface singularity, and
to address a variety of questions concerning the interplay of the singularity
theory and symplectic and contact topology. The PI's previous work (with
Ghiggini and Golla) shows that rational surface singularities with reduced
fundametal cycle, whose deformation theory is well-understood, correspond
precisely to the class of planar contact structures, whose fillings can be
studied via surface diffeomorphisms. This opens the door to extending certain
results from algebraic geometry to symplectic topology as well as to
applications of symplectic topology to singularity theory. Plamenevskaya will
pursue these questions using a range of tools, including low-dimensional
constructions such as open book decompositions and symplectic caps, complex and
symplectic line arrangements, and certain Floer-homological and combinatorial
invariants. She intends to discover further connections between the
aforementioned constructions and ideas, which may additionally lead to new
results on mapping class groups and combinatorics of line arrangements.
Plamenevskaya will also study a number of related questions, such as certain
constructions in lattice cohomology (a combinatorial theory introduced by
Nemethi for links of singularities) and their relation to Heegaard Floer
homology. Several collaborators will be involved in the PI's work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
