
* 1907635
* Structural Results in Floer Theory and Mirror Symmetry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Sheel Ganatra,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 228,000.00

Symplectic geometry is an area broadly concerned with the global shape of
physical systems, such as those tracking the possible positions and momenta of
particles in a constrained configuration. Insights from mathematical physics
have led to powerful tools, collectively called Floer theory, for extracting
properties of such systems (for instance the number of periodic orbits
associated to a system with given kinetic and potential energy); unfortunately
the appearance of difficult differential equations makes these tools challenging
to apply. This project seeks to simplify the study of Floer theory of a large
class of spaces by developing systematic rules for computation (via e.g., cut
and paste) and by establishing new relationships between different types of
Floer theory. Using these, the project aims to solve open problems about the
structure of Floer theory and find new applications to mirror symmetry (a
remarkable geometric duality first arising in string theory) and the study of
singularities (abrupt changes) in symplectic geometry. The PI will also train
and encourage mathematics students through workshops, new course and seminar
content, and judging of K-12 science fairs.

This project aims to develop new structural results in Floer theory and mirror
symmetry using input from (and with applications to) the study of singularities
of various forms in symplectic geometry. In one direction, the project aims to
show that wrapped Fukaya categories satisfy expected van-Kampen style locality
properties, and deduce as a consequence axiomatic and sheaf-theoretic
characterizions of Fukaya categories of Stein manifolds (using in part the
singular structure of their Lagrangian skeleta). In a related direction, the
project aims to geometrically calculate the Hochschild invariants of Fukaya
categories associated to certain Landau-Ginzburg models (i.e., holomorphic
functions), and deduce new applications to the study of singularities of such
functions. The third and final direction is to understand the effect of hidden
singularities (in the sense of having a singular mirror) on Fukaya categories,
with computational and structural consequences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
