
* 1907010
* Surfaces and Geometry and Topology of Quantum Link Invariants
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,08/23/2021
* Christine Lee,AL,University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 10/31/2022
* USD 109,708.00

Knot theory studies knotted, closed loops in a three-dimensional space
considered up to continuous transformations of the space. In mathematics, knots
that cannot be transformed into one another without cutting and regluing the
strings that form the loops are considered to be different from each other, or
in other words, inequivalent. Key tools for distinguishing inequivalent knots
are called knot invariants and these are essentially the properties of a knot
that are preserved by continuous transformations of the space. In this project
the PI will study the relationship between quantum knot invariants, a relatively
less understood family, constructed from the ideas of quantum physics and
mathematics. Central questions in quantum topology are broadly connected to the
geometric topology of three-dimensional spaces, number-theoretic properties of
polynomials assigned by quantum invariants, and the algebraic structures of
quantum groups defining the theory. The project includes research plans for
undergraduate and Master's students. The PI will also engage with "Girls Who
Code" club meetings in service to the local community.

The colored Jones polynomial is an important knot invariant that comes from the
representation theory of quantum groups and lies at the heart of quantum
topology, low-dimensional topology, and hyperbolic geometry. In this project the
PI and her collaborators will expand the correspondence between a state sum
defining the colored Jones polynomial and properly embedded surfaces in a link
complement, by applying the techniques of classical three-manifold topology and
normal surface theory. The next part is to prove a categorified version of the
Strong Slope Conjecture for colored Khovanov homology, which is a
categorification of the colored Jones polynomial. The PI will evaluate the
potential for this framework to provide new perspectives on the relationship of
Khovanov homology to knot Floer homology, another link invariant that has been
extensively studied with deep connections to other fields. The project will
further study the stability properties of Khovanov homology. These results will
be used to explore the contact-geometric properties of the transverse invariant
defined by Plamenevskaya.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
