
* 1910865
* International Workshop on Quasi-Isometries and Groups: Rigidity and Classification
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2019,05/24/2019
* Martin Bridgeman,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports participation of US based mathematicians in the workshop
"Quasi-isometries and groups: rigidity and classification" which will take place
from September 9th until September 14th, 2019, in Ventotene, Italy. A major goal
of the workshop is to train and support the next generation of mathematicians in
the field of coarse geometry and quasi-isometries. The conference will help to
educate graduate students and recent PhDs on the latest developments in the
field. The conference will introduce junior mathematicians to various topics in
geometric group theory and bring them up to the forefront of research. A part of
the conference will be devoted to three mini-courses, taught by experts known
also for their ability to give enlightening lectures. In parallel to the
minicourses, there will be research talks. The speakers will be prompted by the
organizers to aim their lectures at a broad audience of mathematicians. The
majority of funding will support junior participants coming from USA. The
organizing committee will encourage and support broad and diverse participation.
In particular, women mathematicians and members of other under-represented
groups are especially encouraged to apply for support.

The workshop consists of the following three minicourses on different aspects of
"Quasi-isometric rigidity for certain classes of solvable groups" (Tullia
Dymarz, University of Wisconsin), "The asymptotic geometry of certain Artin
groups"(Jingyin Huang, Ohio State University), and "Analysis on boundaries of
hyperbolic groups" (John MacKay, University of Bristol). The workshop will also
feature research talks and informal discussions. Participants will include
leading U.S. and European researchers from different areas relevant to the
centerpiece of the workshop (3-manifold topology, geometric group theory and
hyperbolic geometry) as well as junior researchers, both graduate students and
postdocs. Additional information can be found at the workshop website
https://www.ventoteneinternationalworkshops.net/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
