
* 1912700
* Quantum Topology and Hyperbolic Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2019,04/11/2019
* Thang Le,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2021
* USD 43,459.00

This award provides partial travel support for U.S. based researchers to
participate in the international conference "Quantum Topology and Hyperbolic
Geometry III" held in Da Nang, Vietnam, May 27-May 31, 2019, and workshop held
at Quy Nhon University, Jun 3-June 7, 2019. The conference covers all aspects of
quantum topology and its relation to hyperbolic geometry. It brings together
participants from all over the world and provides an opportunity for researchers
and students to share their latest ideas and to collaborate with each other. The
conference is followed by a workshop, June 3-7, 2019, in Quy Nhon. Four of the
speakers of the conference will each give a 5-lecture mini-course for graduate
students and recent Ph.D's thereby contributing to the training and development
of mathematical talent. Knot theory has long been an active branch of topology.
There have been exciting new developments in the area of knot theory and
3-manifold topology in the last 35 years: the Jones polynomial, topological
quantum field theories, gauge theory type invariants, etc. The new developments
relate knot theory to other branches of mathematics such as number theory, Lie
theory, statistical physics, etc, and employ tools far beyond the traditional
ones from algebraic topology. The subject has significant applications and
relations with biology, physics, combinatorics, algebra and the theory of
quantum computation. This conference will drive and promote progress in all
aspects of quantum topology and its relations to geometry. It will provide a
venue for sharing new results in the closely related fields of quantum topology
and 3-manifold geometry and topology; it will increase collaboration and
communication among research experts globally; and it will introduce
researchers, especially students and early career researchers, to important
problems and areas of current research, especially problems lying at the
interface of quantum and classical topology in three dimensions. The website of
the conference is at http://vietnam2019.math.gatech.edu.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
