
* 1928295
* International Conference on Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2019,05/23/2019
* Vladimir Shpilrain,NY,CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The "Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications" (GAGTA) conference
will be held in Bar Ilan, Israel, during May 26--30, 2019. Geometric and
asymptotic group theory is an essential part of modern mathematics. It
interfaces with a number of important areas of mathematics and theoretical
computer science, including low-dimensional topology, geometry, graph theory,
combinatorics, complexity theory, and information theory, in particular
information security. The synergistic effect of the interactions between people
in these areas that the conference will promote has the potential to result in
significant advances in research. The technological and societal impact of the
conference stems from potential wide applications to electronic communication
and information security. A special session on "Applications to information
security" will emphasize these applications, in particular to post-quantum
cryptography.

This conference will be devoted to the study of a variety of topics in geometric
and asymptotic group theory, with special emphasis on interactions with other
areas, including model theory, theoretical computer science, and applications to
information security. The speakers include leading specialists in various
aspects of the geometric, asymptotic, and algorithmic group theory. More
specifically, this includes: group actions, quasi-isometries, growth, asymptotic
invariants, random walks, algorithmic problems and their complexity. A special
emphasis will be made on an emerging area that studies problems in group theory
motivated by computer science. The conference website is
http://gagta.math.biu.ac.il/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
