
* 1941077
* Conference on Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2020,12/23/2019
* Talia Fernos,NC,University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2020
* USD 46,793.00

This project will support US-based participants in the upcoming Young Geometric
Group Theory IX conference to be held February 24-28, 2020 in Brittany, France.
This will be the ninth iteration of the Young Geometric Group Theory meetings,
which have been held every year since 2012. The conferences typically attract
between 100 and 200 young researchers. The meeting will have three main types of
events: minicourses given by four established experts in the field, informal
discussion sessions, and research talks given by junior researchers in geometric
group theory. This format allows young researchers to publicize their work,
allows graduate students and postdocs to learn cutting-edge methods from their
peers and from experts, and provides an opportunity to foster new and
international collaborations.

Geometric group theory is a fairly young and very active field, and the
selection of minicourses and speakers at this conference will reflect various
current key directions of research, including groups of birational
transformations, Furstenberg-Poisson boundaries and their connections to
geometry, conformal dynamics, and groups acting on non-positively curved spaces.
Participants will be exposed to a very broad spectrum of topics at the forefront
of research in geometric group theory. As most of the participants are expected
to be graduate students and early-career mathematicians, they will be able to
greatly broaden their knowledge of the field. Through the selection of speakers
and participants, the conference will promote the growing diversity that
geometric group theory enjoys.

For more information, please see the conference website
https://yggt2020.sciencesconf.org/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
