
* 2000506
* Homological Invariants in Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2019,11/07/2019
* Akram Alishahi,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 86,764.00

This National Science Foundation award supports a project in low dimensional
topology, an area of mathematics that studies shapes of three- and four-
dimensional spaces. Interestingly, the fundamental problem of understanding and
classifying shapes of spaces is more difficult in these lower dimensions
compared to higher dimensions. In fact, investigating some of the new phenomena
that happen in these dimensions require the use of more modern invariants, or in
other words, quantities associated to shapes that can distinguish between those
with different properties. This subject is also closely related to knot theory,
that is focused on studying the shapes of knotted circles in three-dimensional
spaces. Low dimensional topology and knot theory have various implications in
physics (quantum theory), cosmology (the shape of the universe), chemistry
(molecular knots) and biology (knotting of DNA and DNA-protein interactions).
This project aims to study the shapes of three- and four-dimensional spaces and
configurations of knotted circles and surfaces in them using an invariant
defined by the PI and her collaborator. In another direction, the PI
investigates the relationship between different invariants for knotted circles.
The PI plans to organize seminars and conferences and involve undergraduate
students in the combinatorial and computational aspects of this project.

Heegaard Floer homology is a collection of algebraic invariants for low
dimensional objects (e.g. 3- and 4-manifolds, knots, links, etc.), defined by
counting holomorphic disks. In particular, different types of such invariants
have been introduced for 3-manifolds with boundary. For example, Eftekhary and
the PI defined tangle Floer homology as a generalization of (minus) Heegaard
Floer homology. In one direction, this project aims to (1) study embeddings of
graphs and homology cobordism group of homology cylinders using tangle Floer
homology and (2) introduce invariants for concordances and Seifert surfaces, and
get bounds for unknotting number using cobordism maps for tangle Floer homology.
In a different direction, the PI intends to (3) give a computationally effective
way for detecting handlebodies using bordered Floer homology (different
extension of Heegaard Floer invariants for 3-manifolds with boundary defined by
Lipshitz-Ozsvath-Thurston) with the hope of providing a new way for detecting
homotopically ribbon fibered knots. This project also proposes to study the
properties of an invariant for knots and links, called symplectic sl(n)
homology. This invariant is conjecturally equal to sl(n) homology, and the PI
plans to (4) investigate spectral sequences for specific involutions in
symplectic sl(n) homology and establish a better understanding of this
conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
