
* 2001599
* Higher Structures, Homotopy Algebras, and Noncommutative Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2020,05/11/2020
* Ping Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project involves problems in noncommutative geometry. The idea of
noncommutative geometry is to study noncommutative algebras using tools inspired
by geometry. Noncommutative algebras are mathematical objects that have addition
and multiplication; however the order in which the elements get multiplied might
matter. The purpose of the project, which is centered around higher structures
and homotopy algebras in noncommutative geometry, is to investigate mathematical
problems motivated by physics in these fields. More specifically, the project is
motivated by a combination of ideas from quantum mechanics, quantum field
theory, string theory, and classical areas of mathematics such as Lie theory,
representation theory, complex geometry, homological algebra, foliation theory,
deformation quantization and index theory, and noncommutative geometry. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed project promotes further interaction
between these fields. The PI continues to disseminate his research by speaking
at conferences and seminars and organizing workshops, which provide excellent
opportunities for the PI to exchange, interact and collaborate with colleagues
from within and outside the US and, in particular, young scientists. This award
will support the training of early career researchers that work on related
fields.

In noncommutative geometry one studies algebras as if they were algebras of
functions on manifolds. However, these noncommutative spaces are virtual and not
made of points. Dg manifolds are one particular type of such a noncommutative
spaces. The space of functions on a dg manifold is a differential graded
algebra. Another important class of noncommutative spaces is obtained as
deformations of commutative algebras. Deformation quantization aims at throwing
a bridge between classical and quantum mechanics. The mathematical structures of
the two theories are very different, making it a challenging problem to
understand how the transition from classical to quantum works. Quantization,
roughly speaking, is the study and prediction of quantum phenomena, which are
normally described by noncommutative algebras, from the geometry of their
underlying classical counterparts. The PI proposes to continue the study of
higher structures and homotopy algebras arising naturally in noncommutative
geometry and their relation to representation theory using tools from
deformation quantization and Lie algebroid theory. The problems include
investigating the role of the Todd class in Tamarkin-Tsygan calculi associated
with a dg manifold, studying the formal geometry of dg manifolds and the concept
of homotopy equivalence of dg Lie algebroids, establishing a Kontsevich-Duflo
type theorem in a wide context, and exploring negatively graded dg manifolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
