
* 2002596
* Group Actions on Manifolds and Related Spaces: Regularity, Structure, and Complexity
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2020,04/23/2020
* Thomas Koberda,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 173,107.00

Manifolds are fundamental objects in mathematics which generalize and
systematize space as we perceive it, and as such have been of great interests to
mathematicians for a long time. One fruitful way in which manifolds can be
studied is through their symmetries, which taken together form an algebraic
object called a group. The focus of this project is the interaction between the
structure of a manifold, both local (up close) and global (as an ensemble), and
its symmetries, or group actions on manifolds for short. The project aims to
resolve some basic questions in this area and investigate some new phenomena.
Among the problems of particular interest are those concerning smoothness of
group actions, in the sense of calculus. A resolution of some of these problems
has the potential to yield insight into old open questions about exotic spheres,
which are certain manifolds which can be deformed into standard spheres, but
only in a highly singular way. Groups acting on manifolds are a broad class of
objects which have received a large amount of attention, and their theory has
developed rapidly in recent years. Planned broader impacts include research
experiences for undergraduates, conference organization, and a book on right-
angled Artin groups.

This project will contribute to these advances in several ways. One area of
focus for the project is critical regularity of group actions. Previous work
with Kim will be extended in order to compute the critical regularity in one
dimension of right-angled Artin groups, which would then be the first natural
class of non-nilpotent groups whose precise one-dimensional critical regularity
is both finite and known. Moreover, the principal investigator intends to
develop critical regularity in higher dimensions, with the goal of encoding the
diffeomorphism type of a compact manifold by a set of finitely generated groups.
Such a result would give an algebraic approach to the 4-dimensional smooth
Poincare conjecture. Another focus of the project is to develop a structure
theory for thin subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, with the goal of resolving a
conjecture of Shalom about the discreteness of their commensurators. The final
main focus of the project is in the area of mapping class groups of surfaces,
where the PI has outlined a program to prove the nonlinearity of mapping class
groups, and to introduce logic into low dimensional topology by investigating
the model theory of the curve graph of a surface.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
