
* 2004300
* Hochschild-Type Invariants of Ring Spectra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2020,04/19/2021
* Ayelet Lindenstrauss,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 212,725.00

Systems where one can add and multiply following the basic rules of arithmetic
are called rings. The integers are the most basic example, but other rings with
very diverse properties occur in all areas of mathematics, pure and applied. For
more than fifty years, a major goal in the study of rings has been to understand
their algebraic K-theory. This is a way of thinking about rings via topology,
the qualitative study of the shape of spaces. The research supported by this
award uses the trace method to connect algebraic K-theory to things which are
easier to understand, like Hochschild homology and its variants. It turns out,
moreover, that if one replaces the rings by topological versions of rings that
are called ring spectra, the Hochschild-type invariants become even better
approximations of algebraic K-theory of the original rings, and this field has
seen a lot of recent development. The principal investigator has made
calculations of algebraic K-theory using these methods, and is working on
others. Understanding the Hochschild-type invariants of ring spectra also gives
good tools for classifying them by analogies with traditional discrete rings.
This project provides research training opportunities for graduate students and
will encourage and mentor young women mathematicians at the graduate and
undergraduate levels.

Most of the principal investigator's work to date has been in calculations of
topological Hochschild homology, the ring spectrum version of Hochschild
homology. It turns out that this is a special case, associated to a circle, of a
more general idea of tensoring any topological space with a ring spectrum, and
viewing the circle calculation in this wider context has already enabled a
better understanding of topological Hochschild homology calculations in some
cases. Just as the tensor product of a ring with a circle is instrumental in
understanding algebraic K-theory, the tensor product of a ring with a higher
dimensional torus is instrumental in understanding iterated algebraic K-theory,
and so one is interested in understanding the interaction between rings (or ring
spectra) and spaces that makes some such tensor product calculations much easier
than others. To get algebraic K-theory calculations, these projects will address
topological cyclic homology calculations using Nikolaus and Scholze's new
formulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
