
* 2005619
* Combinatorial Methods in Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2020,04/24/2020
* Joshua Greene,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2023
* USD 285,675.00

Topology refers broadly to the study of shapes, and low-dimensional topology
refers specifically to their study in dimensions one through four. These
dimensions are special from an anthropic perspective, since they model our
everyday perception of the physical world, and from a mathematical perspective,
since the phenomena they exhibit and the collection of techniques used to study
them are rather different from those in higher dimensions. Combinatorics refers
to the study of discrete structures, such as networks and flows, and it is
influential in the development of codes and algorithms. Combinatorial methods
have long influenced topology. Amongst the various techniques that come to bear
on low-dimensional topology are graphs of surface intersections; lattice-
theoretic methods; and extremal combinatorics. Each technique has led to
sensational progress on the main problems in low-dimensional topology, and they
lend very different perspectives on the subject. The unifying goal of this
research project is to advance combinatorial methods towards problems in low-
dimensional topology. Alongside the research component, the PI will conduct
activities that integrate his research interests with education and training
initiatives that reach audiences from the high school level to postdoctoral
researchers. For instance, the PI is actively involved with mathematics
enrichment at the high school level through the Hampshire College Summer Studies
in Mathematics and Mathematical Staircase, Inc. In the context of these programs
and in other mentoring activities, he seeks to inspire the discovery process and
aid in the exposition of beautiful mathematics. He ran a graduate summer school
focused on a central theme in low-dimensional topology, Dehn surgery, and is in
the process of editing a book based on it. He has also written a survey article
on Heegaard Floer homology for the Notices of the AMS, the most widely-read
general interest periodical targeted at professional mathematicians, and he is
committed to more expository work aimed at a wide mathematical audience. The
award provides funds for supporting graduate students.

The PI will develop combinatorial methods in low-dimensional topology, in
continuation of an established program. The main projects focus on studying
graphs of surface intersections in application to exceptional Dehn surgery and
embeddings of surfaces in the four-sphere; lattice embeddings and their
refinements in application to the study of rational homology balls, slice links,
and surface isotopy; and extremal combinatorics in application to properties of
curves on surfaces. The surface intersection techniques are more direct and rely
on the development of graph theoretic tools in order to draw topological
conclusions. Floer homology methods are less direct but apply heavy machinery to
a vast collection of problems. This project will more closely bind combinatorics
and low-dimensional topology. The PI currently advises three PhD students and
has just graduated one student. The PI runs original graduate courses on various
themes, including advanced combinatorics and the knot complement problem, and
will continue to do so. This award will support graduate students during summer
months and assist them with travel funds. At the postdoctoral level, the PI
mentors and collaborates with post-doctoral fellows. This award will support
them with travel funds. At the scholarly outreach level, the PI intends to
undertake more expository projects with the aim of reaching and educating a wide
audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
