
* 2006029
* RUI: New Approaches to Understanding the Four-Sphere
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2020,05/05/2020
* Jeffrey Meier,WA,Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2024
* USD 148,699.00

We inhabit a three-dimensional space. This means that, locally, one can move in
three independent directions: left/right, forward/backward, and up/down.
However, the global nature of our three-dimensional space is not known. For
example, it is not known whether our universe extends infinitely far in every
direction or if it curls back on itself. To complicate things, it becomes more
natural to view the space we inhabit as a four-dimensional space by including
time. The goal of low-dimensional topology is to study and classify three-
dimensional and four-dimensional spaces. One important aspect of this program is
to understand the topology (or "shape") of the four-dimensional sphere, which is
a four-dimensional analog the spherical surface of a solid ball. Amazingly,
despite over one hundred years of study, very little is known about the topology
of the four-dimensional sphere. In contrast, the analogous objects in dimensions
greater than or less than four are much better understood. The goal of this
research project is to apply novel techniques and approaches better understand
four-dimensional sphere. This work will help to inform and advance the general
study of four-dimensional spaces, such as the spacetime expanse that we inhabit.
The award provides funds to support research training for undergraduate
students.

Perhaps the most important open problem in low-dimensional topology, the Smooth
Poincare Conjecture, ask whether any smooth four-manifold with the homotopy-type
of the four-sphere is equivalent to the four-sphere. This problem has been open
for more than 100 years, yet has seen almost no progress. Rather than approach
this problem directly, this research program aims to study the smooth topology
from four distinct, but related, angles. One angle is to study four-manifolds
with the homotopy-type of the four-sphere that admit simple handle-
decompositions. Recently, the PI and Zupan gave new results in this setting,
offering the first general progress towards the Poincare Conjecture in 30 years.
The first aim of this research is to build on this work to obtain results that
apply in even broader settings. In another direction, the introduction of theory
of trisections by Gay and Kirby in 2016, and the subsequent development and
expansion, especially by the PI and Zupan, has ushered in a new era in four-
manifold topology, with applications emerging to many interesting aspects of
low-dimensional topology. This research project aims to advance and refine these
theories, broaden their applicability, and bring to fruition many applications
and connections. In particular, the PI will investigate what sort of trisections
the four-sphere can admit. In the process, connections will be established with
important open problems in low-dimensional topology, such as the Andrews-Curtis,
Generalized Property R, and Slice-Ribbon Conjectures. The project will include
an investigation of trisections of genus three, where the additivity of
trisection genus will be explored in search for exotic copies of familiar four-
manifolds. Finally, the PI will employ the theory of bridge trisections to study
knotted surfaces in the four-sphere. This theory was introduced by the PI and
Zupan and offers a powerful new way to study knot theory in dimension four. In
particular, the PI will work to give connections between the braid group and
potentially exotic knotted spheres.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
