
* 2017119
* Mid-Atlantic Topology Conference
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 03/01/2020,01/24/2023
* Mona Merling,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,863.00

This award provides funding for participants in the Mid-Atlantic Topology
Conference taking place April 18-19, 2020 at the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia. The conference focuses on a confluence of areas in algebraic
topology that are currently at the forefront of research: arithmetic topology,
chromatic homotopy theory, applied topology, manifold topology, and geometric
representation theory. Priority for funding will be given to graduate students
and to junior researchers without other funding sources, and among those to
members of underrepresented groups in mathematics. Algebraic topology is
enjoying a growing diversity, which this conference will foster through the
selection of speakers and participants. This conference is quite timely in light
of the research growth in algebraic topology seen on the East Coast in recent
years and the resulting growth of student groups in the subject. Modern
algebraic topology is intimately tied to a host of fields. From Thom's thesis to
the Madsen-Weiss theorem and beyond, stable homotopy theory has long played a
crucial role in the study of manifolds. More recently, sophisticated techniques
of equivariant stable homotopy theory were brought to bear in the solution of
the Kervaire invariant problem concerning exotic smooth structures on spheres,
opening new research directions and applications. On the other hand, homotopy
theory is connected to algebraic geometry via motivic homotopy theory and
applications such as those of abstract scissors congruence K-theory to the
classical Grothendieck ring of varieties. Moreover, algebraic topology has seen
notable recent application to the study of data in the emerging field of
topological data analysis. One of the aims for this conference is to provide a
sample of new directions in algebraic topology and interactions with other
fields such as geometric topology, arithmetic geometry, and applied topology.
The conference features nine 45-minute invited talks over two days. The
scientific focus of the conference is decidedly forward-looking: the speakers
are rising leaders in the field and include early career researchers; each
speaker represents a distinct and vital aspect of the topology of the future.
More information can be found on the webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/mid-
atlantic-topology/home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
