
* 2030179
* Instantons, Representations and Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2020,04/23/2020
* Aliakbar Daemi,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 77,450.00

Low dimensional topology is an area of mathematics that studies qualities of
three- and four-dimensional spaces which are insensitive to continuous
deformations such as stretching and bending. These spaces model real world
objects and low dimensional topology is highly relevant to other scientific
disciplines. For example, knot theory, a branch of low dimensional topology, is
an effective tool in studying configurations of protein and DNA. In addition,
topology plays an essential role in formulating modern theories in physics.
Perhaps more surprisingly, tools from modern physics, more specifically quantum
filed theory, have yielded significant progresses in low dimensional topology.
This National Science Foundation funded project promotes systematic application
of ideas in physics to topology and vice versa. The PI aims to investigate
applications of the Yang-Mills theory of high energy physics in the topological
properties of three-and four-dimensional objects. The proposed research also
partly focuses on foundational questions in symplectic geometry, a field with
close ties with Physics.

Instanton Floer homology, defined using Yang-Mills gauge theory, provides
algebraic invariants of three- and four-dimensional manifolds. The PI will apply
different versions of instanton Floer homology to the study of problems in low
dimensional topology. The focus of the first part of the project is the Atiyah-
Floer conjecture. This conjecture states that one can apply methods from
symplectic geometry to define three-manifold invariants. Furthermore, the
resulting invariant, often called symplectic instanton Floer homology, is
isomorphic to instanton Floer homology. The PI and his collaborators will
develop tools in symplectic topology which can be used to construct new types of
symplectic instanton Floer homology. They will also use a certain partial
differential equation, called the mixed equation, to address various versions of
the Atiyah-Floer conjecture. Another goal of this project is to prove the
existence of non-trivial representations of knot groups into the special unitary
group SU(N). An outcome of this project would be to give gauge theoretical
proofs of the Smith conjecture and the Covering Conjecture. The final goal of
this project is to employ instanton Floer homology in the study of the homology
cobordism group. The PI recently constructed a family of new invariants for the
homology cobordism group using Yang-Mills gauge theory. The PI will apply these
invariants to better understand the structure of the homology cobordism group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
