
* 2042428
* CAREER: Geometric and Topological Combinatorics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2021,09/07/2022
* Florian Frick,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 152,050.00

Geometry and topology are mathematical branches that provide methods that
measure phenomena that are global instead of local. If a problem's resolution
depends on the aggregate of its information then geometric methods are useful in
detecting global obstructions. Numerous problems across mathematics and its
applications are global in this sense, ranging from data science to economics.
The research supported by this grant will develop new topological and geometric
methods to tackle problems further afield, primarily discrete, non-continuous
problems. This promises new insights at the confluence of combinatorics,
geometry, and topology. Students at all stages will be involved in the research
effort supported by this grant.

Among the general goals of the research program are the following: In
applications of equivariant topology one often requires that a certain parameter
has to be a prime power, and methods fail outside of this prime power case.
Recent research of the PI has suggested that one may effectively circumvent this
prime power requirement via a synthesis of topological and combinatorial
techniques. This will be further developed. The application of topological
methods brings about geometric generalizations of combinatorial problems. To
understand the limitations of topological techniques one has to study those
types of problems, where geometric results deviate considerably from their
combinatorial special cases. A central goal will thus be to delimit rigid
combinatorial results from their flexible geometric counterparts. In addition to
showing the existence of a solution to some combinatorial problem, one is often
interested in quantifying how rich the space of solutions is. General
topological methods will be developed that provide lower bounds for the topology
of the space of solutions of a given combinatorial problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
