
* 2042345
* CAREER: Symplectic 4-Manifolds and Singular Symplectic Surfaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Laura Starkston,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 186,543.00

This project studies new frontiers in the geometry of 4-dimensional spaces.
These spaces play important roles in the mathematical areas of topology and
geometry, as well as in models of important physical systems. Because humans
cannot visualize four spatial dimensions, it is necessary to develop
mathematical and diagrammatic tools to study these spaces. Historically,
4-dimensional spaces have displayed unusual phenomena, distinct from spaces of
either lower or higher dimensions. A persistent theme in the discovery of such
phenomena is the role of symplectic geometry. Although symplectic geometry was
initially formulated to encode the equations of Hamiltonian physics, it has
grown into an important abstract mathematical topic that is particularly
powerful for studying 4-dimensional spaces. This project aims to use cutting-
edge tools to make novel advances in 4-dimensional symplectic geometry. Because
this is a rapidly growing field, training a well-prepared and diverse next
generation is particularly important. To that end, the PI will create a new
undergraduate course, run speaking workshops for graduate students, develop a
paired graduate-undergraduate reading program, and organize workshops, summer
schools, and conferences.

The project will study symplectic 4-manifolds and singular symplectic surfaces.
The first primary goal is to create diagrammatic methods to study the subtleties
of diffeomorphism classes of symplectic 4-manifolds. The second goal is to
produce new symplectic isotopy classifications for smooth and singular
symplectic surfaces. The third goal is to perform new calculations of existing
symplectic invariants and to define new invariants for symplectic 4-manifolds
and their submanifolds. The project will employ four mathematical methods to
study symplectic 4-manifolds and surfaces: branched coverings of braided
surfaces, trisections, (de)singularization, and Weinstein handlebodies. The
fourth goal is to create a pipeline of new mathematicians well trained in the
study of manifolds and skilled in scientific communication and research. The
project includes training of students at the graduate and undergraduate levels
in geometry, topology, and 4-dimensional spaces, as well as in clear
communication and mentoring skills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
