
* 2043485
* Motivic Homotopy Theory, Stable Homotopy Groups of Spheres and the Kervaire Invariant
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2020,08/08/2020
* Zhouli Xu,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2021
* USD 26,637.00

Topology is a subject of mathematics that studies the shape of spaces, and
homotopy theory studies how spaces can be deformed to each other without tearing
things up or puncturing holes in the process. Among all spaces, the spheres are
the most fundamental and beautiful objects. A central question in homotopy
theory and algebraic topology - the computation of homotopy groups of spheres -
is to understand how spheres can be mapped to other spheres, in different
dimensions, and to understand how different maps can or cannot be deformed to
each other. This topological question is not just a fundamental question on
fundamental mathematical objects, but it also has deep connections and
interactions to other subjects in mathematics. It has been a major research
question since 1950's. For example, Kervaire and Milnor established a connection
to the question on how many ways one could do calculus on spheres - smooth
structures on spheres; Kervaire and Browder built a connection to the question
on how one could or could not do surgeries to higher dimensional spaces to turn
them into spheres - the Kervaire invariant problem. Moreover, a summand of the
stable homotopy groups of spheres, the image of J, is closely related to the
Bernoulli numbers; Quillen and Goerss, Hopkins, Miller, Lurie established a
connection to the moduli stack of formal groups. More recently, Hill, Hopkins,
Ravenel, Voevodsky, Morel, Isaksen and others established connections between
equivariant homotopy theory and motivic homotopy theory. The goal of this
project is to deepen the existing connections, as well as discovering new
connections by pushing further the limit of existing ones.

This research concentrates on computations of stable homotopy groups of
spheres, with interactions among motivic, equivariant and chromatic homotopy
theory, and applications to problems in differential topology, such as
uniqueness of smooth structure on spheres and the Kervaire invariant problem.
More specifically, in current and ongoing projects with Isaksen and Wang, the
Principle Investigator (PI) develops new computational tools in motivic homotopy
theory, with connection to chromatic homotopy theory, which computes 40 more new
stems of classical stable homotopy groups of sphere within two years. The PI
will deepen the new connection between motivic homotopy theory and chromatic
homotopy theory, carry out more computations of stable stems in the next a few
years, and use the computations to attack the last unsolved case of the Kervaire
invariant problem in dimension 126. The PI will also explore connections between
real motivic homotopy theory and C2 equivariant homotopy theory, following
ongoing work of Behrens, Dugger, Guillou and Isaksen. The goal is to prove
structural theorems in this direction, as well as providing concrete
computational results. In ongoing projects with Hill, Shi and Wang, the PI will
also apply equivariant techniques, such as the slice spectral sequences that are
developed by Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel, to do computations in heights greater than 2
in chromatic homotopy theory and to understand its connection to stable homotopy
groups of spheres.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
