
* 2104865
* Collaborative Research: Geometric Analysis, Monopoles, and Applications to Low-Dimensional Manifolds
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2021,08/10/2021
* Paul Feehan,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 283,300.00

Manifolds are shapes that locally resemble Euclidean space. This project focuses
on manifolds that are closed in the sense that they have no boundary edges and
do not extend to infinity. A closed one-dimensional manifold is equivalent to
the circle, while a closed (orientable) two-dimensional manifold is equivalent
to the sphere, the surface of a donut, or the surface of a ?donut? with two or
more holes. Closed three-dimensional manifolds cannot be so easily visualized,
while closed four-dimensional manifolds can have very complicated structures and
are not well-understood. Four-dimensional manifolds, with three spatial
directions and one temporal direction, are used in general relativity as models
for the universe. Four-dimensional manifolds also play a central role in gauge
theories developed to unify three of the four known fundamental forces (the
electromagnetic, weak, and strong interactions). The first goal of the project
is to complete a mathematical proof of a prediction from supersymmetric quantum
field theory, one that relates two different gauge theories used to help
understand four-dimensional manifolds. The second goal of the project is to
advance understanding of the possible structures of four-dimensional manifolds,
a source of fascination and inspiration for mathematicians and physicists for
nearly a century. The classification of possible structures of three-dimensional
manifolds advanced tremendously in recent decades, but four-dimensional
manifolds remain mysterious, despite intense effort by mathematicians to analyze
them. The third goal of the project is to develop methods to relate different
approaches to understanding the structure of three-dimensional manifolds. The
project involves graduate students in the research. To help train the next
generation of mathematicians, the principals also will continue their tradition
of organizing seminars and conferences, contributing expository articles to help
engage a broader audience interested in learning about careers and research in
mathematics, mentoring undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, and encouraging the interest of high-school students in mathematics
through summer programs and outreach activities at the National Museum of
Mathematics.

The first goal of the project is to complete a proof of Witten's formula
relating the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants of a closed, oriented,
smooth four-dimensional manifold with admissible topology and simple type,
employing a mathematically rigorous method based on moduli spaces of non-Abelian
monopoles. The work will apply a new approach to gluing solutions to non-linear
partial differential equations that arise in geometric analysis to establish a
proof of an expected gluing theorem for non-Abelian monopoles. The second goal
of their project is complete a proof of the conjectured Bogomolov-Miyaoka-Yau
inequality for simply connected four-dimensional manifolds of Seiberg-Witten
simple type and having non-zero Seiberg-Witten invariants. The approach uses a
new version of Morse theory for singular analytic spaces applied to the singular
moduli space of non-Abelian monopoles to prove existence of solutions to another
non-linear partial differential equation ? the anti-self-dual Yang-Mills
equation on a rank-two Hermitian vector bundle with prescribed topology over a
four-dimensional manifold. The third goal of the project is to derive relations
between the instanton and Seiberg-Witten Floer homologies of closed three-
dimensional manifolds, potentially relating fundamental groups and contact
structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
