
* 2104300
* Algebraic Structures in Equivariant Homotopy Theory and K Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2021,08/02/2021
* AnnaMarie Bohmann,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,148.00

Symmetry and deformation may be viewed as two opposing forces in understanding
topological spaces. On the one hand, symmetries represent rigid structure of a
space-ways in which the space is the same under operations like rotation or
reflection. Deformations, on the other hand, purposely elide rigid structures so
as to allow us to understand rough features of spaces. Examples of these
features include the number of holes or the number of separate pieces of the
space. These two approaches to understanding spaces combine in equivariant
algebraic topology. Algebraic topology is an area of mathematics that studies
complicated and frequently high dimensional spaces via algebraic invariants, and
equivariant algebraic topology incorporates the symmetries of the spaces into
the invariants in a robust way. This field has connections to subjects such as
mathematical physics and data analysis. The PI's work advances state-of-the-art
knowledge in this area by developing both computational and theoretical tools to
analyze the structures of and relationships between the invariants in
equivariant algebraic topology. Particular contexts of interest also include
questions related to algebraic and topological K-theory, invariants that are at
the heart of modern approaches to topology, algebra and number theory.
Additionally, the funds from this grant will assist the PI in her outreach
activities designed to promote women and underrepresented minorities in
mathematics, including her work with the newly formed Vanderbilt student chapter
of the Association for Women in Mathematics and the Vanderbilt Directed Reading
Program. These programs will expand the reach of mathematical thinking and give
a wider variety of students the opportunity to be part of the project of
mathematics, creating both a broader base for the mathematical community and
more mathematically literate members of society.

Recent developments in homotopy theory have highlighted the importance of
equivariance, as well as the many ways in which equivariance remains poorly
understood. Equivariant homotopy theory is key to modern computations in
algebraic K-theory and has deep ramifications in p-adic Hodge theory.
Equivariant homotopy theory is also central to results in nonequivariant
homotopy theory, such as the recent solution to the Kervaire invariant one
problem. The PI's research program will develop new tools for extending these
kinds of calculations as well as deepening our overall picture of the surprising
ways in which symmetry manifests itself in homotopical considerations. Her
program focuses on the interplay of different groups of symmetries, both at a
topological and algebraic level. At the algebraic level, these new developments
in this area will allow mathematicians to fully exploit algebraic tools in
understanding topological spaces with group actions. At the topological level,
her work will provide a basis for advances relating to duality, chromatic
homotopy theory and algebraic K-theory. While undertaking this research, the PI
plans to continue current activities designed to promote women and
underrepresented minorities in mathematics. By providing mathematicians from
these groups with the opportunity to disseminate their new results, she will
support their careers and additionally increase the visibility of the diverse
range of people doing mathematics. The PI's proposed activities will also
broaden participation in mathematics by providing opportunities for students
with a wide range of backgrounds to be part of the mathematical research
experience. This program will expand the reach of mathematical thinking and give
a wider variety of students the opportunity to be part of the project of
mathematics, creating both a broader base for the mathematical community and
more mathematically literate members of society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
