
* 2104536
* Heegaard Diagrams and Holomorphic Disks
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,07/26/2022
* Peter Ozsvath,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 238,911.00

This project in topology studies "Heegaard Floer homology," which is an
invariant for three-and four-dimensional spaces. A variant of this construction,
called "knot Floer homology," provides new methods for studying knotted curves
in three-dimensional space and answering classical questions about such objects.
Both Heegaard Floer homology and the associated knot invariant come in two
versions: a simplified one, and a richer one. The simplified version provides
interesting three-dimensional information, but the richer version also sheds
light on four-dimensional aspects of the theory. Heegaard Floer homology brings
together tools from various mathematical disciplines, including symplectic
geometry, analysis, and homological algebra to study problems in knot theory and
low-dimensional topology, in a way which was partially inspired by modern
physics. As such, it lies at a fertile intellectual crossroads, bringing new
perspectives to neighboring subjects. Heegaard Floer homology continues to
provide novel methods for attacking old problems. The award provides support for
graduate students to be engaged in related research.

In collaboration with Robert Lipshitz and Dylan Thurston, the PI defined
"bordered Floer homology," a technique for reconstructing the simplified version
of Heegaard Floer homology from a three-dimensional space that is decomposed
into simple component pieces. In collaboration with Szabo, the PI used similar
methods to describe the simplified version of knot Floer homology. This project
deals with further developing bordered techniques for three-dimensional spaces
and also for knots, extending them to the richer versions. This project aims to
both give a better conceptual understanding of these invariants, and to give
effective computational techniques for calculating them. The project aims to
study bordered Floer homology as a tool for studying various versions of
Heegaard Floer homology and knot Floer homology. Part of the project will start
by extending the bordered theory to include the full (unspecialized) Heegaard
Floer homology for three-manifolds with torus boundary. Having established most
of the algebraic foundations of this theory, the PI will now turn to the
analytical aspects, with a view towards constructing modules for three-manifolds
with torus boundary, and a pairing theorem for computing the (unspecialized)
Heegaard Floer homology of a three-manifold decomposed along a torus, in terms
of the modules assocaited to the pieces. In a different direction, bordered
Floer homology is extended to a tool for studying and computing (unspecialized)
knot Floer homology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
