
* 2104844
* Equivariant Methods in Chromatic Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2021,08/04/2021
* XiaoLin Danny Shi,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2023
* USD 223,563.00

The spheres are among the simplest geometric objects, and they are the building
blocks of more complicated topological spaces. The homotopy groups of spheres
are collections of continuous functions between spheres considered up to certain
deformations. These groups hold fundamental information about maps between
topological spaces and have deep connections to number theory, differential
topology, and geometric topology. However, despite their simple definition, the
homotopy groups of spheres are extremely difficult to compute. To better
understand these groups, chromatic homotopy theory is a powerful tool that
organizes theory and computations by analyzing the algebraic geometry of smooth
one-parameter formal groups. The moduli stack of formal groups has a
stratification by height, which corresponds in the stable homotopy category to
localizations with respect to the Lubin-Tate theories. The Lubin-Tate theories
give rise to higher periodicity in the stable homotopy groups of spheres, and
studying them is one of the most important areas of research in chromatic
homotopy theory. Starting from Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel's resolution of the Kervaire
invariant problem, the newly developed equivariant machinery offers new methods
to attack problems in chromatic homotopy theory that were notoriously difficult
to approach via classical methods. The planned research explores the connections
between equivariant homotopy theory and chromatic homotopy theory, and uses
cutting-edge equivariant technology to produce state-of-the-art computations in
chromatic homotopy theory.

The principal investigator will study periodicity phenomena in the stable
homotopy groups of spheres through the lens of equivariant and chromatic
homotopy theory. In current and ongoing projects, the PI establishes the first
known connection between the obstruction-theoretic actions in chromatic homotopy
theory and the geometry of complex conjugations. Using this newly discovered
connection, the PI will study Lubin-Tate theories as equivariant spectra and use
equivariant machinery developed by Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel to produce higher
chromatic height computations at the prime 2. This project aims to deepen the
connection between equivariant and chromatic homotopy theory by proving
Periodicity, Gap, and Detection theorems for norms of Real bordism theories and
fixed points of Lubin-Tate theories. The PI will carry out more chromatic
computations to study the last open case of the Kervaire invariant problem. The
PI will also investigate Hurewicz images, prove general differential patterns,
and exhibit transchromatic phenomena in the slice spectral sequences of Real
bordism theories and Lubin-Tate theories across different groups and heights.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
