
* 2104473
* Conformal Symplectic Structures, Contact Structures, Foliations, and Their Interactions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,07/05/2022
* Yakov Eliashberg,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,520.00

This project explores the new recently emerged links between various areas of
mathematics, such as symplectic and contact topology and the theory of
foliations. It builds on recent progress and results of prior research in an
attempt to advance some of the long-standing problems in these and related
areas. A related goal is the development of new and alternative tools beyond the
currently used techniques that, while they proved to be quite effective for some
applications, fail for a large class of open problems in the subject. The work
will involve several graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. A graduate
student workshop devoted to dissemination of new ideas, methods and results will
be organized. The principal investigator will also write a graduate student
level book devoted to new advances in symplectic flexibility, including main
findings of the proposed research.

Rich links between symplectic and contact topology were known since the
inception of these subjects in 1980s. A decade later there were discovered
connections of contact topology with the theory of foliations. In recent years
it was understood that it is important to add to the above mix the theory of
conformal symplectic structures. This project builds on recent progress and
results of prior research in an attempt to explore developments in each of these
areas for advancing some of the long-standing problems in the others. A related
goal is the development of new tools beyond the currently used techniques, such
as Gromov's theory of holomorphic curves and its ramifications, e.g., Floer
homology, Fukaya categories and Symplectic Field Theory. While these techniques
proved to be very effective for some applications, they fail for a large class
of open problems in the subject. This project aims to develop alternative tools,
or in case they do not exist to prove h-principle type results asserting that
whatever is not prohibited by holomorphic curve method is, in fact, possible.
The main objectives of the project are: 1) Completion of the arborealization
program of simplification of singularities of Lagrangian skeleta of Weinstein
manifolds, and, in particular, establishing the combinatorial notion of arboreal
homotopy, i.e., finding the minimal set of Reidemeister type moves necessary and
sufficient to connect two arboreal skeleta of homotopic Weinstein structures; 2)
Finding an appropriate notion of overtwistedness for conformal symplectic
structures and proving the corresponding parametric h-principle; 3) Finding a
generalization of the notion of arboreal singularities applicable to general
Weinstein manifolds beyond the polarized case; 4) Finding conditions on a
codimension 1 foliation to admit a leafwise conformal symplectic structure;
explorations of this condition for the problem of deformation of foliations into
contact structures; and 5) Developing effective invariants for open contact
manifolds and proving surgery type formulas for their computations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
