
* 2104309
* Floer Homology and Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2020,11/05/2020
* Linh Truong,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2023
* USD 90,393.00

Low-dimensional topology is the study of spaces of dimensions three and four and
their qualitative geometric properties. The classification of these spaces
remains a fundamental problem today. The main theme of this project is to study
topological properties of spaces using certain algebraic invariants, called
Floer homology and Khovanov homology. These invariants have become central tools
in modern topology and have connections to fields ranging from symplectic
geometry to quantum physics to biology. In addition to its research component,
the project includes plans for mentoring and outreach efforts, with a focus on
increasing the accessibility of mathematics to groups underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences.

The project is devoted to studying three- and four-dimensional manifolds by
further developing techniques in Floer homology and Khovanov homology. The first
part of the project is to study homology cobordism and knot concordance,
including constructing new concordance homomorphisms for knots in homology
spheres. The second part of the project concerns properties of the monodromy of
open book decompositions and Stein fillability of contact three-manifolds. The
third part is to study properties of a link invariant called symplectic sl(n)
homology and its connection to Khovanov-Rozansky homology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
