
* 2104649
* Exploring the Topology and Geometry of Dynamical Subvarieties
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2021,08/29/2022
* Sarah Koch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2024
* USD 289,302.00

Dynamical systems are all around us: they govern the motion of the planets, the
weather, the stock market, the ecosystems in which we live. These systems depend
on a variety of parameters, and as these parameters change, the corresponding
system is affected. Understanding how dynamical systems change with different
parameters is a very complicated and delicate question that is not even
completely understood in the simplest of mathematical models. However, there is
one shining success story in this regard: that is, the parameter space, or
"moduli space", of complex quadratic polynomials. This space contains the famous
Mandelbrot Set, which has been thoroughly studied over the last 40 years. The
research outlined in this proposal explores different parameter spaces
associated to particular dynamical systems, with a view toward understanding
them to the same extent that the mathematical community understands the space
where the Mandelbrot set lives. This proposal also contains a significant
outreach component to support the Math Corps at U(M), a free math Summer Camp
for middle school students and high school mentors.

A major goal in the field of complex dynamics is to understand dynamical moduli
spaces. The most successful endeavor in this regard has been the study of the
moduli space of quadratic polynomials where the Mandelbrot Set lives, a
fundamental object in the subject. Ultimately, we strive to understand the
moduli space of rational maps of arbitrary degree to the same extent that we
understand the moduli space of quadratic polynomials. Many tools from complex
analysis that pave the way for key breakthroughs in the one-dimensional setting
do not carry over to higher dimensions. So instead of considering the whole
moduli space, PI follows an approach initiated by William Thurston and
investigate sub-varieties of moduli space. The most natural sub-varieties to
study are those that come from dynamical conditions, like imposing combinatorial
constraints on the forward orbits of critical points. One may view Thurston?s
Topological Characterization of Rational Maps as a first step. It provides a way
to understand zero-dimensional dynamical sub-varieties; that is, those that
consist of postcritically finite parameters. Following Epstein, the PI will
adapt Thurston?s ideas and constructions and shall develop a setting in which to
study higher-dimensional dynamical sub-varieties of moduli spaces. PI will
explore this theory by working with one-dimensional dynamical sub-varieties in
the moduli space of quadratic rational maps, and one-dimensional dynamical sub-
varieties in the moduli space of cubic polynomials, where there are already very
challenging and fundamental problems concerning their topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
