
* 2104233
* Algebraic K-Theory, Topological Hochschild Homology, and Equivariant Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2021,08/26/2022
* Teena Gerhardt,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2024
* USD 147,163.00

The mathematical fields of algebra and topology are deeply intertwined. Indeed,
tools from algebra can be used to study objects in topology, and vice versa. One
illustration of this deep interaction is through algebraic K-theory. Algebraic
K-theory is an invariant of rings, fundamental objects in algebra. There is
great interest in algebraic K-theory due to its significant applications in the
fields of algebraic geometry, number theory, and topology. While algebraic
K-theory is difficult to compute, and many open questions remain, there is a
powerful approach using tools from topology. In recent years, exciting advances
in algebraic topology have made it possible to study questions in algebraic
K-theory which were previously thought to be inaccessible. A goal of this
project is to produce new algebraic K-theory computations. A key step in
computing algebraic K-theory is studying a related invariant called topological
Hochschild homology. Another goal of this project is to further develop the
framework and theory around variants of topological Hochschild homology, and
study applications to several other areas of mathematics. In addition to the
mathematics research goals, the project also includes work in undergraduate and
graduate education, undergraduate research, conference organization, and efforts
to support the participation of women and other underrepresented groups in
mathematics.

This project uses the tools of equivariant stable homotopy to study algebraic
K-theory and topological Hochschild homology. Algebraic K-theory is an invariant
of a ring which is generally very difficult to compute. A fruitful approach to
the study of algebraic K-theory is the trace method approach, which approximates
algebraic K-theory by theories that are more computable, such as topological
Hochschild homology and topological cyclic homology. The trace method approach
relies on tools from equivariant stable homotopy theory. This project explores
the intricate relationship between equivariant homotopy theory, algebraic
K-theory, and topological Hochschild homology. Specific research goals of the
project are organized into three broad objectives: One, use recent developments
in trace methods and equivariant stable homotopy theory to compute algebraic
K-theory groups which were previously inaccessible. Two, use equivariant
homotopy theory to study algebraic and topological Hochschild homologies such as
twisted topological Hochschild homology and Real topological Hochschild
homology. Three, study applications of topological Hochschild homology theories
to questions in geometry and low-dimensional topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
