
* 2105553
* DMS-EPSRC: Topology of Automated Motion Planning
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,06/17/2021
* Shmuel Weinberger,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 311,427.00

This project will investigate new mathematics useful for understanding the
complexity of robotic action in a physical environment. The project thus
concentrates on those aspects that are different from purely computational work.
Instead, as a robot moves from place to place, it senses its environment, acts
within it to achieve some goal, responds to changes in it, and might communicate
with others. The interactions with the external environment are typically
achieved via changes to some internal states, so that, for example, a given
motion performed on two different occasions (even under identical external
conditions) could be the result of different changes to the internal state of
the robot. By building abstract topological models of these issues, the PI, in
collaboration with M. Farber in the UK, will use algebraic and geometric tools
to shed light on some of the tradeoffs (for example of stability of output
against flexibility in being able to handle a variety of environments) that
necessarily arise when solving such problems.

The first step in this direction, a numerical invariant that measures the amount
of instability necessary, no matter the computational resources available, for
robotic motion planning, or equivalently the minimum amount of stochasticity
necessary is the topological complexity invented almost twenty years ago by
Farber, and frequently studied by cohomological tools. To understand the
additional cost of flexibility", the costs imposed by needing to solve a motion
planning problem but in a variety of different environments (say for a Roomba to
learn its way around a room after the furniture has been moved), D. Cohen,
Farber, and the PI introduced parametrized topological complexity; preliminary
calculations show that it does indeed capture some new phenomena that the
ordinary complexity does not. Besides further development of topological and
parametrized complexity, this project aims to study the role of hidden states
(e.g. moving from one fiber to another of a work map), sensing (e.g. the role of
incomplete information about the environment that unfolds over time), the
development of a useful technology for genus of non-fibrations, and the use of
persistent homology to understand about the role of resources (e.g. the speed,
path length, energy usage, sensing costs, etc.) in planning tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
