
* 2105469
* Lagrangians and Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/2021,07/19/2021
* Tye Lidman,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 408,832.00

Topology is a mathematical field that seeks to understand the intrinsic
properties of shape. This provides tools for many areas of science, including
studying how enzymes knot up DNA or finding trends in large data sets. The aim
of this project is to study the properties of knotted strings. One of the major
goals is to understand mathematically how a knot changes if it is cut open and
the ends are connected together differently, just as enzymes do to DNA. The
prediction is that this always has a measurable change in the knottedness, and
the PI seeks to verify this mathematically, enhancing understanding of the
fundamental structure of knots. The PI's activities in this project, including
mentorship and developing virtual mathematics communities, will create new
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, with special
focus on increasing diversity in and access to mathematics.

The project will study key questions and structures in low-dimensional topology
through a variety of invariants built from Lagrangian submanifolds. This
includes using the description of knot Floer and Khovanov tangle invariants in
terms of immersed Lagrangians in the four-punctured sphere to study the nugatory
crossing conjecture, obtain lower bounds on the rank of knot homology theories
in the presence of an essential Conway sphere, and prove detection results for
the tangle invariants for certain classes of tangles. The PI will use the
immersed Lagrangian invariants from bordered Heegaard Floer homology to give new
bounds on the unknotting numbers of satellite knots. The PI will also use
Lagrangians in the pillowcase arising from SU(2)-character varieties of knots
towards the three-summands conjecture, which predicts that Dehn surgery on a
knot in the three-sphere cannot consist of more than two prime summands. The PI
will also mentor graduate students to develop new structural properties of
symplectic instanton homology and to study the knot Floer homology of tunnel
number one knots. In addition to organizing various seminars, the PI will assist
in the development of the Floer homology open problem list and continue
mentorship and other activities with the aim of promotion of underrepresented
groups in mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
