
* 2105512
* New tools for gauge theory in dimensions 3 and 4
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,08/26/2022
* Tomasz Mrowka,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 324,248.00

High energy physicists believe that the Yang-Mills Equations model the behavior
of quarks - the fundamental constituents of matter. The Yang-Mills Equations
turn out to have a remarkably rich mathematical structure which, outside of
direct applications to physics, enable the study of models of space-time
inaccessible by other means. They even give tools for the study of the
topological structure of DNA. The PI will continue his research on the Yang-
Mills equations, and related ideas focusing on its connections to many different
parts of mathematics, the study of nonlinear partial differential equations, low
dimensional topology, algebraic geometry, representation theory and graph
theory. The award provides support for students engaged in related research.

The PI will study Floer homology invariants for three manifolds and knotted
graphs in them. In particular with Peter Kronheimer, the PI is studying a family
of Floer homology theories built from connections with a prescribed singularity
along knotted graphs in three manifolds. These theories have many applications
to questions in low dimensional topology. The PI plans to put a key missing
feature for Instanton Floer homology into place-- having a full ?equivariant?
version available for all three manifolds. This should enable new computations
and give rise to new application. The PI will develop tools for a topological
attack on some basic questions in Algebraic Geometry and Number theory related
to conjectures of Land and Caporaso-Harris-Mazur. Yet another rather delicate
version appears to have bearing on questions of tri-colorability of spacial
graphs in particular appears likely to provide novel insight to the question of
tri-colorability of planar graphs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
