
* 2105031
* Factorization Homology and Low-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2021,08/02/2021
* Aaron Mazel-Gee,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,038.00

Recent decades have seen an explosion of research developments at the interface
of low-dimensional topology and mathematical physics (particularly quantum field
theory). These developments largely center around topological invariants:
assignments of algebraic objects to topological objects. For example, each link
(i.e. knotted curve) in Euclidean 3-space can be assigned a polynomial called
its Jones polynomial, as well as a vector space called its Khovanov homology. As
another example, each 3-manifold (i.e. 3-dimensional space) can be assigned a
vector space called its Heegaard Floer homology. Typically, these invariants are
defined by first making an arbitrary choice (e.g. a link diagram representing
the chosen link in Euclidean 3-space, or a Heegaard diagram representing the
chosen 3-manifold); in order to have a topological invariant, one must then show
that the result is independent of this choice. Factorization homology is a tool
for defining topological invariants that does not require any arbitrary choices,
which brings a number of advantages as discussed below. The present project
seeks to further develop the theory of factorization homology, and to apply it
to study invariants in low-dimensional topology of physical interest as also
discussed below. It furthermore supports the training of early career
mathematicians, the organization of ecologically sustainable conferences, and
public engagement with the goal of disseminating the joy and excitement of
mathematical understanding.

Factorization homology is a categorified form of integration: whereas ordinary
integration sums numbers, factorization homology sums vector spaces or chain
complexes. More precisely, factorization homology integrates (enriched)
n-categories over n-manifolds, giving an invariant of n-manifolds that adheres
to the local-to-global principles appearing in TQFT. Given its well-definedness
and homotopy-coherent functoriality (including a continuous action of
diffeomorphisms), it plays an analogous role for state-sum TQFT as singular
homology plays for cellular homology. Moreover, a slight modification is
expected to give an invariant of links in 3-manifolds, e.g. the Witten--
Reshetikhin--Turaev invariant (valued in the skein module of the 3-manifold).
The present project also seeks to apply factorization homology to the study of
Khovanov homology and other link homology theories. Beyond making them
manifestly well-defined, such a connection would further endow them with
extensions to links in arbitrary 3-manifolds and with homotopy-coherent
functoriality for cobordisms. The symmetries that would result lead to
conjectural relationships with arithmetic objects such as cyclotomic spectra and
topological Cartier modules, which the present project also seeks to explore.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
