
* 2106906
* Group Actions on Hyperbolic Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,06/17/2021
* Carolyn Abbott,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 263,986.00

The collection of symmetries of an object form an algebraic object called a
group. A simple example of a group is that of reflections and rotations of a
square, as in the case of a 90 degree rotation, which leaves it unchanged.
Studying groups can lead to many interesting questions. One could ask, for
instance, how many different groups act on a square? What do such groups have in
common? Geometric group theory aims to answer such questions by translating the
geometric properties of spaces on which a group acts into algebraic properties
of the group. The project will use these techniques to work towards
understanding certain classes of groups, all of which act on spaces that have a
particular geometric structure, called hyperbolicity. This project also seeks to
support and encourage student involvement in mathematics, through support for
graduate students, outreach to the local community, and support for a seminar
series.

In more detail, this projects fits into the broad goal of understanding groups
that act on hyperbolic, or negatively curved, spaces. This goal is approached in
three distinct ways: first, through understanding all actions of a given group
on hyperbolic metric spaces; next, through an in-depth study of two particular
actions of big mapping class groups, a class of groups in which there has
recently been an explosion of interest; and finally, by seeking to prove a
strong stability result for quotients of hierarchically hyperbolic groups, a
class of groups which can be completely described by their actions on hyperbolic
metric spaces. Parts of this project involve tools from other areas of
mathematics, including descriptive set theory and (often non-commutative) ring
theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
