
* 2109683
* Around Non-Positive Curvature
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,06/17/2021
* Jean-Francois Lafont,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 277,463.00

Geometry is concerned with quantitative features of a space, while topology
studies qualitative aspects of a space. As an example, a teacup and a donut are
topologically the same (they both have a single ?hole?), but geometrically
different. Non-positive curvature is a geometric property, and roughly means
that on small scales the space does not curve back on itself. These spaces have
an interesting associated dynamical system: one can try to imagine how a
billiard ball in such a space would move over time. This proposal is focused on
studying these spaces from all three points of view (geometry, topology, and
dynamics), providing a rich melting pot for different approaches and techniques.
While the notion of non-positive curvature might seem strange, these spaces are
in fact pervasive, both in mathematics and in nature. For this reason, they are
a fundamental class of spaces for mathematicians to study and understand. This
project will address a series of projects that are loosely centered around the
notion of non-positive curvature. This project will provide opportunities for
graduate student research and training. In addition the PI will help organize
the EDGE (Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education) program in 2022, a
recruitment program with the goals of strengthening the ability of women to
pursue careers in mathematical research and education and placing more women in
visible leadership roles in the mathematics community.

The Principal Investigator (PI) will work on various projects in non-positive
curvature that fall into four broad categories. (1) Projects on locally
symmetric spaces: the PI will consider the isomorphism problem for lattices in
higher rank semisimple Lie groups, will construct new non-arithmetic lattices in
PO(n,1), will produce divisible integral homology classes, and will study
branched covers over immersed submanifolds. (2) Projects in coarse geometry: the
PI will show that groups obtained via the Charney-Davis hyperbolizations are
linear, will develop new QI-invariants of pairs of spaces, and study QI rigidity
for manifolds with boundary. (3) Projects of a dynamical nature: the PI will
work on a version of Khinchine?s theorem for continued fractions with
constraints, and will study the decay of correlations for geodesic flows on
compact locally CAT(-1) spaces. (4) Projects on K-theory: the PI will produce
distinct algebraic number fields with isomorphic integral K-theory, and will
show that all finitely generated Q-linear groups have finite VC geometric
dimension.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
