
* 2109308
* Knot and Link Concordance
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2021,07/29/2021
* Shelly Harvey,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 431,778.00

Topology is the study of the shape of spaces, called manifolds, that locally
look like Euclidian space but globally can be quite complicated or curved. For
example, the surface of the earth or the surface of a donut are examples of
manifolds. In this case, on the surface there are two directions to move in and
hence they are called 2-dimensional manifolds. This award will be used to study
the topology of manifolds in dimensions 3 and 4 as well as how the natural
submanifolds in both dimensions interact. The study of manifolds in dimensions 3
and 4 are of utmost important in science as it uncovers information about the
world we live in (3-dimensions) as well as 4-dimensional objects which can be
seen as space-time. The main goal of this project is to better understand which
knots and links can be the slice of sphere in 3-dimensional space as it moves
through space-time, called slice knots and links. This is especially important
in studying the topology of 4-dimensional manifolds as it relates to one of the
most important questions in topology: the Smooth 4-dimensional Poincare
Conjecture. This conjecture says that if one can compute certain information
about a 4-dimensional manifold and one gets the same answer as for the standard
4-dimensional sphere, then it is actually a sphere. This is the only dimension
where it is still unknown. In addition, the PI aims to make progress to the
famous Slice-ribbon Conjecture, which says that if a knot is slice then we can
deform the 4-sphere in space-time so that is it "nice". Understanding topology
and methods for homological algebra is especially important at this time as it
is crucial to the study of topological data analysis, a leading area of data
science. The PI will present the work at conferences, as well as publish and put
the article on the public repository, arxiv.org so that the results are
available to all. The PI will run conferences and special sessions where the
majority of speakers are women or other underrepresented areas of mathematics.
The award provides funds to train graduate students in research.

Knots and links are of fundamental importance in the study of 3- and
4-dimensional manifolds. For example, we can present any 4-manifold as a Kirby
diagram of weighted links. Furthermore, topological knot and link concordance
has a strong relationship to Freedman's surgery-theoretic scheme for classifying
4-dimensional manifolds. While much is understood about 3-manifolds, because of
the geometrization conjecture and work of Agol, the study of smooth
4-dimensional manifolds is still poorly understood. This project will further
our knowledge of knot and links concordance, as well as general 3- and
4-dimensional topology, subjects of vital importance in mathematics. The goal of
the project is to have a better understanding of knot and link concordance as
well as questions about 3-manifold groups. To do this, the PI will study the
algebraic structure of the knot and links concordance groups along with their
filtrations like the n-solvable and bipolar filtrations. Related to this, the PI
will study their various metric spaces to show that they have the structure of a
fractal space. In addition, the PI will study the behavior of knot and string
link satellite operators on the space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
