
* 2152311
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Higher Categorical Structures in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,06/28/2022
* Akhil Mathew,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2025
* USD 248,807.00

This project aims to apply major new developments in mathematics to open
questions in algebra and algebraic geometry. Algebra is the study of generalized
systems of numbers, while algebraic geometry is concerned with the geometry of
solutions of polynomial equations. Both fields are used throughout mathematics
and touch regularly on daily life via algorithms used in computer vision (for
instance in cell phone cameras), satellite communications (error-correcting
codes), and secure messaging (cryptography using elliptic curves). The project
also uses higher category theory developed over the last two decades, which
makes it possible to systematically deal with subtle, loosely defined objects.
This extra flexibility leads to new control over the basic objects used in
algebraic geometry. Even more recently, some work on condensed mathematics
raises the possibility of extending this new control to closely related areas of
analysis. This project will use this cutting-edge work to attempt to settle
longstanding questions in algebraic geometry and to introduce and solve new
questions in analytical algebraic geometry. It will provide research and
training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers and
will support several workshops aimed at early-career mathematicians.

There are four main research challenges addressed by this project. First, the
PIs aim to find complete noncommutative categorical invariants and to find a
bridge directly from the topological invariants to the categorical ones. No
known noncommutative categorical invariant suffices to reconstruct an algebraic
variety. In good cases, work of the PIs and collaborators shows that the
underlying space is enough for such a reconstruction. Next, to clarify the role
of commutative objects inside noncommutative objects, the PIs will study the
deformations and local systems of dg categories in an attempt to settle Orlov's
geometricity conjecture. Third, the PIs will study the p-adic cohomology of
algebraic varieties via higher categorical invariants such as topological
Hochschild homology, applied to the derived category. Finally, the PIs will try
to show that the recently constructed theory of nuclear modules yields the
correct noncommutative invariants of a rigid analytic variety and will aim to
generalize the first three projects to the more general analytic context.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
