
* 2153772
* Homotopical Methods in Fixed Point Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 05/15/2022,07/20/2022
* Agnes Beaudry,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2023
* USD 34,226.00

This award supports participation in the summer school ?Homotopical Methods in
Fixed Point Theory,? taking place July 11 to 15, 2022 at the University of
Colorado, Boulder. This workshop will be an opportunity for participants from a
wide variety of institutions and backgrounds to learn advanced topics in
algebraic topology, an area of mathematics that uses tools from algebra to study
certain invariant properties of geometric objects. The advantage of the workshop
is that the questions and problems in this field are easy to state and motivate,
yet their study naturally leads one to consider modern developments in the field
of algebraic topology. The active-learning format, and emphasis on co-creating
mathematics in community with one another, will allow for significant
collaboration between participants and for interactions with the scientific
committee. The approachability of the topic and the format of the workshop will
attract participants coming from institutions with smaller topology research
groups, as well as those with marginalized or underrepresented aspects of their
identity. The scientific committee itself is made up of early-career
researchers, and more than half of the organizing and scientific committee are
women. This representation and the diverse perspectives it offers for the design
of the summer school will have a positive impact on attendees.

The scientific goal of the summer school is to introduce participants to tools
and ideas from algebraic topology and homotopy theory through the lens of fixed
point theory. The workshop will be structured around mini-courses taught in an
active-learning style and course topics will range from classical fixed point
theory to modern tools such as duality, spectra, and trace methods in algebraic
K-theory. This range reflects recent and superficially unrelated advances in
homotopy theory and higher category theory that have provided new approaches to
topological fixed point theory. These approaches have refined classical
invariants defined using simplicial structures that were often difficult to
generalize. This shift in perspective also illuminated the centrality of
additivity for useful fixed point invariants. Since algebraic K-theory is the
universal home for additive invariants, it is natural to look for connections
between fixed point theory and algebraic K-theory. This connection is further
supported by the recent important developments in computations of K-groups. Work
of some members of the scientific committee has established that these
computational approaches can be effectively modeled using the new forms of fixed
point invariants. This provides a very different approach to these important
developments and a new source of intuition.

https://sites.google.com/colorado.edu/fixedpointtheory2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
