
* 2153879
* Monodromy in Topology and Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 10/01/2021,10/21/2021
* Nicholas Salter,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 104,070.00

Topology and algebraic geometry are two subjects of central importance in
contemporary mathematics. Topology is the study of spatial structures (e.g. the
surface of a donut, the large-scale shape of the cosmos, a tangled strand of
DNA, a cluster of points in a massive data set), while algebraic geometry
studies the mathematics of the ubiquitous polynomial equation. These disciplines
have many and diverse points of contact; the principal investigator will study
one in particular: families of Riemann surfaces. A surface is a topological
object like the two-dimensional surface of a coffee cup, possibly one with lots
of extra handles. A Riemann surface gives a special way of describing such an
object as the solution to a polynomial equation, much as we learn in high school
algebra that some equations describe circles, others ellipses, and others far
more complicated shapes. A family of Riemann surfaces arises by varying the
equations used to define the Riemann surface - one can imagine "turning a knob"
to stretch and distort the shapes of the surfaces. Families of Riemann surfaces
arise in many parts of mathematics and also play an important role in
theoretical physics. The principal investigator will apply tools from topology
and the related discipline of geometric group theory in order to better
understand some of the most important families of Riemann surfaces that
mathematicians today are interested in. Broader impacts include the
establishment of a new chapter of the national Directed Reading Project network.

The project has two components. The first will investigate the topology of
strata of Abelian differentials (translation surfaces). These families have been
intensively studied by dynamicists and geometers, but there are foundational
topological questions that still remain. In particular, the (orbifold)
fundamental groups of strata are still highly mysterious. This can be
effectively probed by way of the monodromy representation, a map into the
mapping class group. The principal investigator will continue his work
describing these monodromy representations, and will develop new tools to
understand the monodromy kernel and so further develop the theory of fundamental
groups of strata. Central to this endeavor will be an elucidation of the precise
relationship between Artin groups and fundamental groups of strata. The second
component of this project concerns families constructed via branched covers.
These families have served as an important source of examples in topology,
algebraic geometry, and group theory. The principal investigator will
investigate the monodromy of these families with the objective of further
synthesizing the topological aspects (braid groups, mapping class groups) with
the algebraic (arithmetic groups and generalizations, Burau-like
representations, primitive homology).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
