
* 2202943
* Stability Patterns in the Homology of Moduli Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Jeremy Miller,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 269,901.00

Homology is a mathematical tool that was introduced over a hundred years ago to
measure features of shape that remain invariant under deformation. This helped
make rigorous many calculations in calculus and physics involving integrals of
functions defined on spaces with ?holes.? Homology gives an algebraic measure of
holes in geometric objects, allowing algebraic techniques to give geometric
information, for example, showing that a given geometric object cannot be
deformed into another one. The aim of this project is to study patterns in the
homology of families of spaces coming from number theory and geometry. These
patterns simplify homology calculations by reducing infinite calculations to
finite calculations. In this project, new methods involving the use of computers
in theoretical algebraic topology and number theory will be developed. The
project will enhance graduate and postdoctoral training in algebraic topology
through mentoring, seminars, and conferences. The PI will promote diversity and
inclusion through participation in a summer bridge program designed for students
from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups to better prepare them for
graduate school.

This project aims to improve understanding of the homology of arithmetic groups,
a central concept in number theory, algebraic K-theory, and even the theory of
manifolds. In high dimensions, the homology is known to vanish, and, in low
dimensions, the homology is known to stabilize. These stable homology groups
have been completely calculated in many cases. The project focuses on two ranges
of dimensions: just below where the homology is known to vanish and just above
the stable range. Conjecturally, the highest degree homology groups should
exhibit a pattern called ?extremal stability? and the homology near the stable
range should exhibit a different pattern called ?secondary stability.? Highly
connected simplicial complexes and operadic cells will be used to try to
establish these conjectures. The connection with algebraic K-theory will be a
key point of emphasis when studying the homology of arithmetic groups. Similar
patterns will be investigated in spaces coming from geometric topology such as
various moduli spaces and configuration spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
