
* 2203312
* Surgery in Contact Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,04/26/2022
* John Etnyre,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 207,094.00

This project will focus on several central questions in low dimensional contact
topology. Contact topology studies a geometric structure on odd dimensional
manifolds, called a contact structure, that over the last twenty to thirty years
has been shown to have deep connections with three and four dimensional spaces.
The Principal Investigator will continue his work classifying contact structures
in dimension three and some special subsets of them called Legendrian knots. In
addition he will investigate how properties of these structures interact and
relate to a more familiar type of geometry called Riemannian geometry. The PI
will also continue his commitment to the education of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows. He will organize conferences and workshops,
and be a managing editor for ?Algebraic and Geometric Topology?, as well as
begin a book project to provide a comprehensive resource for certain key
techniques in contact geometry.

The Principal Investigator will investigate contact and symplectic structures
through a variety of techniques, but focusing on surgery techniques and
connections to Riemannian metrics. In dimension three understanding Legendrian
and transverse knots in a contact manifold has gone hand in hand with advances
in our understanding of contact structures and their subtle links with topology.
The Principal Investigator will continue his investigations of such knots in
three manifolds, focusing on qualitative features of them as well as
classification results in novel situations. He will study how various properties
of a contact structure, such as Giroux torsion, fillability, and virtual
overtwistedness, behave under surgery. The Principal Investigator will also
start a project to classify contact structures on all small Seifert fibered
spaces (and some large ones) and study their contact geometric properties.
Riemannian metrics have long been known to have deep connections with the smooth
topology of manifolds and more recently it has been shown that contact
structures do as well. The Principal Investigator will continue to explore
relations between these two geometric structures with the goal of seeing key
properties of a contact structure (such as tightness) reflected in Riemannian
metrics that are adapted to them. This will hopefully lead to a more complete
understanding of the general picture of contact structures on 3 manifolds and
create new tools for studying higher dimensional contact manifolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
