
* 2203915
* Model Comparisons and Foundational Developments in Higher Category Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2022,05/02/2022
* Martina Rovelli,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2025
* USD 44,990.00

One of the major roles of mathematics is to axiomatize a recurring structure,
study it abstractly, and then apply it to situations beyond the originally
intended ones. Several algebraic structures of interest, such as groups or
vector spaces, consist of endowing a set with one or more operations subject to
axioms. Often, interesting phenomena in algebraic topology, algebraic geometry,
mathematical physics, and logic seem at first glance to be formalizable by one
of such algebraic structures, although with a closer look one realizes that the
equalities demanded by the axioms do not quite hold. Instead, the failure of the
validity of the axioms is captured by the presence of a "higher isomorphism,"
whose nature is clear in the specific contexts. To accommodate those situations,
one needs to acknowledge the presence of higher structures and replace the role
played by the usual equality relation with higher isomorphisms, organizing the
information into a higher category of some kind. Many objects of interest have
by now been identified to have a specific type of higher structure called an
(infinity, n)-category. The research project will investigate multiple questions
related to this. Broader impacts of this collaborative research will be through
making the literature more accessible to the users of higher category theory.
The PI plans to organize an online working group of students and early career
researchers to explore the features of the various models. Resulting expository
materials will be made available online. An (infinity, n)-category is a type of
categorical structure with objects and morphisms in each dimension which are
furthermore invertible above dimension n. While there is a general agreement
about this schematic idea, numerous alternative mathematical implementations of
the definition of an (infinity, n)-category have been proposed, each approach
leading to its own advantages and disadvantages. At present, some models are
expected but not known to be equivalent. Even when models have been shown to be
abstractly equivalent, it is often not easy to export constructions and results
from a model to another. This research project sets goals to advance knowledge
both in terms of developing aspects of specific models and understanding how to
relate different models. The projects aim to provide consistency results that
are currently lacking from the existing (infinity, 2)-categorical literature,
producing an accessible and well-documented account of the pool of models of
(infinity, 2)-categories as well as how they relate to the strict 2-categorical
literature. These include developing a theory of weighted limits in (infinity,
2)-categories, proving a comparison of (infinity, 2)-categorical nerves, and
studying the compatibility of the Gray tensor product with such nerves. Further,
building on current work of the PI with collaborators, one of the main long-term
aims of the joint research is to establish the equivalence of n-complicial sets
with all other main models of (infinity, n)-categories for n>2. A positive
answer to this longstanding question is crucial to unifying various results in
the context of the (infinity, n)-literature. Finally, the PI also plans to
formalize explicitly the inductive and coinductive homotopy theories of
(infinity, infinity)-categories, understanding how they relate with the existing
literature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
