
* 2203455
* The Nearby Lagrangian Conjecture from the K-Theoretic Viewpoint
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Daniel Alvarez-Gavela,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 188,437.00

Symplectic topology is a field of mathematics that originated from classical
physics. In the 1980s a well-known conjecture in this field, known as the nearby
Lagrangian conjecture, was formulated. To this day the conjecture remains open
as one of the fundamental problems that play a central role in modern
mathematics. The overarching research goal of this project is to obtain new
results in the direction of this conjecture by exploiting an interaction between
two different areas of mathematics. This process will naturally lead to new
problems and related applications opening future directions of research. The
project aims to make the subject more accessible to early career researchers
through inclusive learning seminars delivered in a hybrid mode accompanied by
expository writings, fostering collaboration and community along the way. The PI
is committed to undergraduate mentoring and to promoting diversity. The project
includes problems suitable for undergraduate research.

This project aims to study the nearby Lagrangian conjecture, using tools and
ideas from algebraic K-theory and probe various K-theoretic aspects of the
conjecture. One aspect concerns the normal invariant of nearby Lagrangians,
which encodes the tangential obstruction for the projection of the nearby
Lagrangian to the base, which is a simple homotopy equivalence, to be homotopic
to a diffeomorphism. Using tools from parametrized Morse theory, algebraic
K-theory, and stable homotopy theory it will be shown that the normal invariant
of a nearby Lagrangian factors through an eta map, which in particular implies
it is 2-torsion. This will constitute the first known restriction on the smooth
structure of nearby Lagrangians (beyond the simple homotopy equivalence
condition) when the base is not a homotopy sphere. Another aspect concerns the
higher Whitehead torsion of nearby Lagrangians. This invariant is defined more
generally for Legendrians in 1-jet spaces which admit generating functions on
tube bundles (or even twisted tube bundles), and can be shown to be nontrivial
for this class of Legendrians. A natural conjecture is that the higher Whitehead
torsion of nearby Lagrangians vanishes, and to confirm this conjecture
constitutes another goal of this project. An application would be a restriction
on the stable isomorphism classes of tube bundles which may be used to generate
nearby Lagrangians. A number of related questions will be studied along the way,
such as the homotopical calculation needed to apply the h-principle for the
simplification of caustics in this context (this is needed to show that we may
take our generating families to be generalized Morse) as well as the interaction
with the analogous Floer theoretic invariant. There are other K-theoretic
aspects of the nearby Lagrangian conjecture which may be considered in this
project once the above aspects are understood, such as the possibility of
developing a 1-parametric Cerf-Hatcher-Wagoner theory for the difference
function of nearby Lagrangians.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
