
* 2203912
* Curves, Surfaces, and 3-Manifolds: Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics in the Mapping Class Group and Beyond
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,05/03/2022
* Marissa Loving,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2022
* USD 221,070.00

Of central importance in the study of geometry and topology is an algebraic
object called the mapping class group, which roughly corresponds to the set of
symmetries of the space under consideration. In this project the spaces of
interest are one-, two- and three-dimensional. These are called curves,
surfaces, and three-manifolds. A common thread in this research program is
leveraging combinatorial constructions of curves on surfaces to answer broader
geometric and algebraic questions. At the heart of the project is the interplay
between several fields of mathematics, namely- topology, combinatorics, and
algebra, that arises in the study of surfaces through their mapping class
groups. The project includes directions that are suitable for both graduate and
undergraduate research. The PI will continue conference organization as well as
her engagement with community-wide initiatives to address issues of equity and
justice in mathematics and community-building initiatives for members of
underrepresented groups.

The mapping class group of a surface captures its topological symmetries. This
group appears across mathematics from algebraic geometry (e.g., the moduli space
of a Riemann surface) to low-dimensional topology (e.g., Heegaard splittings of
3-manifolds) to dynamics (e.g., the topological entropy of braids). Thus, the
study of surfaces can provide insights into a wide range of mathematical
problems while making use of the structure and rigidity found in dimensions one
and two. The PI and her collaborators will investigate the geometry and topology
of surfaces, using a three-pronged approach: 1) the algebra and dynamics of the
mapping class group of surfaces of both finite and infinite type; 2) the length
spectra of non-positively curved metrics on surfaces; and, 3) the coarse-
geometry of various graphs naturally associated to surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
