
* 2203302
* Moduli Spaces of Pseudoholomorphic Maps
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,04/26/2022
* Eleny-Nicoleta Ionel,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 133,040.00

Mathematical objects known as symplectic manifolds are of fundamental importance
in the study of modern geometry and physics. This award supports research that
lies at the intersection of symplectic geometry, which provides the framework
for classical mechanics, and string theory, which developed as a potential
candidate for unifying general relativity and particle physics, enabling the
study of models of space-time and phase-spaces inaccessible by other means. The
problems considered in this project are of foundational nature, and answers to
these are expected to lead to new techniques and interactions among different
fields of mathematics and have potential applications in string theory. There
are several interesting applications of this work, and promising directions for
continuing this line of research, some of them involving graduate students. The
research and outreach activities of the principal investigator will have an
impact on the education of next generation of mathematicians, engaging them in
cutting-edge research early in their graduate career.

The theme of this research involves symplectic manifolds and the structure of
the invariants associated to them. Specifically, one of the projects aims to
understand the geometric reasons behind a general Gopakumar-Vafa type structure
theorem for many flavors of Gromov-Witten invariants. These types of structures
were conjectured using string theory and have spurred a lot of interest in
mathematics and many attempts to understand the geometry behind them. Another
project aims to understand the properties of the Gromov-Witten virtual
fundamental cycle in symplectic geometry and explore its functorial aspects. It
includes a proposed set of axioms that would uniquely determine it, inspired by
the Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms for homology theories. There are many different
constructions of the Gromov-Witten virtual fundamental class of closed
symplectic manifolds, each one with its own strengths and advantages, so knowing
that most of these constructions carry the same information is useful, allowing
one to choose whatever construction may be best suited for the particular
problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
