
* 2203993
* Veering Triangulations and Visualization
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Henry Segerman,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 345,394.00

This project will study the topology of three-dimensional (3D) spaces: the
possible shapes that a universe could have. Such a possible shape can be
described by cutting it into tetrahedra and recording how to glue them back
together. This structure, called a triangulation, is particularly useful for
studying topological spaces using computers. Veering triangulations are a very
special kind of triangulation, which seem to be closely connected to the
possible flows through the space, that is, the ways in which a fluid could
circulate. One of the central goals of the project is to formally prove this
relationship, which will open the study of these flows to computational
experimentation and exploration. In addition to answering other questions about
veering triangulations, the project will investigate foundational questions
about triangulations of higher-dimensional spaces. Another goal of the project
is in mathematical visualization, using 3D printing and virtual/augmented
reality to aid in research, pedagogy, and outreach. The PI has developed an
undergraduate course in which students learn 3D design skills and apply their
mathematical knowledge to produce 3D printed objects and has advised student
projects in both 3D printing and virtual reality. He plans to extend these
activities with new technologies and mathematical visualization projects. With
collaborators at CIMAT (Mexico), the PI plans to design inexpensive 3D printed
sliding tile puzzles and associated educational materials, to be distributed to
underrepresented communities in Latin America. Other outreach activities will
include expository papers, public talks, and YouTube videos.

In this project the PI aims to prove, together with collaborators, that veering
triangulations correspond to pseudo-Anosov flows, that they can be used to
produce new Cannon-Thurston maps (space-filling curves associated to hyperbolic
geometry), and that certain types of manifolds have finitely many veering
triangulations. The work will also extend the existing census of veering
triangulations. In another direction, the project seeks to establish
connectivity properties for triangulations in an arbitrary number of dimensions,
with potential applications in topological invariants and census building. The
PI and collaborators plan to further develop virtual reality experiences for the
Thurston (and other) geometries, as well as an augmented reality application to
investigate sphere eversions, and to work with developers of the research
software ?SnapPy? to extend its visualization capabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
