
* 2204349
* Knots, Disks, and Exotic Phenomena in Dimension 4
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2022,08/01/2022
* Alexandra Kjuchukova,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 215,864.00

Manifolds are objects which look locally simple but can have interesting global
shape and properties. A guiding question in the field of topology is the
classification, up to a given notion of equivalence, of all possible manifolds
in a fixed dimension. Long-standing open questions concern the detection of
exotic pairs in dimension 4. These are manifolds which are homeomorphic but not
diffeomorphic, meaning that they are only distinguished by a very fine notion of
equivalence. Techniques going back to Fox and Milnor and recently extended by
Marengon, Manolescu and Piccirillo demonstrate that exotic pairs can be
identified by using certain properties of knots, or entangled circles, which lie
in the boundary of a 4-manifold after removing an open ball. The PI will explore
this paradigm, which has the potential to lead to a fundamental shift in our
ability to distinguish smooth 4-dimensional manifolds. An additional set of
goals concerns studying the properties of knots in their own right, where
certain old questions can be attacked by combinatorial tools introduced by the
PI along with Blair and others. Overall, the development of these methods can
have a lasting impact on the field of topology and on the applied sciences it
informs, such as signal processing, data science and control theory, where
manifolds appear in many guises - for one example, as state spaces of dynamical
systems. The PI is also engaged in creating education and research opportunities
for underrepresented communities. The PI will continue a program to employ
combinatorial tools to address open questions in topology; her approach will
provide graduate and advanced undergraduate students with an entry point to
cutting-edge research in the field.



The project outlines paths toward several distinct goals in low-dimensional
topology for which the interaction between algebraic and geometric phenomena is
the unifying principle; in which a combinatorial approach has proven effective;
and in which knots in the 3-sphere and surfaces embedded in 4-manifolds are a
central object of interest. Specific problems the PI will study include the
Meridional Rank Conjecture of Cappell and Shaneson, the Slice-Ribbon Conjecture
of Fox and Milnor and applications of knot theory to the detection of exotic
smooth structures in dimension 4. The PI will employ state of the art tools,
several of which she has previously helped develop and apply. The tools include:
Coxeter quotients of knot groups; the Wirtinger number of a knot diagram;
trisections of 4-manifolds; singular branched covers in dimension 4 and a ribbon
obstruction extracted by the PI and collaborators from this context.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
