
* 2204357
* Computations in Classical and Motivic Stable Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2022,05/03/2022
* Eva Belmont,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2025
* USD 125,138.00

Algebraic topology is a field of mathematics that involves using algebra and
category theory to study properties of geometric objects that do not change when
those objects are deformed. A central challenge is to classify all maps from
spheres to other spheres, where two maps are considered equivalent if one can be
deformed to the other. The equivalence classes of these maps are called the
homotopy groups of spheres, and collectively they form one of the deepest and
most central objects in the field. Historically, much important theory has
arisen out of attempts to compute more homotopy groups of spheres and understand
patterns within them. This project involves furthering knowledge of the homotopy
groups of spheres, using old and new techniques as well as computer
calculations. The project also involves studying an analogue of these groups in
algebraic geometry; this falls under a relatively new and actively developed
area called motivic homotopy theory, which applies techniques in algebraic
topology to study algebraic geometry. The broader impacts of this project center
around supporting the local mathematics community through mentoring and
promoting diversity. The principal investigator will help build the nascent
homotopy theory community at the university and promote women and minorities in
the subject through seminar organization and mentoring. One of the main planned
projects is a large-scale effort to compute the homotopy groups of spheres at
the prime 3 in a range, using old and new techniques such as the Adams-Novikov
spectral sequence as well as infinite descent machinery. This work will be aided
by computer calculations, which short-circuits some of the technical
difficulties encountered in previous attempts. Another main group of projects
concerns computing the analogue of the stable homotopy groups of spheres in the
world of R-motivic homotopy theory. This represents a continuation of prior work
of the PI and collaborator; the plan is to supplement the techniques used in
that work with computer calculations and a new tool, the slice spectral
sequence. A third project concerns theory and spectral sequence computations
aimed at computing the cohomology of profinite groups such as special linear
groups and Morava stabilizer groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
