
* 2204304
* Homotopical Macrocosms for Higher Category Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,04/29/2022
* Emily Riehl,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 130,453.00

Higher category theory is increasingly being used as the metatheory for new
results in several areas of mathematics, creating a huge barrier to entry for
mathematicians whose primary technical expertise lies in another field. Past
joint work of the PI reimagined the foundations of infinite-dimensional category
theory with the aim of simplifying proofs by replacing "analytic" methods, that
rely on the combinatorics of a particular model of infinite-dimensional
categories, with "synthetic" ones that apply in any model. One part of this
project seeks to develop a computer-verifiable formal language that expresses
only statements about infinite-dimensional categories that are invariant under
change of model. Such a language would force users to "speak no evil" by
guaranteeing that every statement they express is model-independent. This
project connects to the plans to recast the theory of infinite-dimensional
categories in a new proposed univalent foundation system for mathematics, in
which homotopical uniqueness up to a contractible space of choices becomes
genuine uniqueness, permitting streamlined definitions of fundamental concepts.
Both of these projects will be undertaken in part with mentees of the PI at
Johns Hopkins. In parallel, the PI has concrete plans to continue her expository
and outreach work which include a new book (Elements of Infinity-Category
Theory, joint with Verity), lectures directed at the general public, survey
articles prepared for a variety of audiences, and efforts to improve access to
advanced mathematics, such as her service on the Equity, Diversity, and
Inclusion Advisory Board at the Banff International Research Station.

The pioneers of homotopy type theory - the new proposed univalent foundation
system - envisioned a computer-verifiable foundation for infinite-dimensional
category theory, but some computational content is lost through the classical
reasoning used in classical homotopy theory. With collaborators, the PI will
develop a new model for classical homotopy theory in a particular category of
cubical sets, in which cubical fibrations are required to be equivariant,
respecting the symmetries of cubes defined by permuting their dimensions. A
longer-term aim is to use similar methods to obtain cubical set based
presentations of all infinity-topoi. A computer proof assistant based on
equivariant cubical fibrations would have the correct classical semantics but
would be able to restore the computational content to univalent mathematics. A
final project explores homotopical macrocosms for higher category theory, aiming
to prove that the collection of cartesian fibrations between
(infinity,n)-categories assemble into a cartesian fibration of
(infinity,n+1)-categories, which can be regarded as some sort of categorified
hyperdoctrine for (infinity,n)-category theory. Results of this nature would
establish a global lifting property against homotopy coherent diagrams that
should aid further developments in (infinity,n)-category theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
