
* 2208181
* Instantons, Lagrangians, and Low Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/2022,05/24/2022
* Aliakbar Daemi,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 217,223.00

Low dimensional topology is an area of mathematics that studies qualities of
three- and four-dimensional spaces which are insensitive to continuous
deformations like stretching and bending. These spaces model real world objects,
and low dimensional topology is highly relevant to other scientific disciplines.
For instance, several homology theories, that are fundamental constructions in
topology, have been used to analyze datasets in the field of data analysis. In
addition, topology plays an essential role in formulating modern theories in
physics. Perhaps more surprisingly, tools from modern physics, more specifically
quantum filed theory, have yielded significant progresses in low dimensional
topology. This NSF award provides support for projects that promote systematic
application of ideas in physics to topology and vice versa. The PI aims to
investigate applications of the Yang-Mills theory of high energy physics in the
topological properties of three-and four-dimensional objects. As a step toward
this goal, the PI will further develop homology theories that he constructed
together with his collaborators. The research also partly focuses on
foundational questions in symplectic geometry, a field with close ties with
physics. Last but not the least, the project will support training of graduate
students and early career researchers in the field of topology through
mentoring, conference and workshop organization, and dissemination of expository
materials. The PI will also engage in undergraduate and K-12 outreach. The
project aims to study equivariant instanton homology theories, which provide
invariants of knots and three-manifolds and are developed by the PI in
collaboration with Chris Scaduto and Michael Miller Eismeier. The PI will apply
different versions of instanton Floer homology to the study of problems in low
dimensional topology and group theory. Another focus of the project is the
Atiyah-Floer conjecture. This conjecture states that one can apply methods from
symplectic geometry to define three-manifold invariants. Furthermore, the
resulting invariant, often called symplectic instanton Floer homology, is
isomorphic to instanton Floer homology. The PI and his collaborators will use a
geometric partial differential equation, called the mixed equation, to address
various versions of the Atiyah-Floer conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
