
* 2243128
* Corks, Concordance, and Complex Curves
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2022,08/29/2022
* Kyle Hayden,NJ,Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2024
* USD 104,011.00

Differential topology is concerned with manifolds ? objects such as circles,
spheres, and tori (and their higher-dimensional analogs). Manifolds arise
naturally in physics (our universe as a 4-dimensional manifold), computer
science (graphics), and biology (investigating how the shape and "knottedness"
of molecules like DNA affect their function). In many ways, this subject is
especially interesting for 4-dimensional spaces. Fortunately, a manifold can
often be studied using the lower-dimensional manifolds that sit inside of it.
Remarkably, several of the most important questions about 4-dimensional
manifolds can be reduced to asking if a given knotted circle in 3-space arises
as the boundary of a 2-dimensional disk in 4-space. This project aims to develop
new techniques to tackle this latter problem and related questions, with a range
of applications in 4-dimensional topology. Of particular interest are the disks
and surfaces in 4-space that arise as solution sets to equations with two
complex variables, known as "complex plane curves". Such surfaces exhibit
surprising connections to foundational questions about 4-manifolds, as well as
connections to other areas of mathematics, such as the mathematical theory of
braids. In addition, aspects of the project aim to illuminate the connections
between complex plane curves and important topological tools that have deep
connections to mathematical physics. These projects include accessible entry
points for undergraduate research.

The project is guided by three interrelated questions: (1) When does a knot in
3-space bound a disk (or another low-genus surface) in 4-space? (2) How unique
is an embedded surface in a 4-manifold, up to isotopy? (3) Which smooth surfaces
in complex manifolds are isotopic to complex curves? For all three questions,
the PI aims to blend constructive techniques (such as handle calculus and
branched coverings) to enhance the power of obstructive tools like Heegaard
Floer homology and Khovanov homology. Further investigation of the cobordism
maps in the aforementioned homology theories will help shed light on whether
these tools can be used to detect pairs of orientable surfaces in 4-dimensional
space that are "exotically knotted", i.e., isotopic through ambient
homeomorphisms but not diffeomorphisms. In particular, the PI will use these
homology theories to investigate uniqueness problems for complex curves. In
addition, the PI will continue to develop topological techniques for studying
complex curves in 4-space and other 4-manifolds, including novel techniques
using singular foliations inspired by the theory of characteristic foliations in
contact geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
