
* 2314082
* Stable Homotopy Theory in Algebra, Topology, and Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 02/01/2023,01/13/2023
* James Quigley,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2025
* USD 211,980.00

Stable homotopy theory was developed throughout the twentieth century to study
high-dimensional topological spaces. Since spheres are the fundamental building
blocks of topological spaces, the stable stems, which encode the possible
relations between high-dimensional spheres up to continuous deformation, are a
central object of study. Beyond topology, the stable stems have surprisingly
broad applications throughout mathematics, ranging from geometric problems, such
as classifying differentiable structures on spheres, to algebraic problems, such
as classifying projective modules over rings. This project will explore further
applications of stable homotopy theory in algebra, topology, and geometry.
Broader impacts center on online community building. The PI will continue co-
organizing the Electronic Computational Homotopy Theory Online Research
Community, which aims to increase inclusion at the undergraduate, graduate, and
senior levels by organizing undergraduate research opportunities, graduate
courses, online seminars, mini-courses, and networking events. To address
inequality at the K-12 level, the PI will develop and manage a program pairing
undergraduates from his home institution with students from local after-school
programs for online tutoring. This program would circumvent certain barriers to
participation, such as lack of access to transportation and facilities, which
are common in traditional outreach.

Specific research projects include the study of the stable stems and their
applications in geometric topology, algebro-geometric analogues of the stable
stems and their connections to number theory, and equivariant analogues of
algebraic K-theory and their applications in algebra and geometry. More
specifically, building on previous work, the PI will study the stable stems
using topological modular forms and the Mahowald invariant, aiming to deduce the
existence of exotic spheres in new dimensions. In a related direction, the PI
will use the kq-resolution introduced in previous work to study the motivic
stable stems, an algebro-geometric analogues of the stable stems. The main goal
is to apply the kq-resolution to relate the motivic stable stems to arithmetic
invariants like Hermitian K-theory. Real algebraic K-theory, which encodes
classical invariants like algebraic K-theory, Hermitian K-theory, and L-theory,
will also be studied using the trace methods developed in previous work. The
overarching goal is extending results from algebraic K-theory to real algebraic
K-theory, thereby obtaining results for Hermitian K-theory and L-theory that
will have applications in algebra and geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
