
* 8702519
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1987,04/27/1989
* Frank Raymond,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1991
* USD 320,700.00

A computable obstruction theory for existence and uniqueness of Seifert
constructions with general homogeneous spaces as typical fiber, has been
recently developed by Professors K.B. Lee and F. Raymond. Professor Raymond will
refine this theory and develop geometric applications. In particular, the
deformation theory of geometric structures that preserve the fiber structure
will be studied for various Seifert fiberings and the topology of the
corresponding moduli spaces will be investigated. Professor Scott will
investigate further several problems centered about three important conjectures
that relate the topology of 3-manifolds with their fundamental groups. Consider
closed oriented irreducible 3-manifolds with infinite fundamental groups. If M
and N are homotopically equivalent, are they homeomorphic? If the fundamental
group contains a central subgroup isomorphic to the integers, is M a classical
Seifert 3-manifold? Is the universal covering homeomorphic to Euclidean space?
These topological investigations shed light on the ways in which geometric
objects can be assembled from simpler geometric objects. Solution spaces to
algebraic or differential equations give rise to these same objects, which makes
their structural properties pervasive and understanding them important.
