
* 8719511
* Mathematical Sciences: 1988-89 Spring Topology Conference to be held April 7-9, 1988, Gainesville, Florida
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 02/15/1988,02/10/1988
* Beverly Brechner,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1989
* USD 13,000.00

The Department of Mathematics of the University of Florida will host the 1988
Spring Topology Conference. The Department of Mathematics of the University of
Tennessee will host the 1989 Spring Topology Conference. These will be the 22nd
and 23rd annual conferences, respectively, in a series of conferences held at
various universities. Over the years, many important areas of topology have been
well-represented at these conferences. Last year for the first time, dynamical
systems was integrated into the conference. There was much interest and
interaction among participants, and in fact, several people from the traditional
group gave talks relating to dynamical systems. The conference will merge the
two groups again in 1988. It will again run for three full days in order to
accommodate additional talks. Most of the speakers will come from the
traditional group. Some survey talks by well-known researchers will be given as
well as talks on interesting new results. The focus in 1988 will be on two
special areas: (1) group actions, including the Hilbert-Smith Conjecture (a
p-adic group cannot act on a manifold), and (2) dynamical systems, including
complex dynamics. There will be a survey talk on each of these topics. A third
area with invited talks is the application of topology to chemistry, especially
the application of knot theory to the behavior of DNA. In 1988, there will also
be two or more Problem Sessions on various topics, including one on each of the
above topics. Problem Session Leaders will be responsible for writing up the
discussion and problems for publication in "Topology Proceedings".
