
* 8803552
* Mathematical Sciences: The Topology of Certain Algebraic Varieties, and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 10/15/1988,10/13/1988
* Steven Weintraub,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 03/31/1991
* USD 38,200.00

This research project involves application of the methods of algebraic and
differential topology to the study of certain algebraic varieties. Weintraub
will use a number of techniques and, in particular, exploit the fact that the
spaces studied often admit, or arise from, certain natural group actions. The
varieties to be studied include the Igusa compactifications of degree two Siegel
modular spaces corresponding to various congruence subgroups of the symplectic
group of degree four (and related groups), moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces
(sometimes with special or additional structure), ball quotients, and other
varieties related to configuration spaces. The information to be obtained
includes homology and cohomology (both the groups and geometric representatives
of the classes), Hodge decompositions, representations of the groups which act
on the (co)homology, intersection homology, zeta functions, and Lefschetz
numbers. In addition there are applications to group cohomology and Siegel
modular forms. One of Weintraub's techniques of interest in its own right, is an
elaboration of the Tits building (called "scaffolding") which he has developed.
Of particular interest is the application of this work to theta-functions. It
clarifies some points about how theta-functions transform, and most
interestingly of all, reveals hitherto unsuspected connections between
geometry/topology (in the guise of holonomy/Rochlin invariants) and theta-
functions, and raises interesting new questions about the latter. (The project
represents a continuation of a long-running research program, much of it joint
work with other mathematicians.)
