
* 8901975
* Mathematical Sciences: Cohomological and Homotopical Methodsin Mathematical Physics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1989,06/25/1991
* James Stasheff,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1992
* USD 106,780.00

Cohomological physics refers to that part of mathematical physics, primarily
gauge and other field theories, in which a variety of cohomological techniques
are seeing increasing application. Stasheff's own research is concerned with
application of those techniques he had earlier developed in relation to his
study of classifying spaces and rational homotopy theory. Currently he is
particularly concerned with two classes of problems: I) the homological aspects
of reduction of constrained Hamiltonian systems, both classical and quantum, as
embodied in the BRST formalism and the Batalin-Fradkin-Vilkovisky complex and
its generalizations, and II) homotopy associative differential graded algebras
as they occur in string field theories and spin n-algebras. Henneaux and
Stasheff have generalized the BFV complex to handle reducible constraints of
first class and now intend to apply the construct to physically interesting
examples. Analogs of associating homotopies have appeared in string field theory
and have led Stasheff to define a homotopy associative convolution algebra and
tensor calculus. With the Italian physicist, Cotta-Ramusino, he plans to
investigate the physical significance of this homotopy and possible higher order
structures as in his previous work. Such higher order terms are definitely
present in spin-n algebras for n bigger than 2. He intends to investigate these
higher order structures by translating them into the BRST formulism. Many of the
techniques used in these applications come from Homological Perturbation Theory.
This project includes further development of that machinery at the theoretical
level in addition to the applications in theoretical physics.
