
* 8902199
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1989,06/27/1991
* William Floyd,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1992
* USD 165,100.00

Professor Floyd plans to work in geometric group theory and topology. In an
attempt to make some progress on the geometric group theory of nonpositively
curved manifolds, he plans to study graph amalgamation products of finite groups
over finite graphs. This will be joint work with Walter Parry. He intends to
continue his research on the growth functions of hyperbolic groups and make the
computer a more effective tool for studying growth functions. His other research
topic is a joint project with Edwin E. Floyd on constructing (and computing the
homology of) classifying spaces of finite groups via their Euclidean actions.
Professor Quinn plans to work in geometric topology, and related topics in
algebra and geometry. Specifically he plans to complete the development of
controlled versions of K- and L-theory. This is expected to yield information
about assembly maps from homology groups to K- and L- groups. In turn this
should allow further computations of K- and L- groups of infinite groups with
torsion, especially discrete subgroups of Lie groups. It should also shed light
on the topological structure of stratified spaces, like algebraic varieties and
quotients of group actions. In short, Floyd and Quinn are investigating the
fundamental structure of geometric objects known as manifolds (spheres, toruses,
and other more highly connected objects) as well as their symmetry properties,
which can be described algebraically by groups.
