
* 8903248
* Mathematical Sciences: Group Actions on Manifolds, Cyclic Homology and Elliptic Cohomology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1989,04/05/1991
* Jean-Luc Brylinski,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1992
* USD 148,200.00

This reserch project by Jean-Luc Brylinski deals with the computation and the
applications of cohomological invariants for actions of Lie groups on manifolds,
and infinitesimal actions of Lie algebras. These cohomological invariants
include cyclic homology, equivariant cohomology, equivariant K-theory, and the
delocalized theory of P. Baum, R. MacPherson and the investigator. The central
example will be the free loop space of a smooth manifold, on which the group D
of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms of the circle acts by reparametrizing
loops. The investigator will develop differential-geometric tools for loop
spaces, in relation with cyclic homology and elliptic cohomology. He will study
D-equivariant vector bundles on loop spaces, in particular those associated with
representations of loop spaces, and relate elliptic cohomology to a K-theory
based on such bundles. Manifolds are natural geometric objects to study, often
arising as solution sets of ordinary or differential equations. Transformation
groups acting upon them encode their symmetry in a form that is useful for
computations. (This is often exploited in analysing manifolds which arise in
physics.) What Brylinski is doing is developing new cohomological (algebraic)
tools for studying transformation groups acting on manifolds and then applying
these tools to important examples.
