
* 9001186
* Mathematical Sciences: Quillen-Type Homology and Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/1990,06/05/1990
* Paul Goerss,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1993
* USD 42,800.00

The principal investigator will attempt to broaden the scope of certain
algebraic techniques of proven geometric utility. In the 1960's Daniel Quillen
showed how to define homology and cohomology in many categories. These included
simplicial sets, where he obtained the ordinary cohomology of topological
spaces, but the categories of simplicial algebras over a field and simplicial
unstable algebras over the mod-p Steenrod algebra both support an idea of
cohomology that is relevant in homotopy theory. Cohomology of simplicial
unstable algebras, for example, is the correct context for studying the E2 term
of the Bousfield- Kan spectral sequence, an unstable Adams-type spectral
sequence which has gained prominence due to the work of Haynes Miller, Jean
Lannes and others. Under prior NSF grants, the principal investigator has made a
successful study of the Quillen-type cohomology in various categories of
algebras. The purpose of this project is to take these results and to extend and
apply them. In particular, he should now be able to make an in-depth study of
Barratt's desuspension spectral sequence and his "Lie ring analyzer" - both a
source of conjecture and speculation for 30 years. Other projects include
combining the Quillen-type cohomology techniques with the methods of Chris
Stover to approach the homotopy groups of a wedge of two spaces, the study of a
spectral sequence for computing the homotopy groups of a space of sections, and
an exploration of the homology of function complexes using tools of Jean Lannes
and A.K. Bousfield.
