
* 9002779
* Mathematical Sciences: Symmetries of Low-Dimensional Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 11/15/1990,09/27/1994
* Allan Edmonds,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 04/30/1995
* USD 15,600.00

The existence and classification of finite groups of symmetries of manifolds of
dimensions three and four will be studied. Recently there has been a tremendous
growth in our understanding of low-dimensional manifolds, based on techniques
pioneered by W. Thurston, M. Freedman, and S. Donaldson. These new techniques
and results have provided the tools to investigate much more systematically the
symmetries of these manifolds and to sharpen significantly the questions that
one can hope to address. Existence of symmetries of 4-manifolds: Freedman showed
how to classify all simply connected, closed topological 4-manifolds in terms of
their intersection forms and stable triangulation obstructions. It is then
appropriate to ask what symmetries these manifolds admit. Results of the
Principal Investigator show that all these 4-manifolds admit locally linear Zn
actions for all odd n and that all except possibly the fake complex projective
plane admit Z actions that are not necessarily locally linear. All the actions
above were constructed so as to be homologically trivial, inducing the identity
on homology. One is led to ask: What automorphisms of the intersection form of a
closed simply connected topological 4-manifold can be realized by a periodic
homeomorphism of the manifold?
