
* 9004017
* Mathematical Sciences: Knot Invariants and Representation Varieties
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1990,08/02/1990
* Xiao-Song Lin,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1992
* USD 42,800.00

This research project consists of two parts, both trying to study knot (link)
invariants via representation varieties. The first part is a continuation of
Lin's work wherein he defined a knot invariant in terms of an intersection
number of subvarieties and related this knot invariant to a classical one. To
generalize this work, one can define other intersection numbers and he is
interested in relating these intersection numbers with classical link
invariants. In the second part, he suggests a way of constructing a 2-variable
polynomial for a knot in S3, generalizing the definition of the Alexander
polynomial via Seifert forms. This construction is intimately related to
representation varieties. In particular, it suggests a possible connection
between the Jones polynomial and Casson's invariant of homology 3-spheres. Lin's
hope is that this research will shed some light on some important questions,
such as how to generalize the Jones polynomial from S3 to arbitrary 3-manifolds
and how to interpret the Jones polynomial in terms of the topology of the knot
complement. Knots in three-dimensional space are natural objects to study. The
polynomials Lin describes reduce the problem of distinguishing truly
inequivalent knots from different presentations of the same knot to questions
about polynomials, i.e. to fairly simple algebraic problems. (This transition
from geometry to algebra turns out to be related to other mathematics of no
immediately apparent connection.)
