
* 9100317
* Mathematical Sciences: A Homotopy Theoretic Approach to Surgery on Poincare' Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1991,05/30/1991
* Steve Hutt,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/31/1993
* USD 38,500.00

The classification and construction of manifolds and varieties is one of the
basic themes in mathematics. Surgery theory is a fundamental tool in this area.
It is a construction which, in certain circumstances, allows one to modify a
manifold by 'cutting and pasting', thereby changing the manifold's homotopy
type. The technique has many important applications. The study of the
obstructions to doing surgery on a manifold has become a subject in its own
right, giving rise to various theories which model surgery in an algebraic
setting. Poincare' spaces have the same algebraic topological properties as
manifolds but are homotopy theoretic in nature. Since many of the applications
of surgery theory on manifolds involve the use of Poincare' spaces, one would
like to have a theory of Poincare' surgery. This project is concerned with such
a surgery theory, building on the investigator's previous results in the area,
and with the construction of an algebraic model for the theory. Manifolds are
very natural objects to study, being simply spaces which are locally like
Euclidean spaces. The space in which we live is either a 3-dimensional or a
4-dimensional manifold, depending upon whether one includes or excludes the time
dimension. Improving and simplifying the technical tools for investigating
properties of manifolds is thus a fundamental and important endeavor.
