
* 9106584
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1991,01/15/1993
* Joan Birman,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1995
* USD 391,200.00

Birman will investigate knot theory, with a particular focus on the
applications of the theory of braids to the classification of knots and links.
The first project, with Menasco, aims at an algorithmic solution to the link
problem via the theory of braids. If successful, work on the main theorem, which
may be described as "Markov's Theorem with stabilization," will establish the
existence of an algorithmic solution to the knot problem by showing that there
is a series of complexity-reducing moves which take an arbitrary closed braid
representative of a knot to one which has minimum complexity. The implementation
of the algorithm will require, in addition, recognizing when certain complexity-
reducing moves are applicable. The second project is an investigation of the
knot invariants of Vassiliev. One goal is to estimate the number of Vassiliev
invariants of order i, and perhaps prove that this number grows without bound.
The third concerns John Moody's recent counterexample to the faithfulness of
Burau representations and its relevance to the corresponding question for the
Jones representations. Birman hopes to identify the kernel of the Burau
representation. The final project concerns understanding whether the collection
of all Jones invariants can be faithful on knot and link types. Morgan intends
to work on three related areas of topology: (i) actions of groups on trees; (ii)
computation of Donaldson invariants for algebraic surfaces, using algebraic
geometry; and (iii) computations of Donaldson invariants of 4-manifolds which
are made of two pieces joined by a long cylindrical tube. The first project,
with R. Skora, concerns the classification of free actions of groups on R-trees,
and in particular, the question of which groups act freely. They have been
studying groups which are certain types of non-trivial free products with
amalgamation or HNN-extensions. They propose to expand this study to more
general amalgams. Projects (ii) and (iii) concern Donaldson's invariants for
smooth 4-manifolds. Project (ii) explores connections with algebraic geometry.
Morgan and R. Friedman have partially computed these invariants for elliptic
surfaces of general type and propose to extend their computations, especially
those for elliptic surfaces. Project (iii) explores some purely analytic,
differential geometric questions, particularly, the ASD connections of finite
energy on infinite cylinders, in order to provide a link between embedded
riemann surfaces in a 4-manifold and the values of the Donaldson invariant.
These are projects in topology which interact heavily with other areas of
mathematics, e.g., algebra, algebraic geometry, and even mathematical physics.
Progress could take many different forms, and it is encouraging to note the
variety of interested parties.
