
* 9119954
* Mathematical Sciences: Two-dimensional Topological Field Theories and Complex Cobordism
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 02/15/1992,04/06/1995
* Jack Morava,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1995
* USD 161,000.00

Under support from DMS 8713718, a problem of paramount interest was to
generalize elliptic cohomology so as to encompass curves of higher genus. Y.
Shimizu and the investigator found a solution to this problem (over the rational
numbers), based on the idea that affine connections on elliptic curves (which do
not generalize to higher genus) should be interpreted as special cases of the
projective connections (which exist for all Riemann surfaces). This allowed them
to associate in a natural way to any chiral conformal field theory (in the sense
of Segal), the topological genus defined by the projective connection (or
stress-energy tensor) of the field theory. They were able to identify this genus
in the case of the charge-one fermion and to show that it reduced (in the case
of the elliptic curve) to the elliptic genus. A corollary of this construction
is that the complex cobordism ring supports a canonical quadratic differential,
closely related in some way to a quadratic differential supported by the
fundamental bosonic representation of the Virasoro algebra. The relation between
these two quadratic differentials seems to be of fundamental importance and will
be a major emphasis of the current project. In recent years mathematical
constructions inspired by theories used to make sense of subatomic particles
have found repeated application to purely geometric problems. To their mutual
profit physicists and mathematicians are interacting more than ever in exploring
these connections, and the investigator is a major player in this game.
