
* 9200881
* Mathematical Sciences: Embeddings and Immersions in S3
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1992,03/16/1994
* William Menasco,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1996
* USD 86,600.00

The theme of this project is understanding how certain types of surfaces and
2-dimensional objects can be embedded, immersed, and, in general, positioned in
the 3-dimensional sphere. Three ongoing collaborative projects and one
individual one are involved, concerning (1) links represented by closed braids,
with Joan S. Birman of Columbia University, (2) planar surfaces and the cabling
conjecture, with Abigail A. Thompson of the University of California, Davis, (3)
embeddings and immersions in highly alternating link exteriors, with Morwen B.
Thistlethwaite of the University of Tennessee, and (4) the Milnor-Bennequin
conjecture and unknotting number. (1) seeks better ways of calculating about
such links, possibly leading to a more efficient effective algorithm than
Haken's for distinguishing oriented links. (3) builds upon a recent joint
triumph in settling the hundred-year-old Tait flyping conjecture. Knots and
their generalization, links, are rather elementary geometric objects whose
really interesting properties are topological. By this we mean that two
geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them can be
transformed to look just like the other without cutting or untying it, just by
pushing its string about to rearrange the crossings. Topologists say that they
are two different geometric realizations of the same topological knot.
Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to recognize when one complicated
geometric knot is topologically different from another, rather than just a
different geometric realization. This problem can be addressed by computing
certain numbers or polynomials which are called "topological invariants,"
meaning that they always have the same value for different geometric
realizations of the same topological knot. The problem would be reduced to pure
algebra if there were one invariant which also always had different values for
geometric realizations of different topological knots, but life is not so simple
-- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the known invariants
taken together. It is therefore valuable to investigate new invariants, some of
the most useful being those inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum
physics. The investigator has been in the thick of this activity and has been
particularly successful in applying some new polynomial invariants to settle old
questions about alternating knots. He will continue to exploit these techniques
as well as some more geometric ones.
