
* 9201091
* Mathematical Sciences: Knot Theory: New Invariants and TheirTopology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1992,07/18/1994
* Xiao-Song Lin,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 129,100.00

Lin will study various new knot invariants and related topology. In the first
part of this project, he intends to put the knot signature into the framework of
instanton invariants of 3- manifolds. Considered in the context of an
equivariant Floer theory, the signature invariant is expected to provide a new
insight into some old problems in knot theory, e.g., the estimate of the
unknotting number. In the second part, he will explore the relationship
established between knot polynomials and Vassiliev's knot invariants. He
anticipates finding a combinatorial construction of knot invariants from
Vassiliev's initial data. These knot invariants determine essentially all
generalized Jones polynomials derived via quantum groups. He also hopes to get
some information about the outstanding problem of finding non-trivial knots with
trivial Jones polynomials from Vassiliev's knot invariants. Knots are rather
elementary geometric objects whose really interesting properties are
topological. By this we mean that two geometric knots do not differ in an
interesting way if one of them can be transformed to look just like the other
without cutting or untying it, just by pushing its string about to rearrange the
crossings. Topologists say that they are two different geometric realizations of
the same topological knot. Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to recognize
when one complicated geometric knot is topologically different from another,
rather than just a different geometric realization. This problem can be
addressed by computing certain numbers or polynomials which are called
"topological invariants," meaning that they always have the same value for
different geometric realizations of the same topological knot. The problem would
be reduced to pure algebra if there were one invariant which also always had
different values for geometric realizations of different topological knots, but
life is not so simple -- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all
the known invariants taken together. It is therefore valuable to investigate new
invariants, some of the most useful being those inspired in recent years by
ideas from quantum physics. In particular, applications of knot theory to the
biology of long strands of DNA have drawn upon knowledge of these newer
invariants.
