
* 9202041
* Mathematical Sciences: Research on Elliptic Genera, Elliptic Cohomology and Modules over the Steenrod Algebra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1992,05/24/1994
* Peter Landweber,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1996
* USD 116,700.00

The investigator will continue his study of elliptic genera and elliptic
cohomology. A new family of periodic cohomology theories was found in 1986 in
joint work with Douglas Ravenel and Robert Stong; it is the intention to study
the central problem of determining the intrinsic geometric nature of these
cohomology theories, in light of the recent work on constructing elliptic
homology by M. Kreck, S. Stolz, and M. Hovey. Further problems dealing with
variants of the usual level-2 elliptic genus, yielding level-1 modular forms
related to the Thom spectrum MO<8>, and level N (N > 1) modular forms related to
Jacobi polynomials, will be studied. In addition, it is hoped that connections
can be established linking knot invariants and quantum groups to elliptic
cohomology. This project is concerned with reducing geometric information to a
subject for calculation. The nature of the geometric information involved is the
crux of the problem. While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and
so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far different
with what are known as topological properties of geometric objects. These are
properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece), knottedness, having
no holes, and so forth. All systematic study of such properties, for example,
how to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to one of
these properties or are only superficially different, or how to classify the
variety of differences that can occur, all these have only truly been
comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of calculation.
Modern algebra furnishes many of the tools and the attitudes toward the tools
that are needed, and the interplay between the algebra and the topology remains
a fascinating subject. Elliptic cohomology, invented by the investigator and
several co- workers, bids fair to be one of the important tools in the arsenal
available to algebraic topologists.
