
* 9203517
* Mathematical Sciences: Characteristic Classes, the Space of Knots and Groups of Diffeomorphisms
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,01/13/1994
* Jean-Luc Brylinski,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1996
* USD 185,100.00

Brylinski intends to continue his work on the geometric construction of
characteristic classes and on explicit integer- valued Cech cocycles for them.
He expects to develop general methods to construct cohomology classes for the
gauge groups and groups of diffeomorphisms. He will also continue his study of
the geometry and topology of knots in a smooth manifold, with emphasis on the
action of the group of unimodular diffeomorphisms. He will analyze rigorously
some topological quantum field theories, using line bundles on moduli spaces.
The details of these parts vary, but all are concerned with reducing geometric
information to a subject for calculation. The nature of the geometric
information involved is the crux of the difficulty. While questions about
lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to
calculations, it is far different with what are known as topological properties
of geometric objects. These are properties such as connectedness (being all in
one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so forth. All systematic study of
such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric objects really
differ in respect to one of these properties or are only superficially
different, or how to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all
these have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced
to matters of calculation.
