
* 9204534
* Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and Its Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,06/17/1994
* Haynes Miller,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1996
* USD 463,300.00

This project encompasses research by four mathematicians and their students on
problems in homotopy theory. Hopkins will study classification questions in
stable homotopy theory using tools from p-adic number theory and localization.
Kan will continue research into fundamental structures in homotopy theory
connected with classification questions in unstable homotopy theory. Peterson
will study the Dickson algebra and other algebras as modules over the Steenrod
algebra. Miller will study the structure of finite loop spaces using
cohomological methods. Topology arose originally as an approach to the study of
differential equations. Over the intervening century it has evolved
prodigiously, often seeming to have a life entirely its own and independent of
its source. Increasingly, however, it has begun to repay its debt. The point is
that it is often more important to know of the solution of an equation whether
it is a closed loop or whether it is knotted, for example, than to know
precisely and numerically what are the coordinates of all of its points.
Furthermore, although the former qualitative information is implicitly contained
in the latter complete description, it is not at all obvious how to extract it.
The sophisticated machinery that has been developed by topologists, such things
as the investigations in homotopy theory outlined for this project, has now been
developed to a degree that often permits these natural problems to be handled in
a natural way.
