
* 9204292
* Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorial Topology and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,03/29/1994
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1996
* USD 88,500.00

The investigator will work on three projects. The first is a continuation of
work with Mladen Bestvina (U.C.L.A.) on automorphisms of the free group. They
hope to prove a classification theorem for subgroups of polynomial growth
automorphisms and thereby complete the proof of the Tits Alternative for
Out(Fn). Secondly, the investigator hopes to prove that there are no minimal
homeomorphisms of the once punctured plane, which would answer a question of
Besicovitch and of Herman. Finally, the investigator, in collaboration with
Bruce Kitchens (I.B.M.), will explore the relationship between two natural
definitions of topological entropy for homeomorphisms of non- compact spaces.
The topology of surfaces is a highly developed subject, addressing properties
which remain invariant when a surface is stretched or twisted without tearing
it, so-called rubber sheet geometry. The theory of dynamical systems is another
highly developed subject, addressing questions about transformations of a space
into itself, such simple things as rotations of spheres, but also far more
complicated transformations. For transformations of surfaces, the topology is
intimately involved and says a great deal about what kinds of transformations
are possible. Extracting this information by combining the topology of surfaces
with the theory of dynamical systems is a sophisticated endeavor which forms a
large part of this project.
