
* 9205277
* Mathematical Sciences: Polynomial Invariants in the Theory of Knots
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,08/11/1992
* Louis Kauffman,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1995
* USD 56,700.00

This project concerns polynomial invariants in knot theory, particularly the
Jones polynomial and its generalizations. Along with knot theory, the project is
integrally involved with related problems in combinatorics, generalized spin
networks, quantum groups, statistical mechanics, and invariants of 3-manifolds.
In particular, it addresses a tangle-theoretic recoupling theory for the
Temperley-Lieb algebra and its relationship with invariants of graph embeddings,
the SL(2) quantum group, and the Turaev-Viro invariant of 3-manifolds. This
recoupling theory gives a completely tangle-theoretic version of quantum 6j
coefficients at roots of unity, and it permits the construction of the Turaev-
Viro invariant on a purely knot-theoretic basis. These topics will be explored
in the context of the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants of 3-manifolds. Other
problems about link polynomials will be considered, such as the properties of
statistical mechanical models for the Alexander-Conway polynomial and relations
with four- dimensional topology. Knots are rather elementary geometric objects
whose really interesting properties are topological. By this we mean that two
geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them can be
transformed to look just like the other without cutting or untying it, just by
pushing its string about to rearrange the crossings. Topologists say that they
are two different geometric realizations of the same topological knot.
Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to recognize when one complicated
geometric knot is topologically different from another, rather than just a
different geometric realization. This problem can be addressed by computing
certain numbers or polynomials which are called "topological invariants,"
meaning that they always have the same value for different geometric
realizations of the same topological knot. The problem would be reduced to pure
algebra if there were one invariant which also always had different values for
geometric realizations of different topological knots, but life is not so simple
-- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the known invariants
taken together. It is therefore valuable to investigate new invariants, some of
the most useful being those inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum
physics. In particular, applications of knot theory to the biology of long
strands of DNA have drawn upon knowledge of these newer invariants.
