
* 9205139
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Structures and Discrete Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/1992,05/24/1994
* William Goldman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 02/29/1996
* USD 121,700.00

This continuing investigation of geometric structures on manifolds and discrete
groups will concentrate on complex hyperbolic geometry, spherical CR geometry,
flat Lorentzian geometry, conformal 3-dimensional geometry, and real projective
geometry. These geometries are intimately interrelated, yet each displays its
own characteristic personality. Direct constructions of discrete groups by
fundamental polyhedra (in the spirit of Poincare) in geometries in which totally
geodesic hypersurfaces either do not exist or are not sufficiently flexible to
build fundamental polyhedra, have led to alternate notions of half-spaces and
hypersurfaces. The investigator has analyzed how such hypersurfaces intersect
and the possible combinatorial types for polyhedra built from these objects. He
applies this theory to the geometry and topology of moduli spaces of geometric
structures on a manifold, these spaces being closely related to the better known
moduli space of representations of a manifold's fundamental group, a structure
profitably studied using gauge-theoretic techniques. The prototype of such
moduli spaces is Teichmueller space, and one objective of this project is to see
how the geometry of Teichmueller space extends to these more general moduli
spaces. Despite the fact that we live in a 3-dimensional manifold, our intuition
quickly fails us as a guide to the truth or falsity of fairly simple questions
about their general geometric and topological properties. Nor is it terribly
helpful in telling us where to look for answers. An elaborate theory has been
developed which is growing by leaps and bounds and has been far more successful
than raw intuition, one of the most surprising features of the theory being the
prominent role that a non-Euclidean geometry, so-called hyperbolic geometry,
occupies in this theory. Other special geometric structures also have been
exploited in similar ways, somewhat as a scaffolding is used in constructing a
building: One asks a topological question about a manifold, something
intrinsically independent of geometry. One then imposes a geometric structure,
deduces properties that seem to depend upon this geometric structure (and some
of which, as intermediate steps, actually do depend upon it), and finally in a
sense kicks away the scaffolding to reveal the desired answer to the original
question. By this I mean that one observes that one has deduced a result that
does not mention the geometric structure explicitly, and that one then succeeds
in showing that any other choice for the geometric structure would have led to
the same final result. This is only one intriguing aspect of such research, for
it is true that the geometric structures involved have now attracted a
considerable amount of interest in their own right.
