
* 9206929
* Mathematical Sciences: Cohomological and Homotopical Methodsin Mathematical Physics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,04/04/1994
* Alexander Varchenko,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1996
* USD 90,000.00

Cohomological physics refers to that part of physics, primarily gauge and field
theories, in which a variety of cohomological techniques are seeing increasing
application. The instant project is concerned with application of techniques
developed in the investigator's previous study of classifying spaces and
rational homotopy theory as an algebraic topologist. It is particularly directed
to four classes of problems: (1) homotopy associative differential graded
algebras and Lie analogs, especially as they occur in string field theories and
spin n- algebras; (2) quasi-Hopf algebras and deformations of bialgebras; (3)
Zamolodcdhikov's tetrahedral equation and generalized classifying spaces; (4)
the homological aspects of reduction of constrained Hamiltonian systems, both
classical and quantum, as embodied in the BRST formalism and the Batalia-
Fradkin-Vilkovisky complex and its generalizations. (1) and (2) bear a very
strong resemblance; one major thrust of this research being to understand the
underlying reason for this resemblance. (3) involves "higher dimensional
algebra," which is the analog of the algebra in (1) and (2) but beginning with
structures for which one-dimensional diagrams are inadequate. Although defined
in greater and more abstract generality, such structures as occur in
mathematical physics are the focus of this work. In another context, a noted
mathematical physicist has marveled at the "unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics." This project is devoted to a special case of that observation,
namely, the unreasonable effectiveness of algebraic topology. It begins with the
discovery that a paper the investigator published almost thirty year ago as an
algebraic topologist was slated for a key role in conformal string theory and
related matters. The "higher order associativity" of H-spaces that he developed
there has gone through a sequence of developments at the hands of MacLane;
Brustein, Ne'eman, and Sternberg; Joyal and Street; and finally Drinfeld, who,
in 1989, gave deep and ingenious applications to both physics and low
dimensional topology. Stasheff has become an enthusiastic participant in the
ensuing explosion of interest in this and related areas.
