
* 9206376
* Mathematical Sciences: Localization and periodicity in unstable homotopy theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1992,01/15/1993
* Mark Mahowald,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/01/1993
* USD 10,000.00

The investigator intends: (1) to continue his study of unstable periodic
homotopy groups, using Adams spectral sequence techniques and Bousfield
localization; (2) to generalize joint work with Mark Mahowald on v2 periodic
homotopy groups of the fiber of the secondary suspension map to higher
periodicity; (3) to study the localization of an unstable sphere with respect to
the homology theory E(n); (4) to study the unstable Adams-Novikov spectral
sequence based on E(n); (5) to compute the mod-p K-theory of free iterated loop
spaces and apply this to the calculation of v1 perioidic homotopy groups.
Topology arose originally as an approach to the study of differential equations.
Over the intervening century it has evolved prodigiously, often seeming to have
a life entirely its own and independent of its source. Increasingly, however, it
has begun to repay its debt. The point is that it is often more important to
know of the solution of an equation whether it is a closed loop or whether it is
knotted, for example, than to know precisely and numerically what are the
coordinates of all of its points. Furthermore, although the former qualitative
information is implicitly contained in the latter complete description, it is
not at all obvious how to extract it. The sophisticated machinery that has been
developed by topologists, such things as the investigations in homotopy theory
outlined for this project, has now been developed to a degree that often permits
these natural problems to be handled in a natural way.
