
* 9208071
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Geometric Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1992,02/23/1994
* Ruth Charney,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1995
* USD 167,400.00

New directions in geometric group theory have emerged in the past few years in
the areas of word hyperbolic groups, automatic groups, and spaces of nonpositive
curvature. Professors Charney and Davis will continue research on a number of
problems in these areas. Charney (together with M. Shapiro) plans research on
several questions related to the automaticity of Artin groups. She also plans to
study the problem of putting a metric of nonpositive curvature on several
building-like complexes. Davis (also with M. Shapiro) plans to work on the
conjecture that all Coxeter groups are automatic. Related to this is his project
to study properties of the boundary of a Coxeter group. This might also be
useful in finding a group of cohomological dimension two but geometric dimension
three (the Eilenberg-Ganea Question). Finally, jointly, Charney and Davis intend
to work on strict hyperbolization procedures and relative hyperbolization
procedures. "Strict" refers to the possibility of converting a complex into a
space of strictly negative curvature (rather than just nonpositive curvature).
"Relative" refers to the problem of keeping the metric on a subcomplex fixed.
Charney and Davis also plan to continue their research on nonpositively curved
orbifolds. The issue here is to decide when certain piecewise spherical metrics
on spheres are "large." Groups are the appropriate algebraic structures for
describing the notion of symmetry with precision. For this reason they play an
extensive role in geometry (and topology). While the more usual interaction
between group theory and geometry is the use of algebraic computations involving
groups to prove theorems about geometric objects possessing symmetry, there is a
very significant mathematical subdiscipline in which the roles are reversed and
our intuition about geometric objects assists us in conjecturing and proving
theorems about associated groups. A fascinating recent development is the
influence of the computer in all this. Not only is it the ubiquitous timesaver
that everyone knows, enabling one to undertake computations that would otherwise
be too formidable, but it has actually influenced the questions in geometric
group theory in a more fundamental way. Certain classes of groups have been
defined in terms of the types of hypothetical machines that would be able to
perform certain computations about them. Real hardware is not involved in this,
and the same definitions could have been conceived long ago, but they were not,
for the existence of computing machines has influenced the way we look at the
world, the types of questions we ask about it, the kinds of properties that we
find interesting.
