
* 9224464
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology of Manifolds and Varieties
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1993,08/23/1993
* Oleg Viro,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 89,100.00

9224464 Viro The first part of this project is devoted to quantum invariants of
low dimensional topological objects. It seeks to give a purely combinatorial
construction of known quantum invariants and to look for non-trivial topological
quantum field theories not related to quantum groups; to study polynomial link
invariants defined by a construction similar to Seifert's construction for the
Alexander module, but with homology replaced by any topological quantum field
theory; to develop link theory in special 3-manifolds like projective space; to
study Vassiliev invariants and their generalizations; and to investigate the
possibility of combinatorial construction of 4-manifold invariants. The second
part is devoted to realizing bistellar transformations of smooth triangulations.
The third part is related to the topology of real algebraic varieties. It
involves investigation of the relationship between special classes of real
algebraic varieties and their topological models and an attempt to study the
topology of real algebraic knots in 3-dimensional projective space. The main
idea of this project is to develop the topological side of quantum topology, a
theory which has flowered recently as a result of the introduction of modern
physics into low-dimensional topology. The effect of this progress on topology
needs to be better understood. The new tools deserve more detailed study and
systematic application to geometric problems. They also provide a new
opportunity to study topological properties of real algebraic varieties. Of
course, traditional methods are to be used together with the new ones. ***
