
* 9301524
* Mathematical Sciences: 4-Manifolds and Symplectic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1993,06/10/1993
* Robert Gompf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 09/30/1996
* USD 94,800.00

The purpose of this project is better to understand smooth and symplectic
4-manifolds. Smooth 4-manifolds are spaces which are locally diffeomorphic to
Euclidean 4-space. Symplectic manifolds are endowed with additional structure
which keeps track of areas and volumes. For both types of 4-manifolds, the most
basic questions of existence and uniqueness are still poorly understood; it is
these questions which the project addresses. Traditionally, these two types of
objects have been studied by rather different methods, but the principal
investigator's research to date shows that much can be gained from a unified
approach. In fact, he has solved major problems in both fields by simple "cut-
and-paste" constructions (log transforms and connected sums along surfaces). He
intends to apply these and related techniques to produce even better examples
(for example, simply connected, irreducible symplectic 4-manifolds with small
second betti numbers). These, and other examples which the principal
investigator has already produced, should be detectable by means of gauge
theory. Other examples which might be produced (such as a simply connected,
symplectic, non-Kaehler 6-manifold, or a symplectic 4-manifold which splits as a
connected sum of indefinite pieces) could be detected by elementary means.
Smooth manifolds of dimension 4 are presently the least understood manifolds of
any dimension. Only in the last decade has substantial progress been made in
understanding the possible shapes of these objects. This is particularly ironic
in that our own universe is an example of a 4-dimensional manifold. Symplectic
manifolds have also come under intense study recently. These objects first
appeared in connection with classical mechanics, the physics of macroscopic
objects such as mechanical systems and orbiting satellites. Subsequently, they
have turned out to play a deep role in quantum physics, so they are of great
interest to physicists who are attempting to understand the fundamental forces
of nature. Symplectic manifolds are also of interest to pure mathematicians
because of their appearance in such diverse fields as algebraic geometry, gauge
theory and Lie group theory. It is the principal investigator's belief that
there are deep and largely unexplored connections between the theories of
symplectic manifolds and smooth 4-manifolds. The instant research project is to
exploit these connections to illuminate both theories.
