
* 9302520
* Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Topology and Infinite Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1993,06/08/1995
* Peter Shalen,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1997
* USD 167,900.00

A striking feature of the development of mathematics in the past decade has
been the extent to which the diverse branches of mathematics have interacted,
with methods from one branch being used to solve outstanding problems in
another. Culler and Shalen's ongoing program for obtaining lower bounds for
volumes of hyperbolic manifolds is in large measure an application of
qualitative results from topology to quantitative estimates in geometry. Their
program for the Property P conjecture would be likely to exploit K-theory and
arithmetic geometry in attacking a problem from the topological theory of
3-manifolds. Culler's project of implementing Manin's program by means of
Thurston's theory of pleated surfaces is a way of using synthetic hyperbolic
geometry to obtain insight into number theory. Finally, Shalen's project
involving fundamental groups of 2-complexes lies in the domain of geometric and
combinatorial group theory but is motivated in part by the prospect of
applications to the study of discrete subgroups of algebraic groups and Kac-
Moody groups. Three-dimensional manifolds are the mathematical models of our
physical universe. While the cosmological question of whether our universe is
finite may be unresolved, it is certain that the study of finite-volume
3-manifolds is of fundamental importance in understanding the physical universe.
The quantitative estimates obtained by Culler and Shalen may be regarded as
being mathematical analogues of measurements of fundamental physical constants,
such as the speed of light. The geometry, as well as the topology, of the
universe is important in physics. While the non-euclidean geometries may have
been considered curiosities in the nineteenth century, the development of
general relativity shows that negatively curved spaces, such as hyperbolic
3-manifolds, are the appropriate models for the universe. Recent mathematical
research has shown that they are ubiquitous and mathematically rich as well. The
research proposed here is aimed at expanding our understanding of these
important spaces.
