
* 9304486
* Mathematical Sciences: The Topology and Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1993,06/15/1993
* Richard Canary,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1997
* USD 92,100.00

Professor Canary's work concerns the relationship between the geometry and the
topology of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In the past he has explored the consequences
of knowing that a hyperbolic 3-manifold is topologically tame, i.e. homeomorphic
to the interior of a compact 3-manifold. In particular, he studied the spectral
geometry and the dynamics of topologically tame hyperbolic 3-manifolds. One
application was a proof of Ahlfors' measure conjecture for topologically tame
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In this project he intends to study the question of
which hyperbolic 3-manifolds are topologically tame. The conjecture is that
every hyperbolic 3-manifold with finitely generated fundamental group is
topologically tame. He also intends to study the space of all hyperbolic
structures on a given 3-manifold. An n-manifold is an object such that about
every point there is a neighborhood which looks like a ball in n-dimensional
space. For example, the unit sphere (in 3-dimensional space) is a 2-manifold,
since about each point there is a small neighborhood which looks like a disk in
the plane. One natural way in which manifolds arise is as solution sets of
equations in several variables. For example, the unit sphere is the solution set
of a particularly simple equation (x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 1). A metric on a manifold
M is a way of measuring distances between points on M. A manifold may admit many
different metrics. For example, the unit sphere and the surface of an apple are
topologically the same manifold, but they have different metrics. Studying the
types of possible metrics on a manifold has many applications in mathematics and
physics. The investigator will study metrics on 3-manifolds such that about any
point there is a small neighborhood which may be identified (by an
identification which preserves distances) with a ball in hyperbolic 3-space.
These metrics are called hyperbolic metrics. Hyperbolic metrics on 2-manifolds
have recently been of great interest to physicists, in particular, to string
theorists.
