
* 9305758
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1993,06/14/1993
* Steven Ferry,NY,SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1996
* USD 110,500.00

The investigator intends to study a number of topics in controlled topology and
differential geometry. The most pressing of these concern the nonresolvable
homology manifolds discovered by the investigator, J. Bryant, W. Mio, and S.
Weinberger. Simply put, he wishes to study these spaces and see to what extent
the classical theory of manifolds carries over to this new category of spaces.
This study is closely related to the well-known Borel and Bing-Borsuk
Conjectures. Other problems involved include applications of controlled Gamma-
surgery to the study of topological embeddings in codimension two, the Borel and
integral Novikov Conjectures for certain classes of groups, and applications of
controlled topology to differential geometry. There are a number of potential
applications for this work. The new spaces being studied have the global
properties of manifolds modelled on euclidean space, but have very different
small-scale properties. Such spaces could be of interest to workers trying to
reconcile large-scale and small-scale models of the universe. The Borel and
Novikov Conjectures are conjectures involving the rigidity of certain classes of
manifolds. Typical results say that manifolds which are "close together" in some
topological sense are the same. This appears to be a naturally occurring
instance of quantization in geometry and topology.
