
* 9322519
* Mathematical Sciences: Feynman Diagrams in Topology and Non-Commutative Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1994,07/14/1994
* Maxim Kontsevich,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9322519 Kontsevich The project deals with interrelated subjects in differential
topology, homotopical algebra and perturbative methods of quantum field theory.
The central model is the quantum Chern-Simons theory with various
generalizations to higher-dimensional and non-commutative settings. The method
of Feynman diagrams gives new invariants of knots, manifolds and new cohomology
classes of classifying spaces of diffeomorphism groups. A non-commutative
version of the Chern-Simons theory produces cohomology classes of moduli spaces
of complex algebraic curves. It will be applied to algebraic construction of
Gromov-Witten invariants of symplectic manifolds and to mirror symmetry. The
project applies a computational scheme developed several decades ago in particle
physics and thermodynamics (Feynman diagrams) in various domains of modern
mathematics. Feynman graphs (visualized as spider webs) turn out to be a very
powerful tool which relates many abstract algebraic structures to geometric and
topological objects of different dimensions. One of the recent applications was
a new series of knot invariants (i.e. quantities distinguishing closed lines in
the space without self-intersections). These new invariants are the first ones
which are really computable via fast working algorithms, and they can be
applicable in hydrodynamics and chemistry of long molecules. In general, the
project gives a unified view on several parts of mathematics. There are many
strong evidences that it leads to an understanding of so called "mirror
symmetry," one of the deepest discoveries of recent years in string theory,
which is a mathematical theory treating gravitation in a quantum mechanical
setting. ***
