
* 9400930
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Properties of Singularities and Solutions of Nonlinear Equations
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1994,01/26/1996
* James Damon,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1997
* USD 129,000.00

9400930 Damon Professor Damon has been developing analogues of infinitesimal
methods introduced by Mather for answering questions about the structure of
nonlinear mappings and the topological structure of special but important
classes of highly nonisolated singularities, such as occur in discriminants of
mappings. In quite different circumstances, he has also discovered how to modify
these infinitesimal methods for understanding the generic behavior of "pixel
intensity functions" under Gaussian blurring used in computer vision. He intends
to build on his earlier results and derive general algebraic formulae for
certain fundamental topological invariants for highly singular spaces. Second,
he will further develop methods for determining the generic properties of
solutions to partial differential equations and, in particular, apply them to
recent nonlinear versions of Gaussian blurring. Third, he will apply the results
on the topology of singular spaces to understand how the qualitative behavior of
the solutions can be deduced from the singularities which occur. This research
project will investigate certain qualitative properties of the set of solutions
of systems of nonlinear equations. Such properties will be applied to generally
appearing solutions of partial differential equations. Professor Damon has been
developing methods for determining such qualitative properties. Moreover, he has
begun applying them to understand the effects of Gaussian blurring applied to
"pixel intensity functions" for analyzing images in computer vision. He intends
to develop these methods further so that they apply to general partial
differential equations. This will include the investigation of relations between
certain invariants of the solutions and their qualitative properties. One
particularapplication will be to the increasingly sophisticated nonlinear
blurring schemes which are being developed for identifying essential features
and properties of images suc h as edges, ridges, etc. ***
