
* 9400587
* Mathematical Sciences: Classical Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1994,06/21/1996
* Frederick Cohen,NY,University of Rochester
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9400587 Cohen F.R. Cohen intends to consider problems in classical homotopy
theory and offshoots to other subjects involving cohomology of discrete groups,
certain moduli spaces, and a further study of the Whitehead square. One of the
main projects is to extend his recent partial solution of M.G. Barratt's finite
exponent conjecture to the general case. He intends to continue an analysis of
the groups appearing in this work together with their connections with other
parts of mathematics involving classical homotopy theory and their connections
to certain moduli spaces. He will continue his study of the Whitehead square
involving an interplay between Cayley-Dickson algebras and spaces of rational
functions. F.R. Cohen and S. Gitler will continue joint work in a study of
characteristic classes for spaces of embeddings which are implicit in their
earlier work and which are related to invariants of knots defined by Vassiliev.
This project is a study of how large dimensional spheres can be wrapped around
smaller dimensional objects at least up to continuous deformations. This type of
geometric problem occurs ubiquitously in mathematics and other related areas
such as physics. Some of the basic structure is given by the geometric and
algebraic consequences of particles which move on a surface and which are
parametrized by a time coordinate. At various times, the particles may return to
their original position. The algebraic analogue of this geometric property is
known as torsion. Bounds on the growth of torsion for various naturally
occurring spaces which are analogues of surfaces is one of the main subjects of
this project. One goal of this work is an attack on an outstanding problem in
the subject known as Barratt's finite exponent conjecture. A second and
unexpected offshoot is that this work overlaps with work of some others who are
interested in physics. ***
