
* 9400235
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Cycles and the Homotopy Theory of Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1994,05/07/1997
* Eric Friedlander,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 313,000.00

9400235 Friedlander Friedlander plans to continue his investigation of algebraic
cycles, using techniques from algebraic geometry and algebraic topology. The
program of Friedlander and others holds promise in that it introduces a new
perspective and imports techniques of algebraic topology. Several specific
avenues of research appear ripe for further exploration: topological filtrations
on algebraic cycles and homology, duality between Lawson homology and morphic
cohomology, motivic complexes in the guise of algebraic cycle homology, and
Chern classes in the context of algebraic cycle spaces. In addition to this
study of algebraic cycles, Friedlander will continue his efforts to study the
geometry implicit in the cohomology of infinitesimal algebraic groups. Priddy
plans to continue his program to study the homotopy type of classifying spaces
of groups and related constructions. Many of the most important questions in
homotopy theory are related to classifying spaces of finite or compact Lie
groups. Recently there have also developed interesting and powerful connections
between topology and group theory, especially the cohomology and modular
representation theory of finite groups. With the solution of the Segal and
Sullivan Conjectures, this area has developed rapidly in recent years to the
point where fundamental questions are being answered. Perhaps the most important
of these is to determine the exact relationship between the stable and unstable
homotopy types of a classifying space, completed at a prime p, and the p-local
structure of its underlying group. Algebraic geometry is the study of solution
sets of polynomial equations (i.e., algebraic varieties) using geometric
techniques. Partial answers to questions in algebraic geometry have led to
progress in fields ranging from complexity theory of computer science to
geometric topology to number theory. Friedlander intends to study algebraic
varieties, using methods borrowed from algebraic topology, as well as modern
techniques of algebraic geometry. The use of topology involves the study of
continuously varying families of structures, which have traditionally been
considered by other means. The hope is that these new techniques will offer
insight into deep and long-standing problems of algebraic geometry. Algebraic
topology is the study of geometric objects by means of algebraic techniques.
Exciting new developments have led to advances in group theory, using algebraic
topology, thus reversing the direction of the usual flow of information. Groups
are the fundamental symmetries occurring in all sciences, including areas
involving codes, and structures in physics. Priddy hopes that this new approach
will lead to a better understanding of the relationship between these fields.
***
