
* 9401529
* Mathematical Scieces: Topics in Set-Theoretic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1994,07/21/1994
* Gary Gruenhage,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/1997
* USD 52,150.00

9401529 Gruenhage The principal investigator will continue his research on
several open questions in set-theoretic topology. The focus will be on the now
classical problem of Arhangel'skii and Tall: Are normal locally compact
metacompact spaces paracompact? Because of recent progress by the principal
investigator, a solution to this problem may be near. Another set of problems
revolves around the failure of the Lindelof property in products, and includes
Michael's long-standing question concerning the existence in ZFC of of a
Lindelof space whose product with a complete separable metric space is not
Lindelof. Yet a third set of problems involves extensions of the PI's recent
solutions to problems of Watson, and Dow and Porter, on closed partitions of
compact Hausdorff spaces. Set-theory and general topology are fundamental
mathematical disciplines which have common turn-of-the-century roots. Set-
theory provides a framework upon which all of mathematics can be based. Objects
of study in topology include familiar spaces such as the plane and ordinary
three-dimensional Euclidean space, and their subsets, as well as much more
abstract spaces. Pioneering work of Goedel and Cohen led to the realization that
some long- standing topological questions could not be solved assuming only the
standard axioms of set-theory. It is illuminating to determine whether or not
topological propositions are independent of the standard axioms in this sense,
and if so, what further axioms are necessary to settle them. This project
involves just such questions, concerning basic topological properties and
constructions, including product spaces, partitions, and refinements of
coverings. Questions to be studied include ones which date back to the 1960's
and have been worked on by many experts with only partial success so far.
Significant recent progress by the principal investigator indicates that a
complete solution to some of these may now be at hand. The new tech niques
involved in their solution are likely to be applicable to a wide variety of
other problems. ***
