
* 9401533
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Applications of Algebraic Cycles
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1994,06/29/1998
* Paulo Lima-Filho,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1998
* USD 67,500.00

9401533 Lima-Filho The investigator will continue to explore topological
properties of the groups of algebraic cycles on algebraic varieties. He has
found this to be a mine of applications to topological and algebraic geometric
problems. Algebraic cycles are seen as a topological group functor from the
category of algebraic varieties to the category of group objects in the category
of CW-complexes. This functor associates principal fibrations to closed
inclusions, and their homotopy groups provide a homology theory for algebraic
varieties which he wishes to understood more deeply. An intersection theory for
arbitrary varieties will be developed, generalizing and simplifying an existing
theory for quasiprojective varieties. On the purely topological side, the
investigator's research has created equivariant infinite loop spaces using
algebraic cycles, and the generalized cohomology theories thus obtained have
been related with several other theories. As an outcome of this interplay
between new and old theories, he has already answered long-standing conjectures
about the total Chern class map and is presently computing several examples
where algebraic geometry, group representation theory, and homotopy theory come
together to illuminate the coefficient systems involved, the associated transfer
maps, and so forth. A fundamental aspect and guiding principle in the
investigator's research is its unifying character, under which diverse areas of
mathematics come into play and yield multifaceted applications of his algebraic
techniques. He thus obtains a highly desirable economy of thought, in the sense
that a concise and unified approach to various seemingly disparate questions
attains deep results about each in a short period of time. He starts by endowing
basic objects in algebraic geometry, the algebraic cycles, with a topology which
turns out to have remarkable properties. He then realizes that these cycles
provide new invariants not only for alge braic varieties (of fundamental
importance to algebraic geometers), but that they also deeply relate with
ongoing mainstream research in stable homotopy theory, a major topic in
algebraic topology. Other natural structures arise in this setting as he
explores constructions involving his algebraic cycles. The study of cycles from
an equivariant point of view thus also provides insight into various aspects of
the theory of representation of finite groups and group cohomology, enhancing
the usefulness of his unified approach. ***
