
* 9401695
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Topology of Quotients in Algebraic and Symplectic Geometry
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1994,07/18/1994
* Yi Hu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9401695 Hu This proposal concerns geometric and topological questions on
symplectic reductions, moduli spaces of vector bundles over algebraic surfaces,
and arithmetic quotients. The investigator plans to study the behavior of a
symplectic reduction when varying its defining datum (i.e. a symplectic form)
and compare its Gromov invariants with the equivariant Gromov invariants of the
original space. He also plans to study the behavior of the Gieseker and
Uhlenbeck compactifications of the moduli space of stable vector bundles on an
algebraic surface when varying their defining data (i.e. ample divisors).
Finally, he intends to compare the cohomology of a toroidal compactification of
an arithmetic quotient with the intersection cohomology of the Baily-Borel-
Satake compactification. Algebraic Geometry studies the geometry of the set of
solutions of a polynomial. Symplectic Geometry is motivated by Theoretical
Physics, which studies the geometry of some mathematical models originally
coming from Physics. The current proposal deals with some questions on the
structures of certain important models in Symplectic and Algebraic Geometry.
These models depend on a choice of parameters (such as numerical data). It is
natural and important to find out how the structure of a model changes when we
change the parameters. A deep result toward this will clarify the mysterious
relation among the structures of these models, leading to new insight into some
other important problems in the two fields. It will have numerous interesting
applications to Physics, because Symplectic Geometry was developed out of
physical models. ***
