
* 9406348
* Mathematical Sciences: Program in Mathematics and Molecular Biology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI, Genetic Mechanisms, GENE EXPRESSION, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY, STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 09/01/1994,08/18/1998
* Nicholas Cozzarelli,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 2,400,000.00

9406348 Cozarelli The Program in Mathematics and Molecular Biology (PMMB)
promotes the discovery and expansion of the applications of mathematics,
including statistics and computer science, to molecular biology Because of its
precise measurement techniques, molecular biology appears now in the position
that physics was a century ago, ready for an explosion of productivity and new
insights arising from interactions with mathematics. Although administered
through the University of California at Berkeley, this is a Program without
walls, a group unified by a common goal. PMMB enables the collaboration of
experimental biologists with mathematicians, professions often viewed as
disparate. PMMB members apply state-of the-art mathematics and computational
techniques to the design and analysis of biology experiments. PMMB provides a
forum for mathematicians and biologists with interesting problems and a
commitment to the application of mathematics to molecular biology. The Program
uses three major mechanisms to achieve this interdisciplinary collaboration. (1
) An active fellowship program and well-attended annual scientific meetings draw
particularly the younger scientists into the area of study and provide support
for interdisciplinary training. (2) The Program actively promotes the education
of the general mathematical and biological audiences on the potentialities of
the field through presentations and tutorials at national meetingst focused
small meetings, individual seminars, courses, and didactic articles. (3) The
Program provides modest direct support for interdisciplinary studies by the
members, their students and postdoctoral associates, fostering a network of
interactions among the members for productive collaborations.
