
* 9415615
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic K-Theory, Topological Cyclic Homology and Crystalline Cohomology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1994,07/13/1994
* Randy McCarthy,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1997
* USD 68,450.00

9415615 McCarthy One goal of this project is to continue the study of theories
closely related to algebraic K-theory but which are more accessible to
computation, in particular, topological Hochschild homology and various theories
which are generated from it. A major focal point for these investigations is
W(p)(A), which is the homotopy inverse limit of the fixed point spectra of
topological Hochschild homology of a ring A with respect to the subgroups of the
circle having order divisible by the prime p, where the structure maps are those
arising from the restriction of equivariant maps to their fixed point subspaces.
When A is commutative, the 0-th homotopy group of W(p)(A) consists of the p-th
Witt vectors of A, and there is a natural map from K(End(A)) to W(p)(A) which on
the 0-th homotopy group is the expected map (from work of Almkvist). If we use
W(p)(A) as a generalization of the p-th Witt vectors, one is led to consider the
homotopy fixed point spectrum of W(p)(A) (there is a circle action) as a
possible generalization of the p-th DeRham-Witt complex. The composite map from
K(A) to K(End(A)) (by the identity endomorphism) to W(p)(A) factors through the
homotopy orbit spectrum of W(p)(A), and it is the investigator's hope that this
is a good modification of Bloch's crystalline chern character. This project
treats some of the algebraic apparatus that has been developed with huge success
over the past several decades for reducing geometric information to a subject
for calculation. The nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of
the difficulty. While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so
forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far different with
what are known as topological properties of geometric objects. These are
properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece), knottedness, having
no holes, and so forth. All systematic study of such properties, for example,
how to tell whet her two geometric objects really differ in respect to one of
these properties or are only superficially different, or how to classify the
variety of differences that can occur, all these have only truly been
comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of calculation.
The investigator's work aims to understand better the relations among some of
the powerful algebraic tools now available for doing this, the obvious hope
being that with better understanding comes the ability to perfect and sharpen
them. The potential value of something so basic is hard to quantify, since
topological properties and questions arise in such widely varied mathematical
settings as the differential equations that govern satellite motions and the
conditions for equilibrium of models of the ecomomy. ***
