
* 9423719
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Homotopy Theory, K-theory, and Representation Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1995
* Nicholas Kuhn,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 68,400.00

9423719 Kuhn Homotopy theory and representation theory have quite distinct
origins, with the former being motivated by the desire to understand the global
structure of geometric objects such as manifolds, and the latter evolving out of
the study of how algebraic structures act as symmetries on vector spaces.
Professor Kuhn is continuing his study of the common ground between these
subjects, as typified by his development of "generic representation theory,"
which was originally inspired by work by topologists on the Steenrod algebra,
but which seems to offer new powerful tools for understanding completely
representation theoretic topics such as the modular representations of the
finite general linear groups and the MacLane homology of algebraic K-theorists.
Among the specific questions being studied are ones dealing with homotopy "at a
large prime," topological realization questions, and the relation between stable
K-theory and MacLane homology. Both homotopy theory and representation theory
are mathematical subjects in which one is trying to discover, and ultimately
classify, fundamental "building blocks" of structure: homotopy dealing with
deformations of geometric objects such as higher dimensional surfaces, and
representation theory being concerned with symmetries of discrete algebraic
objects such as configurations of lines and planes. Professor Kuhn is continuing
his study of some of the common ground between these, using algebraic tools
developed by him that were inspired by homotopy theoretic experiences. ***
