
* 9504530
* Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1995,02/25/1997
* James McClure,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 83,900.00

9504530 McClure The principal investigator is working on a variety of questions
in homotopy theory. He is continuing his work on topological Andre-Quillen
homology and its relation to unstable homotopy theory. He is also investigating
the properties of a construction on A-infinity ring spectra that is analogous to
the center of a ring in algebra; this seems likely to have applications to a
question posed by Mahowald, Ravenel and Shick in their work on the telescope
conjecture. He intends to do some calculations with cyclotomic homology (a
construction that was defined by Bokstedt, Goodwillie, Hsiang and Madsen, which
has important applications in algebraic K-theory). He is investigating the
question of whether the wedge of the even suspensions of a complex-oriented
E-infinity ring is again an E-infinity ring, and some consequences that this
property would have. He intends to work on several problems which relate
homotopy theory to C*-algebras. He is investigating some old questions posed by
Adams-Wilkerson and Atiyah involving the relationship between Adams operations
and Steenrod operations in the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence. He is
seeking a better understanding of the Morava K-theory of extended powers.
Topology is the study of certain properties that shapes can have that do not
depend on detailed measurement (the well-known example is that a doughnut and a
coffee cup are the same to a topologist, because one can be stretched to look
exactly like the other). Algebraic topology is a method for describing shapes by
means of certain kinds of calculation. For example, the surfaces of the doughnut
and the coffee cup could be divided into non-overlapping triangles, and one
could then calculate the number of triangles plus the number of vertices minus
the number of edges; the result would be the same in both cases, and this fact
shows (by means of a nontrivial theorem) that one shape can be stretched into
the other. In order to get more info rmation from these calculations, one
incorporates them into the framework of abstract algebra by relating them to
groups or rings. One of the most interesting trends in the subject in the last
decade has been to bring in abstract algebra at an earlier stage of the process
by relating the shapes themselves to groups or rings; that is what the phrase
"A-infinity ring spectrum" refers to. The main purpose of this project is to
continue the development of this idea. ***
