
* 9504607
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1995,05/08/1997
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 125,800.00

9504607 Davis The method for classifying high-dimensional manifolds is surgery
theory. Surgery is a mature subject, with the major open questions being the
Borel/Novikov conjecture and the four- dimensional topological surgery
conjecture. James F. Davis investigates topics connected with the Borel/Novikov
conjecture: the implications of this conjecture for stable-diffeomorphisms of
four-dimensional manifolds and for the study of manifolds with infinite
fundamental group. Kent Orr investigates the homological and geometrical
properties of the fundamental group and its transfinite lower central series.
This centers on the parafree conjecture and its relevance to four dimensional
cobordisms of three-manifolds, the study of knots and links in dimensions three
and above, and the four-dimensional topological surgery conjecture. An
n-dimensional manifold is a set of points which is locally modeled on an
n-dimensional linear space. For instance, a surface is a locally 2-dimensional
linear space. The principal problem of geometric topology is the classification
of manifolds. Two manifolds are the same if there is a continuous function with
a continuous inverse between the manifolds. One pathway to understanding
manifolds is through the fundamental group. This provides a transition to
algebra. The researchers emphasize the use of homological and geometric
techniques, and focus on both high dimensional and low dimensional manifolds.
Four-dimensional manifolds are of particular interest, as the results and
techniques in this dimension manifest the harmony of the algebraic techniques
which have found success in high dimensional manifold topology and the geometric
techniques which prevail in dimension three. Investigating the foundations of
manifold theory is important for geometry, algebra, physics, and differential
equations. ***
