
* 9504832
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Knot Theory and Low- Dimensional Topology: Applications of Quasipositive Knots and Surfaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1995
* Lee Rudolph,MA,Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9504832 Rudolph Recent research on manifolds of dimension 3 and 4 both draws
upon, and has striking consequences for, the theory of complex curves in complex
surfaces. Topologically, complex curves in the unit ball in complex 2-space are
simply represented as quasipositive surfaces, which are combinatorially defined
and readily manipulable. Earlier, Dr. Rudolph combined quasipositivity with
results from gauge theory to obtain estimates showing that many knots are much
more complicated (in certain specific senses) than classical knot invariants can
detect; he is now working to extend such estimates (using results from monopole
theory). Other work in progress includes development of skein theory for
Legendrian knots, an attack on a question of Harer about fibered links (are they
all stably Hopf-plumbed?), and (with Michel Boileau) a study of Stein-fillable
3-manifolds. Knots and links are superficially simple objects which turn up in
contexts as diverse as physics, theoretical meteorology, and biology.
Mathematically, a rich source of knots is the theory of equations in a small
number of variables (the simplest mathematical link, which looks like two rings
in a piece of chain, comes from the simple equation xy = 0). Knot theory--the
study of aspects of the geometry of knots and links which are insensitive to
continuous deformations--has always had a lot to give to, and take from, the
qualitative side of the theory of equations. Quasipositive knot theory takes
advantage of extra structure in certain equations to obtain stronger results
about their associated knots; potential applications range from quantum gravity
to unraveling the molecular structure of DNA. ***
