
* 9504912
* Mathematical Sciences: Outer Automorphisms and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1995,02/07/1997
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 83,000.00

9504912 Handel The project concerns the outer automorphism group of a free group
and pseudo-Anosov surface dynamics. One part is a continuation of joint work
with Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn concerning three problems. The first is a
characterization of subgroups of polynomial growth outer automorphisms. The
second is to extend their proof of the Tits Alternative by showing that all
virtually solvable subgroups of the outer automorphism group are virtually
abelian. The third is to show that the mapping torus of an outer automorphism is
coherent. The goal of the other part of the project is to use combinatorial
group theory methods, especially folding, to analyze a dynamically defined
partial order on conjugacy classes in the mapping class group of a punctured
disk. Two fields of mathematics interact in this project: dynamical systems and
combinatorial group theory, the latter, perhaps surprisingly, contributing a
powerful method for studying the former. In dynamical systems, the focus is on
the long-term patterns that occur in a changing, or evolving system, for example
a system of orbiting planets and their sun. Combinatorial group theory is the
study of algebraic objects called groups using topological and combinatorial
methods. One part of the project examines an important family of two-dimensional
dynamical systems known as pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms and uses a tool from
combinatorial group theory called "folding" to analyze the relationship between
various members of this family. Another part of the project relates to a group
whose elements are the algebraic analogs of the pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms.
While most research in this area is derived from geometry, in this project the
principal investigator will add dynamical systems techniques in order to
investigate this group in greater detail. ***
