
* 9505136
* Mathematical Sciences: Non-Positive Curvature, Triangulations and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1995,07/28/1995
* Pedro Ontaneda,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/1997
* USD 33,600.00

9505136 Ontaneda A basic problem in Geometry and Topology is to study the
relation between curvature (local information about a space) and topology
(global information about a space). The investigator studies a particular case
of curvature: spaces of non-positive curvature, in the riemannian case and in
the PL (piecewise linear) case. He also studies some problems concerning
riemannian and PL rigidity (in the non-positively curved case); the relation
between riemannian and PL non-positively curved geometry; and how the topology
could determine the curvature: which spaces admit a non-positively curved
geometry. A space with non-positively curved geometry is a space on which,
essentially, an object, as it moves away from an observer, seems to decrease in
size at a rate equal to or faster than the rate in the "real world" (euclidean
geometry). In general, geometry determines some properties about the (global)
shape of the space. For instance, if a space has a non-positively curved
geometry, after "unwrapping" the space we obtain another space that, unlike a
doughnut, can be shrunk within itself to a single point (Cartan-Hadamard
theorem). This research project is oriented towards studying such relations on
spaces with non-positive geometry: how the geometry (local data) determines the
global shape (topology) and also how topology could determine the geometry.
Although the relevance of this to the "real world" is not obvious if one
considers only the apparently Euclidean environs of the earth, questions of
cosmology -- the nature of the universe as a whole and not merely our small
corner of it -- are intimately related to these mathematical questions. ***
