
* 9619981
* RUI: Fixed Points in Continua
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/1997,09/05/1997
* Charles Hagopian,CA,University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 08/31/2000
* USD 29,800.00

This research project is based on a program that originated in 1912 with the
Brouwer fixed-point theorem. The central problem of the program is to determine
whether every plane continuum that does not separate the plane has the fixed-
point property . R. H. Bing called this the most interesting problem in plane
topology. Aside from providing a beautiful generalization to Brouwer's theorem,
a solution to this problem would represent the final step in a historical
research effort that has involved many of our brightest mathematicians; P.
Alexandroff, R. H. Bing, K. Borsuk, and K. Kuratowski are among the
international giants who have worked extensively on this famous problem. Through
the years a list of related problems has been developed, each of which has taken
on a significance of its own. Recently, the PI has solved two of these problems,
establishing the fixed-point property for every simply-connected plane continuum
and proving that every deformation of a tree-like continuum has a fixed point.
The techniques developed should lead to further advances in this program.
Topology is the study of properties that persist when geometric objects are
bent, folded, shrunk, stretched, turned, twisted, or in any other way
continuously transformed. For example, when points are marked on a rubber band
and it is stretched, the order in which the points appear does not change. Other
topological facts are more subtle. Among these are the fixed-point theorems,
results about points that remain in their original position after an object has
been transformed. Consider a cup of coffee that has been stirred (but not
whipped) so that the surface of the liquid remains on top. The Brouwer fixed-
point theorem tells us that when the liquid stops moving, some point on the
surface will be in the same place that it was before we started stirring. There
are a wide variety of interesting applications of this theorem in the
literature. It has been used to prove a well-known theorem on the existence of
roots of complex polynomials, the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, as well as the
existence of equilibrium points in an economy. Fixed points of deformations also
appear in a variety of scientific applications. For example, in electromagnetic-
wave theory, they are used to show that there are no isotropic antennas and
explain why most magnetic plasma containers are tori instead of spheres. This
project will deal with generalizations of this theorem.
