
* 9626801
* Mathematical Sciences: The 1996 Workshop on the Symbiosis of Topology and Group Theory; Septmeber 9-19, 1996; Mazama, Washington
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1996,07/29/1996
* Marion Latiolais,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 01/31/1997
* USD 5,968.00

9626801 Latiolais This award provides partial support for the fall 1996 Workshop
on the Symbiosis of Topology and Group Theory. The award is to Portland State
University, but faculty and graduate students from the University of Oregon and
Oregon State University are heavily involved as well. Additional participants,
including graduate students, postdocs, and faculty investigators, represent
other states and foreign countries. Previous workshops of the same nature
include a 1993 conference in Oregon and earlier workshops in Luttach, Italy. The
site of this year's workshop is Mazama, Washington, in the Northern Cascade
Mountains. The workshop has been planned for nine days beginning September 30,
and this duration allows the detailed program to evolve somewhat in response to
preferences expressed by particpants upon their arrival. Those invited have
expertise in quantum groups, low dimensional topology, combinatorial homotopy,
algebraic K-theory, and combinatorial group theory. The goal is to obtain
progress in areas relating to the application of quantum groups as topological
obstruction groups, new classification schemes for manifolds and 2-complexes,
new computational methods for the second homotopy group, further inroads on the
Kervaire-Laudenbach conjecture, application of the tools of automatic groups to
low dimensional homotopy theory, and issues relating to Whitehead's asphericity
conjecture. Past experience suggests that unexpected connections will be made
and that these will be at least as significant as any that could be foreseen.
***
