
* 9626233
* Mathematical Sciences: Hyperbolic Geometry and Rigidity in Three Dimensions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Yair Minsky,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/1999
* USD 68,100.00

9626233 Minsky Minsky will investigate a collection of problems centered on the
basic classification conjectures in the field of hyperbolic 3-manifolds and
Kleinian groups, and their connections to holomorphic dynamics. A prominent open
question in this field is Thurston's Ending Lamination Conjecture, which states
that a hyperbolic 3-manifold is uniquely determined by its topological type and
a list of invariants that describe the asymptotic geometry of its ends.
Consequences of this conjecture include a rigidity theorem for Kleinian group
actions on the sphere, directly analogous to outstanding rigidity conjectures in
holomorphic dynamics, and a topological description of parameter spaces of
isomorphic Kleinian groups. Minsky previously established these conjectures in
special cases, and the techniques developed show promise for extension to the
general case. A number of projects have grown out of this program, whose
successful completion should contribute to the solution of the conjecture, as
well as being of independent interest. These projects investigate topological
characterizations of Kleinian group actions on the sphere, some phenomena
associated with geometric limits of Kleinian groups (with R. Canary and J.
Brock), and the large scale geometry and combinatorics of the Teichmueller space
of a surface (with H. Masur). Minsky is also considering (with M. Lyubich) a new
construction that associates to a rational map a 3-dimensional hyperbolic object
analogous to the quotient 3-orbifold of a Kleinian group. This object renders
more explicit the powerful analogies between Kleinian groups and other
holomorphic dynamical systems. In the study of low-dimensional geometry,
topology and dynamics, one witnesses the depth of interconnection between fields
of mathematics. Henri Poincare, who studied both celestial dynamics and complex
analysis (among many other things), observed in the 19th century that the
conformal transformations of the Riema nn sphere -- some of the building blocks
of complex analysis -- extend to act on the three-dimensional ball bounded by
the sphere, and their action preserves a complete, homogeneous metric, the
metric of Hyperbolic or Non-Euclidean Space. This opened the door to a beautiful
theory relating topology, geometry, and complex dynamics, which was only
seriously explored in the latter part of this century. The rigidity problem
mentioned above is essentially the question of to what extent the topological,
or combinatorial, properties of a system determine its geometric properties.
This and other basic questions in the field can be phrased in geometric,
topological or dynamical terms, and are still linked to some of the motivating
questions about physical systems of which Poincare was aware a hundred years
ago. Issues such as classification of systems, mapping out regions of stability
and instability, deformation and bifurcation of families of systems, and
probabilistic properties such as ergodicity, all have significance in both pure
and applied mathematics. Topology and geometry have already provided deep
insights into such issues, and one hopes that further study of these
interactions will continue to bear fruit. ***
