
* 9626616
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Methods in Representation Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1996,07/03/1996
* R. Mark Goresky,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,600.00

9626616 Goresky During the last decade, many apparently insurmountable
difficulties in the Langlands program have been overcome. Recently, attention
has turned to the so-called "Fundamental lemma," which appears to be the single
most difficult unproven conjecture in the field, and which threatens to delay
indefinitely the completion of the program. Nevertheless, the lemma is so widely
believed to be true that papers are regularly published that depend on its
validity. In the simplest cases, the fundamental lemma is a conjectural equality
between an orbital integral on a p-adic algebraic group, and another orbital
integral on an endoscopic group. It is an amazing formula, which has been
verified (with great difficulty) in a number of special cases. Professors
Goresky, Kottwitz, and MacPherson have found a new approach to this problem that
adds a number of geometric ideas and methods; by a sequence of reductions,
applications of the Weil conjectures and the Lefschetz fixed point formula, each
case of the fundamental lemma may be restated as an equality between the
equivariant cohomology groups of two naturally occurring complex projective
algebraic varieties. These two varieties apparently have little or nothing to do
with each other except that they both admit an action by the same torus. Using
their newly developed formula for equivariant cohomology, Professors Goresky,
Kottwitz, and MacPherson have found it possible to compare both sides of the
fundamental lemma, which in many cases suffices for a proof. They are refining
this technique with the hopes that it may eventually lead to a complete proof.
To put the foregoing in perspective, during the 1970's, R. Langlands (of the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton) outlined a series of conjectures and
ideas of enormous scope and depth that, when fully explored and verified, will
result in a "grand unification" of several branches of mathematics, including
number theory, representation theory of Lie groups, and harmonic analysis.
During the last twenty years enormous progress has been made on this program,
and very difficult obstacles have been overcome. Nevertheless, it is commonly
believed that it may take another twenty years (or more) before Langlands' ideas
are fully explored. The "fundamental lemma" remains the single most outstanding
difficulty in the program. It has been proven in many special cases, and, as
mentioned above, it is so widely believed to be true that papers which depend on
it are regularly published in refereed journals. Professors Goresky, Kottwitz
and MacPherson have discovered new geometric techniques in the study of the
fundamental lemma that will lead to its proof in many new cases and may
eventually lead to a complete proof. Although these geometric techniques have
been developed primarily to carry out this step in Langlands' program, they have
already been applied to problems in other areas of mathematics. ***
