
* 9626699
* Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry of Groups and Real Trees
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1996,06/11/1996
* Mark Feighn,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 41,400.00

9626699 Feighn In the current project, the Principal Investigator will continue
his work, joint with M. Bestvina and M. Handel, on the structure of the outer
automorphism group of a free group. The methods used are a mixture of techniques
from E. Rips's theory of real trees and from the train track theory of Bestvina
and Handel. The Principal Investigator will also examine to what extent the JSJ
theorem of Rips and Z. Sela can be extended to splittings over other than cyclic
groups. Now is an exciting time to be a geometric group theorist. Much beautiful
mathematics is devoted to classification results. For example, the
classification of surfaces (spaces, such as the sphere, that are locally the
same as a plane) is classical. This classification is akin to Mendeleev's
periodic table of the elements -- each surface appears once and only once. In
recent years, due in large part to the geometric ideas of W. Thurston, there has
been great progress towards a classification theorem for 3-manifolds (spaces
that are locally like 3- dimensional space). Inspired by these manifold
successes, mathematicians have begun to look at groups from a geometric
viewpoint. (A group is a fundamental object found throughout mathematics and the
sciences. Roughly speaking, a group is the set of symmetries of some object.)
Mathematics has arrived at the point where the possibility of a classification
theorem for (geometric) groups can be envisioned. For example, a recent result
of E. Rips and Z. Sela describes how to break a group into more fundamental
pieces. In the current project, the Principal Investigator will continue his
research along these lines. More specifically, he will show how to break up
groups into fundamental pieces in ways other than that of Rips and Sela. Also,
he will continue his work with M. Bestvina and M. Handel undertaking a detailed
study of some of the groups that will play a key role in this classification.
***
