
* 9626578
* Mathematical Sciences: The Topology and Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1996,06/21/1996
* Richard Canary,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2000
* USD 63,000.00

9626578 Canary Professor Canary will explore a variety of conjectures concerning
hyperbolic 3-manifolds and the deformation theory of Kleinian groups. Several of
these conjectures are motivated by Marden's tameness conjecture, which predicts
that every hyperbolic 3-manifold with finitely generated fundamental group is
topologically tame, i.e., homeomorphic to the interior of a compact 3-manifold.
Professor Canary has previously established that topological tameness has strong
consequences for the geometry of a hyperbolic 3-manifold. He will also study the
relationship between the algebraic limit and the geometric limit of a sequence
of Kleinian groups. This study is inspired by Thurston's ending lamination
conjecture, which provides a conjectural classification of all hyperbolic
3-manifolds. A 3-manifold is a mathematical space such that about any point
there is a neighborhood which can be identified with a ball in 3-dimensional
space. One can imagine building 3-dimensional manifolds by gluing together
3-dimensional blocks. Of course, this gluing would have to be an abstract gluing
in general, not one which could be done in 3-dimensional space. For example,
consider the 3-manifold obtained by taking the unit cube and gluing the top to
the bottom, the front to the back, and the left side to the right side. A
Riemannian metric is a way of measuring distances and angles in a 3-manifold.
For instance, the world we live in is a 3-manifold with a Riemannian metric. In
the 1970's, Wiliam Thurston conjectured that every 3-manifold can be cut up, in
a canonical way, so that each piece has a Riemannian metric of one of 8
geometric types. He proved his conjecture for large classes of three-manifolds.
The 3-manifolds which admit seven of the eight geometric types of Riemannian
metrics are completely classified and well-understood. 3-manifolds that admit
the eighth type of metric are called hyperbolic and are currently a subject of
intense interest and act ivity in the fields of geometry and topology. Professor
Canary is investigating the relationship between the topology and the geometry
of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. ***
