
* 9703655
* Calculus of Homotopy Functors, Algebraic K-theory and Universal Constructions of Finite Degree
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1997,08/21/1997
* Randy McCarthy,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9703655 McCarthy Tom Goodwillie defined a Taylor tower for homotopy functors.
These are functors from spaces (or spectra) to spaces (or spectra) and they must
preserve homotopy equivalences. The tower is an inverse limit of functors with
the fibers between stages being equivariant homology theories. The tower does
not necessarily recover the original functor for all spaces or spectra but does
for suitably connected objects. One way in which the investigator will study
this tower is by studying another tower that agrees with the Taylor tower within
the radius of convergence for a given functor but whose defining characteristic
at the n-th level is the universal degree n construction as compared to the
universal n-excisive construction given by the Taylor tower. He will also
continue to study algebraic K-theory by use of linearizing functors of exact
categories to spectra. A functor F from exact categories to spaces or spectra is
said to satisfy ``additivity'' if F applied to the exact category of short exact
sequences of a category is naturally equivalent to the two-fold product of F
applied to the category given by the exact functors that take kernel and
cokernel of a short exact sequence. There is a universal construction, called
``linearizing,'' which takes an arbitrary functor from exact categories to
spectra and produces a new functor of exact categories that satisfies
additivity. This is completely analogous to taking the ``derivative'' in the
sense of Goodwillie when reinterpreted with these new towers. Algebraic K-theory
itself is the linearization of a free functor from exact categories to spectra.
Topological Hochschild homology and topological cyclic homology are also
examples of linearizing a functor, and the trace maps that connect these
theories may be studied from this point of view. The investigator will be
examining different constructions for the study of algebraic K-theory obtained
by linearizing various types of functors. The hope is to obtain new theories
that one can use to study algebraic K-theory effectively. An important tool for
studying functions from the complex numbers to itself is the Taylor series
expansion of the function about a point. For a functor -- a kind of generalized
function -- from spaces to spaces, Tom Goodwillie has similarly defined a Taylor
series expansion of the functor about a space. In standard analysis one must
assume a function has all its derivatives about a point to ensure that the
Taylor tower exists, and then one can be sure that this approximation to the
original function is accurate only within a radius of convergence about the
point. Similarly, for functors of spaces, one must make assumptions about the
functor to ensure its Taylor tower exists, and even when these are satisfied,
one obtains accurate estimates of the original functor only for spaces
sufficiently close to the space of expansion. The investigator will be examining
a modification of Goodwillie's original definition for the Taylor tower of
functors from spaces to spaces that tends to agree with his definition for
spaces within the radius of convergence of a point but differs in general. Two
advantages of this new tower are that it is easier to define and that it can be
applied to an even greater variety of interesting situations. One area to be
explored with this new technology is algebraic K-theory, which from this point
of view is simply the derivative of a particularly easy functor. ***
