
* 9703756
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Low-Dimensional Topology in Group Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,05/21/1999
* Zlil Sela,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 105,000.00

9703756 Sela Zlil Sela intends to complete his sequence of papers on the
isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups and the sequence of papers on
automorphisms of free groups. He further plans to complete writing his work on
the structure of sets of solutions to systems of equations in a free group, and
on families of such systems depending on a set of defining parameters. This work
is based on borrowing notions and ideas from algebraic geometry and low
dimensional topology and implementing them in group theory. Sela and E. Rips
(Hebrew University) are engaged in a long-standing investigation of fundamental
algebraic structures known as ``groups,'' structures which abstract and capture
the essence of symmetry. One of three key problem of the field is the
isomorphism problem, the problem of telling when two groups, presented
differently, are really the same. It is known that there can be no general
recipe for solving this problem, one that will work for a completely arbitrary
pair of groups. For this reason, recipes have been sought that work within large
classes of interesting groups, and Sela is closing in on such a recipe for the
class of (Gromov) hyperbolic groups, groups whose interest derives from being
attached to geometric objects known as manifolds, both arbitrary manifolds of
dimension three and negatively curved ones of any dimension. The ideas and
techniques evolved in this work have led to other questions and to unexpected
answers, all bearing on the deep and intimate connection between the algebra of
groups and the geometry of manifolds. During the last year, Sela has developed a
geometric approach to sets of solutions of equations in a so-called free group.
The approach borrows heavily from algebraic geometry. More recently he has
pushed this geometric approach further in order to study indexed families of
sets of solutions of equations in groups. Sela and Rips now expect that the
structure theory they have developed will find many applications in group theory
and in mathematical logic. In particular, they believe that the tools they have
in hand will provide positive answers to several questions posed by the logician
Alfred Tarski around 1950. Since their techniques borrow heavily from low
dimensional topology, they hope that their structure theory will also find
applications to basic questions in low-d topology. ***
