
* 9704811
* Essential Laminations in 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,08/05/1997
* Mark Brittenham,NY,Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 07/31/2000
* USD 66,123.00

9704811 Brittenham Essential laminations are one of a large array of objects
that are used to probe the structure of 3-manifolds. They were developed as a
result of an attempt to generalize simultaneously two such classical objects;
the incompressible surface and the taut foliation. This project involves
studying the structure of essential laminations and how they sit inside of a
3-manifold, to extract information about the `laminar' 3-manifold. The main
goals that the investigator will pursue are to show that every irreducible
3-manifold homotopy-equivalent to a laminar manifold is homeomorphic to it, and
to show that laminar manifolds are finitely covered by Haken manifolds. He will
also study taut foliations from the laminar point of view, using this new point
of view to study these older objects. The goal is to find examples of manifolds
that admit essential laminations but which do not contain either of the two
`parent' objects. An associated goal is to find a hyperbolic 3-manifold which
does not admit an essential lamination. A 3-dimensional manifold is an object
which looks like our ordinary 3-dimensional space, if you don't look too far
away from where you are standing. Such objects can behave very differently over
large distances, though; walking in a straight line, for example, can bring you
right back to where you started from (much like walking on the surface of the
spherical Earth). 3-manifold topology attempts to describe this global
structure. In doing so, ideas are drawn from, and applied to, many other
branches of science; they have been applied to chemistry, where they have helped
to unlock some of the secrets of DNA recombination, and they have been both
drawn from and applied to physics, in work aimed at understanding the basic
building blocks of the universe. One technique that has proved fruitful in
studying 3-manifolds is to think of the 3-manifold as a collection of surfaces
(called a foliation) stacked together (like the pages of a book); then one can
use what is known about surfaces to explore the structure of the 3-manifold. The
investigator plans to continue work aimed at developing this approach. ***
