
* 9704903
* Mathematical Sciences: The Topological Structure of Planar Continua
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1997,06/18/1997
* Lex Oversteegen,AL,University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2000
* USD 81,296.00

This research project is centered around the class of weakly chainable plane
continua (plane continua which are the continuous image of the pseudo arc).
Given that the pseudo arc is very non-locally-connected, this class includes
many pathological continua as well as all locally connected continua. The
proposer has shown that it includes all non-separating homogeneous continua,
Lelek has shown that it includes all chainable continua and Minc has shown that
all non separating continua in this class have the fixed point property. Kato
has shown that no chainable continuum admits an expansive homeomorphism. A
natural question which arises is whether weakly chainable plane continua admit
an expansive homeomorphism. We will establish connections between this problem
and the structure of invariant continua of branched covering maps of the plane,
including the structure of the boundary of invariant simply connected domains.
We will make use of prime end techniques as well as results from continuum
theory and dynamical systems. The problems in this proposal are related to the
classification of homogeneous plane continua, the fixed point property of non-
separating plane continua, and the topological structure of non-locally-
connected Julia sets of complex polynomials. Planar continua arise in many
applications, most notably as invariant sets in dynamical systems. Dynamical
systems is an area of mathematics which studies properties of mathematical
models of systems which change over time. Invariant continua often determine the
long term behavior of a dynamical system and are particularly of interest in
case these systems exhibit chaotic behavior. The study of such continua has a
long history dating back to the late 1800's. Despite significant advances during
the last 80 years, several long-standing problems remain unresolved. In this
proposal we will establish connections between some of these old problems and
new ones which arise from other areas of mathematics. We will indicate possible
solutions to th ese problems using a mixture of old ideas and new tools and
techniques from adjacent mathematical fields. We will focus on the topological
aspects of these problems although solutions may well have an impact on work in
adjacent fields.
