
* 9704125
* Topology, Geometry and Algebraic Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1997,09/29/2000
* Gregory Kuperberg,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2001
* USD 65,025.00

This project will involve the study of combinatorial methods in geometric
topology and geometric methods in enumerative combinatorics and algebra. Most of
this work will be in the context of quantum groups, quantum topological
invariants, and finite-type invariants of 3-manifolds. The conjecture that the
Jones polynomial distinguishes the unknot is one example of a problem that
motivates this work. Another example is the conjecture that no Vassiliev
invariant distinguishes a knot from its reverse. This research involves the
investigation of connections between topology, enumeration, and quantum
mechanics. Topology is the study of how objects such as knots and surfaces are
connected to themselves; although it was first established firmly as a field of
mathematics a century ago, it has seen major advances in the past 30 years due
to contributions from many areas of mathematics and physics. Enumeration is the
art of counting things, such as how many way that there are to tile a square
tray with dominos; it is related to the thermal properties of materials and
other questions in physics. Quantum mechanics is a famous subject, but it is
less well known that it has had an enormous influence in mathematics; it has
partly redefined our conception of geometry and mathematical spaces. These three
areas saw a confluence in the 1980's, culminating in the Fields medals awarded
to Vaughan Jones, Vladimir Drinfeld, and Edward Witten. The hope is to extend
the work of these and other mathematicians and physicists.
