
* 9704761
* New Approaches to Global Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1997,07/31/1997
* Gregory Arone,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 12/31/1999
* USD 35,221.00

9704761 Arone The investigator's general area of specialization is algebraic
topology. His recent work has been concerned with achieving a better
understanding of the global structure of homotopy theory. This work combines two
hitherto disjoint approaches, the "chromatic approach," and the "calculus of
functors" approach. In joint work with M. Mahowald, the investigator examined
the Goodwillie derivatives of unstable homotopy theory and used them to prove a
new result about unstable homotopy of spheres. In other work, the investigator
studied the Taylor polynomials (as opposed to derivatives) of unstable homotopy
theory and provided an explicit space-level description of these. One of the key
ingredients of the investigator's contribution to his joint work with Mahowald
was a combinatorial analysis of the poset of partitions of a finite set, which
turned out to have consequences for the chromatic filtration of spheres. Further
investigation of the combinatorics involved has led the investigator to discover
seemingly new and mysterious recurrence patterns. He believes that some of the
deep periodic phenomena in homotopy theory can be studied via this combinatorial
periodicity. In very recent work, the investigator utilized this combinatorial
periodicity to construct certain "self maps" on the derivatives of unstable
homotopy theory, which imply, among other things, the existence of finite
complexes whose cohomology realizes certain finite subalgebras of the Steenrod
algebra. The investigator believes that these finite complexes will be useful
for localization and periodicity. In the investigator's area of Algebraic
Topology, he is interested in how to analyze the space of continuous functions
between two topological spaces. It turns out that an analogue of the theory of
Taylor series can be developed, and one can study the space of continuous maps
via its "polynomial approximations" (an idea due to T. Goodwillie). The
investigato r combined this theory with more classical methods in topology, and
he used it (in joint work with M. Mahowald) to prove a new result on the global
structure of an important algebraic tool of the trade, the so-called unstable
homotopy of spheres. He now intends to use the aformentioned polynomial
approximations to construct certain spaces with interesting (cohomological)
properties, spaces whose mere existence should lead to further insights in
topology. His work has a strong combinatorial flavor (specifically, one of the
main gadgets in his work is the lattice of partitions of a finite set), and he
hopes that some of his results will be of interest to combinatorialists. ***
