
* 9704410
* Homotopy Theory, Loop Spaces, and Group Cohomology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,04/12/1999
* Frederick Cohen,NY,University of Rochester
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 131,100.00

9704410 Cohen This project explores connections between topology, group theory,
and certain constructions inspired by the classical Yang-Baxter relations in
physics. Three main areas arise as follows: (1) One could consider ``braidings''
of a finite number of higher dimensional spheres (or suspensions) in a fixed
manifold as an analogue of the classical Artin braid group. The main examples
here arise as the universal Lie algebra that satisfies the Yang-Baxter relations
of classical physics, which concerns collisions of particles. The homology of
the attached function spaces is precisely the universal enveloping algebras of
these ``universal Yang-Baxter Lie algebras.'' The spaces under consideration are
loop spaces of classical configuration spaces as well as ``orbit configuration
spaces'' as studied by M. Xicotencatl. The loop space homology of many of these
spaces is shown to be the universal enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra that is
defined in terms of the Yang- Baxter or infinitesimal braid relations. The
underlying manifold can be a homogeneous space or a manifold with a Euclidean
factor. In the case of ``orbit configuration spaces,'' these same relations also
appear in knot invariants as studied by L. Kauffman. (2) The intimate link
between the structure of certain choices of function spaces in homotopy theory
and moduli spaces of curves within classical algebraic geometry is studied. The
connecting tissue is the link between Dehn twists and Whitehead products. These
connections are used to give homological calculations. Here, the space of maps
from a fixed surface to a sphere is considered. These spaces stably split, while
the stable summands are Thom complexes of bundles with base given by certain
moduli spaces of curves. In the case of finite genus with marked points,
homological calculations are shown to be an analogue of cyclic homology, while
some specific calculations are carried out. The plus construction for the
classifying space of th e stable mapping class group is shown to split. One
factor gives the stable homotopy groups of spheres. (3) Classical methods in
combinatorial group theory are used to attack problems on the growth of the
torsion in the homotopy groups of certain spaces. Simplicial methods are used as
well as techniques from classical methods of W. Magnus on embedding groups as
units in certain associative algebras. Here, the homotopy groups of double
suspensions all of whose homology is torsion are studied. The main tool is an
inverse limit of finite p-groups. This tower is an algebraic analog of the
Goodwillie tower of the identity; the groups at each stage are central
extensions with centers at each stage given by the mod-p reductions of modules
Lie(n), a module of the symmetric group on n letters of rank (n-1)! that has
occurred ubiquitously in homotopy theory. Ordinary braidings of strings are at
the foundation of these problems. One could also imagine braiding other
geometric objects such as planes, spheres, or torii. These braidings force
symmetries that have occurred previously in physics from considering collisions
of particles and are known as the Yang-Baxter relations. The first part of this
project is a study of these symmetries for higher dimensional geometric objects.
Next consider the surface of a doughnut with many holes removed. In a second
direction, the ``smooth deformations'' of this surface are considered. The main
thrust here is to analyze the ``holes'' in these spaces of ``smooth
deformations'' as they appear in many contexts in physics, string theory,
geometry, algebraic topology, and holomorphic maps. A natural continuation is to
understand how spheres of large dimension move around in space provided only
continuous deformations are permitted. This problem has been the key to others
and is one of the main problems in homotopy theory on which there has been
interesting progress. These spheres move in much the same way that the hour hand
moves around a clock. The actual numbers are quite complicated, and part of this
project is to understand the uniform structure here. ***
