
* 9704043
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies of Negatively Curved Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1997,07/25/1997
* William Floyd,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2000
* USD 43,200.00

9704043 Floyd This project is an attempt to prove the conjecture that a
negatively curved group whose visual sphere at infinity is the 2-sphere acts
cocompactly, properly discontinuously, and isometrically on real hyperbolic
3-space. The proof of this conjecture would be an important step in proving
Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture. A result of Cannon-Swenson reduced the
conjecture to proving that a particular sequence of shinglings of the visual
sphere at infinity is conformal. In this setting, a result of Cannon-Floyd-Parry
reduced the two axioms of conformality to a single one that is weaker than
either of them. This led to reducing the problem further to proving that a
finite collection of annuli have combinatorial moduli bounded uniformly from 0
with respect to this sequence of shinglings. A promising approach to studying
these shinglings is that of expansion complexes and expansion maps. Expansion
complexes correspond to horospheres in the hyperbolic case, and the expansion
map corresponds to shrinking to a smaller horosphere. If the sequence of
shinglings is not conformal, expansion complexes based at different points
should show the infinitesimal distortions. The identification of the expansion
complex with a subset of the sphere at infinity enables one to relate expansion
complexes based at different points, and so the infinitesimal distortions may
provide a substitute for a "line field." Cubulated 3-manifolds are a good
starting point for checking this. A central question in low-dimensional geometry
and topology is the extent to which geometry dominates topology in dimension
three. Thurston conjectured that 3-manifolds (topological spaces that locally
look like Euclidean 3-space) can be naturally decomposed into pieces that can be
equipped with geometric structures. If this Geometrization Conjecture were true,
it would greatly aid the study of these spaces, since the rigidity of the
geometry enables one to use much more powerful too ls. This project is part of a
multi-pronged approach to settling this conjecture in the dominant case of
negatively curved spaces. Because of previous work of the principal investigator
and coauthors, the main object of study here is tiling patterns on the plane and
on the 2-sphere. Given a tiling pattern with finitely many model tiles and a
finite rule for subdividing model tiles, one can recursively subdivide the
tiling pattern. The problem is to determine when there are geometric models for
the tiles so that under subdivision the shapes of the subtiles stay "almost
round" (even though they may have fractal boundaries). These tiling problems can
be studied using discrete conformal geometry, and, in particular, can be studied
experimentally using circle packings. The interplay between the circle packing
ideas and the subdivision ideas has been very fruitful and suggests that the
methods being developed here could provide useful algorithmic techniques for
studying geometrical tiling problems. ***
