
* 9704819
* Differentiable Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,06/24/1999
* Wu-chung Hsiang,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 145,083.00

9704819 Hsiang One of the most astounding results of Donaldson is as follows.
There are h-cobordisms (W; M, N) of simply-connected smooth 4-manifolds M and N
such that M and N are not diffeomorphic. They are closed 4-manifolds with the
same non-trivial second homology over the reals, and the non-triviality of the
h-cobordism is detected by gauge invariants. It was observed by Hsiang et al.
Inv. Math. 123 (1996) 343-348 that the cobordism W may be decomposed into two
cobordisms, the first being a trivial one and the second being a non-trivial
relative h-cobordism of contractible 4-manifolds bounded by the same
3-dimensional homology sphere. This means that all the non-triviality of W is
concentrated inside a contractible piece. Because the gauge invariants heavily
depend on the non-triviality of the quadratic form of the second homology of M,
two questions need to be answered. (A) How can one detect the non-triviality of
a cobordism (W; M, N) of contractible 4-manifolds M, N (relative to the
boundaries)? In fact, there should be combinatorial invariants related to the
classical knot invariants to detect this non-triviality, and, in particular, one
should be able to describe some explicit examples constructed from the explicit
non-trivial h-cobordisms of Akbulut. (B) How do any such combinatorial
invariants relate to gauge theory. Hsiang is seeking solutions to these two
problems. He has already found that (B) is related to Property P for
3-manifolds. Geometric topology treats spaces known as manifolds that come in a
vast array of configurations and all different dimensions. A manifold of
dimension n is referred to briefly as an n-manifold, and what the dimension
means is that an ant living on the manifold would think himself in n-dimensional
Euclidean space if he took only short excursions. However, he could learn
otherwise on returning from a lengthy journey and finding himself disoriented or
constrained in some way. Think of an ant on life s upport that requires trailing
an umbilicus behind him attached at the other end to a base station. Already in
the 2-dimensional case, he will discover if he travels widely enough that there
are differences between living on the surface of a sphere and living on the
surface of a doughnut, even if the sphere (or doughnut) is very large and
appears to his myopic gaze to be everywhere a flat Euclidean plane. The
2-dimensional possibilities have been understood since the 19th century, but the
possibilities become increasingly various and impossible to classify fully as
the dimension increases. What is always surprising to the unitiate is to learn
that in spite of this dimensional complication, some of the most intriguing
problems, problems that have been solved for the higher dimensions, remain
unsolved for dimensions 3 or 4 or both, a fact of importance to beings who live
mostly in these dimensions and wish, for example, to understand the physics of
their cosmos. The present project takes note of the exciting new methods that
have been introduced into low-dimensional topology in recent years, first by
Donaldson, and more recently by Seiberg and Witten, the so-called gauge
theoretic methods. Then it asks some incisive questions about how these gauge
invariants relate to the vast arsenal of techniques with which algebraic
topologists had previously been equipped. ***
