
* 9704794
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Cycles, Group Schemes, K-Theory and Connections between Stable Homotopy and Group Cohomology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,02/24/1999
* Eric Friedlander,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2001
* USD 185,400.00

9704794 Friedlander Eric M. Friedlander will study algebraic cycles from two
points of view: the first is more topological and differential-geometric in
nature, whereas the second is more algebraic and is allied with the study of
motivic cohomology. Particular attention will be given to relationships with
algebraic K-theory, long-standing problems in algebraic geometry, and the
challenge of producing concrete examples. Moreover, the study of representations
of various Hopf algebras associated to algebraic groups will continue. Of
special interest are the representations of infinitesimal group schemes. Stewart
B. Priddy will study connections between stable homotopy theory and the
cohomology and representation theory of groups. The goal is to develop a global
point of view by working at the interface of these fields, using insights from
the stable homotopy theory of classifying spaces. One avenue of research is the
study of the stable type of classifying spaces of products of groups. Another is
the study of the representation theory conjectures of Alperin and Broue', which
may be amenable to equivariant topological methods. One of the principal
techniques is the use of stable decompositions of classifying spaces to suggest
concepts in cohomology of groups, as was the case with Swan groups. Aspects of
Friedlander's research relate to fundamental problems in mathematics whose
history can be traced back to the previous century. Many central problems of
algebraic geometry, especially those involving algebraic cycles, have challenged
generations of mathematicians. New techniques from topology and formal algebraic
geometry hold promise of at least partial solutions. In a different mathematical
arena, the classical representation theory of algebraic groups is reflected by
the representations of related algebraic structures. The interplay between the
classical theory and the latest techniques involving categorical constructions
presents opportunities for i mportant developments. In contrast with Priddy's
emphasis, the field of algebraic topology has long sought, with much success, to
apply algebraic methods to the solution of geometric or topological problems. By
reformulating topological problems in algebraic terms, one is often able to
answer a more tractable question. In general, however, there are many
connections between these areas, which enables one to reverse this procedure and
bring topological methods to bear in algebra. Priddy's project studies the
interaction between topology and group theory, with the aim of uncovering
fundamental algebraic structures. Powerful symbolic manipulation techniques
using high speed computers comprise part of the project. ***
