
* 9704849
* Problems in Set-Theoretic Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/1997,04/24/1997
* Gary Gruenhage,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 05/31/2000
* USD 63,214.00

The principal investigator will continue his research on several open problems
in set-theoretic topology. First, he will determine if some modifications of his
recent solution (with P. Koszmider) of the well-known Arhangel'skii-Tall problem
can be applied to other long-standing open problems concerning normality and
paracompactness in locally nice spaces. These problems include M.E. Rudin's
question of whether or not every normal manifold must be collectionwise-
Hausdorff, and S. Watson's question about the existence in ZFC of a perfectly
normal locally compact non-paracompact space. Second, two problems concerning
closed mappings will be investigated, the first being the well-known open
question about the preservation of the metalindelof property under closed or
perfect maps, and the other a question about the existence of irreducible
restrictions of closed mappings. Finally, a set of other problems related to
recent work of the principal investigator includes the question of the
characterization of the Baire property in function spaces with the compact-open
topology, of the existence of a completely regular connectification of
metrizable spaces with no compact open sets, and problems about the behavior of
the Lindelof property in product spaces. Set-theory and general topology are
fundamental mathematical disciplines which have common turn-of-the-century
roots. Set-theory provides a framework upon which all of mathematics can be
based. Objects of study in topology include familiar spaces such as the plane
and ordinary three-dimensional Euclidean space, and their subsets, as well as
much more abstract spaces. The pioneering set-theoretical work of K. Goedel in
the late 30's and P. Cohen in the 60's soon led to the realization that some
long-standing topological questions could not be solved assuming only the
standard axioms of set-theory. The principal investigator's research lies
substantially within the scope of this interesting interaction between the two
fields, focusing especia lly on problems selected for their topological
significance, but where knowledge of set-theory is likely to be useful in their
solution. The problems involve basic topological properties and constructions-
normality, covering properties, product spaces, function spaces, etc.-which
impact a large portion of the field of general topology, and have applications
in other areas of mathematics as well. The new techniques involved in the
solution of these problems are likely to be applicable to a wide variety of
other problems.
