
* 9704927
* Mathematical Sciences: Smooth 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1997,02/19/1999
* Ronald Fintushel,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 110,100.00

9704927 Fintushel This project will explore the relationship between the
classification of smooth simply connected 4-manifolds and invariants of knot
theory, by constructing families of 4-manifolds that are distinguished by knot
theoretic invariants. Already the investigator, jointly with R. Stern, has
accomplished this for the Alexander polynomial. Any symmetric Laurent polynomial
P(t) with absolute value of P(1)=1 occurs as the Alexander polynomial of some
knot in the 3-sphere. For example, R. Stern and the principal investigator have
constructed a family of distinct 4-manifolds, each homeomorphic to the
K3-surface, constructed from knots, and distinguished by the fact that their
Seiberg-Witten invariants are the Alexander polynomials of the knots. There are
other knot invariants that should correspond to other constructions. A related
issue is the geography problem for simply connected irreducible 4-manifolds.
Each such manifold can be assigned a lattice point in the plane corresponding to
its characteristic numbers. The problem is to study which points are realized.
There has been notable progress, but much work still remains, and the principal
investigator plans to seek new methods for constructing irreducible simply
connected 4-manifolds of positive signature. He and R. Stern also conjecture a
replacement for the Noether inequality for certain symplectic 4-manifolds that
generalize the notion of `general type'. The investigator has a promising
technique for its proof, which he plans to pursue. The theory of smooth
4-manifolds gains its importance both from its central location between low and
high-dimensional topology, and from its close interaction with high energy
physics. The major problem in this field is the classification of smooth simply
connected 4-manifolds. The interaction between topology and physics has
stimulated the construction of invariants - at first Donaldson's invariant, and
then the invariant of Seiberg and Witten - tha t are useful in distinguishing
the (diffeomorphism) types of 4-manifolds. These have led to major advances in
the classification problem. Specifically, researchers who have constructed
possibly new families of 4-manifolds can use these invariants to confirm that
their phenomena are indeed `new'. Recent years have given rise to simply
connected (irreducible) smooth 4-manifolds that admit no complex structure (even
up to homotopy), then to those that admit no symplectic structure. These
examples have confused the issue of classification to the point that we are left
without even a conjectural classification, but they have also invigorated the
theory and reinforced its richness. ***
