
* 9727594
* Conference at MSRI in Low Dimensional-Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 09/01/1998,09/03/1998
* Andrew Casson,CA,Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 08/31/1999
* USD 25,000.00

9727594 Casson This award will provide partial reimbursement for travel and
subsistence of speakers and participants in a conference on low-dimensional
topology that took place at the Mathematical Sciences Research Center, Berkeley,
California, May 22-26, 1998. The purpose of the conference was to bring together
researchers working in all strands of low-dimensional topology and to enable
them to gain an overall perspective on developments in the field. Recent years
have seen exciting new developments in the study of 3- and 4-dimensional
manifolds and knot theory. Bringing researchers in these fields together
encouraged a cross-fertilization of ideas and techniques, exposed graduate
students to these ideas, and encouraged new collaborations. The conference took
place one year after the end of a closely related year-long program at M.S.R.I.
Thus it was natural to review how progress had been consolidated in this area
over the ensuing year, and an added benefit of the conference was to expose this
progress to the wider mathematical community. Approximately 150 mathematicians
attended the conference, more than 50 of them graduate students. Some talks were
tailored specifically for these students. Topology addresses those geometric
properties that depend only on continuity, i.e., on the notion of one point
being close to another, but disregards the stock in trade of high school
geometry, measurement of quantities such as distance, angle, area, volume, and
so forth. Topology of the plane is often referred to in popular scientific
literature as rubber sheet geometry, and this captures the essential spirit of
the discipline without giving so much as a hint of the techniques topologists
might use in their science. They confront some very basic but elusive
properties, those that remain after rigidity has been exorcised, and the past
century has seen the gradual assembly of a considerable arsenal of weapons for
dealing with these properties. Low-dimensional topology, mainly the topology of
3- and 4-dimensional geometric objects, presents special problems of its own,
for while we have the intuition that we should be able to apprehend these object
more readily, living as we do in 3-dimensional space and 4-dimensional space-
time, in fact much of the algebraic machinery that has been developed for
topology fails in these lower dimensions. Recent years have seen some remarkable
advances on this front too, and this was the central theme of the conference at
M.S.R.I. in May. It is also noteworthy that low-dimensional topology has become
sufficiently highly developed to be useful, for example, in applications of knot
theory to polymer chemistry and to the study of DNA. As this field continues to
progress, the immediacy of the objects with which it deals is likely to lead its
further technical advances to find equally natural applications in the real
world. ***


