
* 9802616
* Cobordism of Configuration Spaces and Its Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,06/06/2000
* Jack Morava,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 141,000.00

9802616 Morava In previous work, the author showed that Witten's tau-function
for topological gravity in two dimensions has a homotopy-theoretic
interpretation as a kind of topological field theory taking values in a category
of modules over a ring-spectrum. This ring-spectrum is a large-genus completion
of the moduli space of stable algebraic curves; it is constructed by homotopy-
theoretic methods from spaces of configurations of smooth points on such curves.
Its cohomology has many features reminiscent of a vertex operator algebra, which
is in turn connected to the theory of symmetric functions. The methods of
cobordism theory have not been systematically applied to the study of
configuration spaces, but questions in a variety of areas suggest that this
merits investigation. It is particularly important to extend the results
mentioned above to topological gravity coupled to a sigma-model, to encompass
quantum cohomology along the lines suggested by T. Eguchi and his school. The
interest of physicists in two-dimensional gravity has shed more light on the
topology of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces than all previous research in
this very classical subject combined, but their work answers questions that are
not, at first sight, what a mathematician might want to ask, and it has been
difficult to understand these new results in terms of the traditional
mathematical approach to this subject. It is becoming increasingly clear that
configuration spaces and cobordism techniques are at the geometric heart of the
physicists' constructions, and that their intersection lies in a rich part of
algebraic topology that has till now escaped systematic study. In physics, it is
always taken to be an encouraging sign when `experimental' applications suggest
new `theoretical' questions for investigation; this is what seems to be
happening here in mathematics. ***
