
* 9802493
* New Problems in Homotopy, K-Theory, and Representation Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,03/16/2001
* Nicholas Kuhn,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 93,000.00

9802493 Kuhn Professor Kuhn has a long record of developing both homotopy-
theoretic and representation-theoretic methods to solve problems in both areas.
More recently, some of these methods have led him also in algebraic K-theoretic
directions, and his research and techniques are being used extensively by
others. The largest part of this project is directed towards connecting classic
loopspace theory with the more recent developments of `S-module' and `Goodwillie
calculus' technology, with the focus of these efforts aimed towards establishing
new conjectures concerning well known and much studied topological objects:
Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, Hopf invariants, and combinatorial function space
models. A second part of the work is part of the rapid development being made
now in algebraic K-theory and generic representation theory over finite fields
by Professor Kuhn, K-theorists Eric Friedlander and Andrei Suslin, and their
collaborators. Finally, Professor Kuhn and his students are continuing work on
topological realization problems, using both new homotopy theoretic and
algebraic techniques, following the direction of earlier work by Professor Kuhn
and Lionel Schwartz of Paris. Homotopy theory, K-theory, and representation
theory are mathematical subjects in which one is trying to discover, and
ultimately classify, fundamental ``building blocks'' of various sorts of
mathematical structure. (This is quite analogous to a chemist's studying simple
molecular configurations, and how these can be assembled in more complex ways.)
Homotopy is concerned with deformations of geometric objects such as higher
dimensional surfaces. Representation theory is concerned with the algebraic
symmetries of more rigid and discrete objects such as configurations of lines
and planes. Finally K-theory is a hybrid of the two. Professor Kuhn is studying
intriguing new connections relating these subjects, using a variety of state-of-
the-art algebraic and homotopy theoretic tools, many developed by himself. ***
