
* 9803122
* Dehn Surgery on Links
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,05/09/2002
* John Luecke,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 109,635.00

9803122 Luecke This project aims to understand the topology of the exterior of a
hyperbolic knot that admits a non-hyperbolic Dehn surgery. More specifically,
what are the hyperbolic knots in the 3-sphere that admit Dehn surgeries that are
small Seifert fibered spaces or contain essential 2-spheres or 2-tori? The main
approach to this problem is to understand when a surface of small genus, either
an essential surface or a Heegaard surface, can appear in a Dehn surgery on a
hyperbolic knot. The residue of a surface in the Dehn surgery is seen as a
punctured surface in the knot exterior. It is put forth that by looking at the
intersections of such a punctured surface with an appropriate planar surface in
the knot exterior, one will obtain a good picture of the knot. Such an approach
has been successful in the past at analyzing similar situations. The structures
of 3-dimensional spaces and the classification of knots are beautiful and deep
subjects, but they are also important subjects in extending our knowledge in
other branches of the sciences. For example, some physicists now are trying to
tie astronomical observations to structures of 3-dimensional spaces in order to
determine the shape of the 3-dimensional universe. Microbiologists are beginning
to use the concepts of knot theory to describe and understand the knotting of
DNA molecules. Chemists are doing the same to understand the knotting and
linking of other molecules. The Dehn surgery construction is an operation on a
3-dimensional space that produces a new 3-dimensional space. This is done by
changing the space around a knotted circle in the space. This project studies
how the space changes according to the type of knot along which the change was
made. The relationship between the resulting space and the knot is a complex
one, and its understanding is a natural goal for 3-dimensional topology and knot
theory. A good knowledge of this relationship is also a useful tool for
exploring knots and 3-dimensional spaces. Since its introduction at the turn of
the century, the Dehn surgery construction has been a standard way of
constructing examples of phenomena in 3- and 4-dimensional spaces. It also turns
out that many basic questions about knots can be formulated as questions about
the Dehn surgery construction. ***
