
* 9803633
* Group Proposal in Topology
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,08/29/2001
* J. Peter May,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 702,800.00

9803633 May This group project in topology deals with research in a wide range
of topics in topology and related areas of algebra, algebraic K-theory, and
geometry. May studies various areas centering on global structures in stable
homotopy theory and related fields. He and his collaborators have opened up
stable homotopy theory to serious point-set level algebraic study with their
recent new approach to highly structured ring and module theory. Rings, modules,
and algebras can now be defined as objects with well-behaved products in a
symmetric monoidal category of spectra, allowing many constructions and
applications that were not possible previously. He and Greenlees have opened up
new interactions between equivariant and non-equivariant stable homotopy theory
with their analysis of Tate cohomology and their proof of a completion theorem
for module spectra over MU. Rothenberg studies analytic and combinatorial
torsion invariants in geometric topology. He and his collaborators have explored
generalizations of the classical invariants to equivariant and non-compact
situations and have constructed torsion invariants for fiber bundles with
compact fibers, these being cohomology classes rather than just numerical
invariants. Weinberger's work centers on geometry and analysis on compact spaces
with singularities and on noncompact manifolds. His surgery theory on stratified
spaces can be applied directly to various problems and has led to a changed
perspective on group actions, both in terms of answering old questions and in
formulating new ones. The perspective is completely integrated with the theory
of homology manifolds at the level of conjecture, and somewhat at the level of
theorem. Furthermore, detailed analysis of what would be involved in proving
such conjectures seems to have deep connections with logic, complexity theory,
and non-commutative geometry. A major emphasis of the project is graduate
education. With three junior faculty and fifteen current graduate students in
topology at Chicago, the topology program supported by this grant is one of the
world's largest. In the three years 1996-98, it has graduated ten new PhD's,
with 1998-99 jobs at MIT (2), Michigan (2), Illinois (2), Berkeley, CUNY,
Rutgers, and Utah. Students supported on the grant work in a wide variety of
areas of algebraic and geometric topology, and some of them work on the
interfaces between algebraic topology and algebraic geometry on the one hand and
between geometric topology and differential geometry on the other. Although
focused on topology, the work supported by this grant impinges on many other
areas of mathematics. Some of it also impinges on current work in mathematical
physics, where the kinds of topological and geometric structures studied by the
investigators have direct relevance. ***
