
* 9803461
* Geometric Group Theory: Group Boundaries and the Torus Theorem
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,08/05/1998
* Eric Swenson,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 58,000.00

9803461 Swenson First, Swenson will continue his collaboration with Martin
Dunwoody on the algebraic torus theorem. Much of the work done in the field of
geometric group theory has been generalizing results from 3-manifold theory to
the setting of finitely generated groups. The first result to generalize was the
sphere theorem, which was generalized by Stallings to the Ends Theorem. When the
most general versions of the annulus and torus theorem for three-manifolds were
proven by Scott in 1980, he conjectured that there should be a purely algebraic
analog to these theorems. The first step in that direction was a proof of the
algebraic annulus theorem for word hyperbolic groups by Scott and Swarup in
1995. The algebraic annulus theorem for finitely generated groups was proven by
Dunwoody and Swenson in 1996. These two will extend this result to an
n-dimensional algebraic torus theorem for finitely generated groups. In
addition, Swenson will continue his investigations into the boundaries of
groups. The study of group boundaries was begun in the theory of Kleinian and
Fuchsian groups. The first person to apply these ideas to abstract groups was
Gromov. He defined the visual boundary both of a word-hyperbolic group, and of a
CAT(0) group. It was shown by Bestvina and Mess that these boundaries carry
considerable cohomological information about the group. Swenson has two
different projects in this area. First, he wishes to determine the relationship
between the local and global homology in the visual boundary of a word-
hyperbolic group. Bestvina began the work in this area, after which Swenson made
a contribution. There are, however, certain important questions that remain
open. The second project concerns the existence (or non-existence) of cut points
in these boundaries. It has been shown by Bowditch and Swarup that the visual
boundary of a word-hyperbolic group cannot contain a cut-point. Swenson will try
to "extend" this result to the nonpositive ly curved or CAT(0) setting. He will
also look for consequences of boundaries' not having cut-points (semistability
at infinity, for example). Years ago it was said that infinite group theory
consisted entirely of counter-examples. Geometric group theory has done much to
remedy this situation. Thurston's work towards the classification of all
3-manifolds, spaces which look locally like 3-space, was the origin of geometric
group theory. Z. He, Cannon, and others noticed the amazing correlation between
the group theoretic properties of the fundamental group of a geometric
3-manifold and the geometric properties of its universal cover. Much of the work
done in geometric group theory has been to translate techniques and sometimes
even theorems from the setting of 3-manifolds to the seemingly much more general
setting of simply connected 2-complexes, spaces formed by gluing triangles along
their edges (often with more than two triangles sharing a common edge). The
torus theorem for 3-manifolds says that any time there is an essential map of a
2-torus (an inner tube) into a 3-manifold M, either M is very simple and well
understood, or there is an embedded 2-torus along which M can be cut to yield
simpler pieces. Swenson is working with Martin Dunwoody to extend this result to
apply to any essential map of a torus of any dimension into a simply connected
2-complex. In the second part of the project, Swenson will investigate non-
positively curved 2-complexes, using techniques transferred over from
differential geometry by Gromov and others. ***
