
* 9803593
* Groupoids and the Geometry of Gauge Groups
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,11/28/2001
* Jean-Luc Brylinski,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 136,500.00

9803593 Brylinski J-L. Brylinski will continue his work on the geometric
structures occurring in mathematical physics, particularly in gauge theory, loop
spaces, and moduli spaces of vector bundles. Gauge groups are of fundamental
importance in modern geometry. The gauge groups on a circle are loop groups, and
gauge groups in dimension 2 are closely related to conformal field theory.
Brylinski will study certain cohomology classes he has constructed for gauge
groups, which are natural generalizations of the degree-two cohomology class
giving the central extension of a loop group. These classes are obtained by a
transgression process from the Chern-Simons classes and the Chern classes of
Beilinson. The first new example is that of a degree-three cohomology class in
the gauge group of a closed surface. Brylinski has shown that these classes obey
reciprocity laws that generalize those of conformal field theory. He will
investigate to what extent they are related to higher-dimensional field
theories. He will study the Kaehler geometry of moduli spaces of vector bundles,
continuing his work with P. Foth, and intends to study the geometric
quantization of these moduli spaces. Brylinski will also continue his work on
the Quillen metric on determinant line bundles, which should lead to methods to
compute it geometrically, as opposed to analytically, in many situations. Here
he will use both the differential geometry of gerbes that he developed and a
variant of Deligne cohomology he introduced, which incorporates hermitian
metrics. Brylinski will continue his investigation of the differential geometry
of the space of knots in a smooth three-manifold, which he previously showed is
a Kaehler manifold, more precisely a union of coadjoint orbits of the group of
unimodular diffeomorphisms. A particular object of study will be the structure
of various Lie algebras of functionals with respect to the Poisson bracket. The
research of J.-L. Brylinski is concerned with the interface between geometry and
mathematical physics. This interface has been growing steadily in the recent
past and has had profound consequences for various branches of geometry:
algebraic, differential, and symplectic, among others. For instance, Edward
Witten (School of Natural Sciences, Institute for Advanced Study) interpreted
the Jones polynomial for knots in terms of field theory in three dimensions
connected to the Chern-Simons class. Also, Verlinde derived a formula for
Riemann-Roch numbers of a line bundle over a moduli space of bundles over a
Riemann surface, using ideas from conformal field theory. All these facts point
to the need for new types of geometry that include generalizations of the
concept of a vector bundle or a principal bundle. For this purpose, Brylinski
has developed a theory of the differential geometry of groupoids and gerbes,
which he is applying to the study of gauge groups, moduli spaces of vector
bundles, Quillen line bundles, and the space of knots. Although the basic
concepts he employs are of an abstract nature, they can often lead to concrete
formulas. For instance, he has obtained a concrete description of Quillen
metrics on some geometric determinant line bundles connected with line bundles
over Riemann surfaces. This research is expected to result in a better
understanding of the geometric underpinnings of mathematical physics. ***


