
* 9803862
* Topological Methods in Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,12/29/1999
* Kari Vilonen,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 01/31/2001
* USD 88,400.00

9803862 Vilonen This research program consists of three separate, but intimately
related, projects. The first one, joint with Wilfried Schmid, concerns one of
the important remaining questions in representation theory of reductive Lie
groups: determining all of their unitary representations. They will attack this
problem using the geometric techniques they developed to prove the Barbasch-
Vogan conjecture. The second project, joint with E.Frenkel, D.Gaitsgory, and
D.Kazhdan, deals with the Langlands conjectures. They will continue their work
on the geometric Langlands conjecture and the geometric theory of Whittaker
functions. The purpose of the third project, joint with Mirkovic, is to develop
geometric techniques for representation theory of algebraic groups. This project
has also turned out to be important for work on the geometric Langlands
conjecture. The goal is to apply their methods to representation theory of
algebraic groups in positive characteristic as well as over the integers. One of
the most interesting aspects of mathematics is to discover and understand
connections between objects that from the outset seem unrelated. A very deep
such connection has been proposed by Langlands and has become known as the
Langlands correspondence. A fundamental theme of this research program is to
establish such connections by using geometry. The situation is most interesting
when the objects themselves are not geometric but the connection between them is
established by geometric means. The joint work with Wilfried Schmid on the
Barbasch-Vogan conjecture has this flavour. The other two projects of this
research program are directly related to the Langlands correspondence. ***
