
* 9803233
* Skein Modules, Representations, and Quantum Invariants of Three-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1998,06/06/2000
* Charles Frohman,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 57,791.00

9803233 Frohman Frohman and his students will pursue the study of the Kauffman
bracket skein module as a means of relating quantum and classical invariants.
They will continue to develop lattice gauge field theory based on quantum
SL(2,C). This will lead to a general description of the Kauffman bracket skein
module of a 3-manifold as invariant functions of the quantized flat SL(2,C)
connections on a spine of the three-manifold. The goal is an intimate
understanding of the relationship between configurations lying in a manifold and
the algebraic structure of the Kauffman bracket skein module. It should also
lead to a rigorous derivation of Witten's asymptotic expansion of quantum
invariants in terms of the representation theory of the manifold. A hyperbolic
structure on the complement of a knot induces a similarity structure on the
peripheral torus. It is their intention to carry out an analogous construction
in the noncommutative setting. They will derive a noncommutative analog of the
A-polynomial, which will in turn allow the relationship between the A-polynomial
and the colored Jones polynomial to be explicated. This work will uncover that
part of the Jones polynomial that is related to the hyperbolic geometry of the
knot complement. Finally they will see how the Kauffman bracket skein module of
a knot induces a geometry on the noncommutative torus. The best way to
understand topology is as an extension of elementary geometry. Recall that two
triangles are congruent if there is a rigid motion of the plane that takes one
to the other. Rigid means that the motion preserves all distances and angles.
The geometric classification of triangles states that two triangles are
congruent if their sides are of the same length. In topology, a larger
collection of congruence transformations is used, specifically any motion of the
plane that sends near points to near points (although the transformation may
distort distances). Sometimes topology is refer red to as rubber sheet geometry,
as congruence transformations may stretch the plane arbitrarily. Under this
notion of geometry, any two triangles are congruent, and in fact they are all
congruent to a circle. The topological study of circles embedded in 3-space
(knots) is much more subtle. A major problem is how to make ``topological''
measurements. That is, associate numbers to a knot that are unchanged by
topological congruence transformations. In the 1980's, work of Jones and Witten
heralded a new age of knot theory with the introduction of quantum invariants.
These invariants are derived from techniques in operator theory and quantum
mechanics. Frohman and his students will study these invariants from a viewpoint
that allows them to be related to invariants of knots coming from more classical
techniques. These investigations will enrich topology, quantum mechanics, and
operator algebras by adding deeper connections between standard constructions in
each field. ***
