
* 9803293
* 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 08/01/1998,06/29/2000
* Ulrich Oertel,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 82,760.00

9803293 Oertel Building on previous work, Ulrich Oertel will study the topology
of 3-manifolds, using essential laminations and essential maps of surfaces. The
goals include generalizing results about Haken manifolds to manifolds containing
essential laminations or admitting essential maps of surfaces. In addition, with
Jacek Swiatkowski, Oertel will study contact structures, confoliations, and
contaminations in 3-manifolds. This may also lead to results about the topology
of 3-manifolds admitting appropriately restricted (essential or tight) versions
of these (partial) plane fields on the 3-manifolds. Another goal is to establish
further connections between contact structures and foliations and laminations in
3-manifolds. Finally, Oertel will continue to study automorphisms of
3-manifolds, refining and generalizing existing work that deals with the
important case of automorphisms of handlebodies and compression bodies. The goal
here, already partially achieved, is to classify automorphisms of 3-manifolds up
to isotopy, as in the Nielsen-Thurston classification of automorphisms of
surfaces. A closed 3-manifold is a space that is locally like ordinary
3-dimensional space. Thus, understanding 3-manifolds amounts to understanding
all possible 3-dimensional universes. Especially since humans live in a
3-dimensional space, one wishes to determine properties of 3-manifolds, and
ultimately, also to classify them. From the 1950's to the 1970's, progress on
3-manifolds was based to a large degree on methods using certain embedded
surfaces, called incompressible surfaces. From the 3-manifolds containing
incompressible surfaces, one can, for example, extract algebraic information
sufficient to distinguish any two of them. The investigator will use objects in
3-manifolds similar to incompressible surfaces, namely essential laminations and
essential maps of surfaces, to explore the unknown territory further. There are
other structures on 3-manifolds, called contact structures, that have their
origins in geometry rather than topology. Work of Eliashberg and Thurston has
shown that contact structures are related, via confoliations, to certain
laminations called foliations. With Swiatkowski, the investigator is finding
further connections among an entire range of related objects: contact
structures, confoliations, foliations, laminations, and contaminations, the last
being a newly invented object. It is typical in mathematics to study a space by
studying suitable maps from the space to itself. For 3-manifolds, one can
consider maps called automorphisms or self-diffeomorphisms. In continuing
research, Oertel is classifying automorphisms of 3-manifolds (up to isotopy).
The work is revealing a rich and interesting theory of the automorphisms of some
of the simplest 3-manifolds. ***
