
* 9803638
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,05/30/1998
* Michael Handel,NY,Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2001
* USD 86,019.00

The project concerns pseudo-Anosov surface dynamics and the outer automorphism
group of a free group. One part of the project is to analyze a certain partial
order on conjugacy classes in the mapping class group of a four times punctured
disk. The goal is to find a description of this partial order, in terms of the
known combinatorial structure of the mapping class group, that is more
transparent and more amenable to computation than the standard dynamical one.
The second part of the project extends the principal investigator's joint work
with Mark Feighn on coherence of groups. The focus is on deciding which one-
relator groups are coherent. The third and final part of the project is a
continuation of work with Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn on the outer
automorphism group of a free group. The goal of this part of the proposal is to
formulate and prove a structure theorem for a class of finitely generated
subgroups that contains, for example, all abelian subgroups. The pseudo-Anosov
homeomorphism is one of the most important concepts in the areas of mathematics
known as three-dimensional geometry, three-dimensional topology, and two-
dimensional dynamical systems. The study of pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms began
in the mid-1970's. During the decade that followed, a great deal of progress was
made in analyzing their behavior. Since then progress has slowed, in part
because only the more difficult problems remain. Chief among these problems is
an understanding of the "forcing partial order," which, roughly speaking,
describes the way in which simple two dimensional systems change into chaotic
ones. The principal investigator will use extensive computer calculations and
techniques from other areas of mathematics, especially that of geometric group
theory to investigate this problem. The application of techniques derived from a
variety of mathematical subfields should prove effective in illuminating this
problem. The other parts of the project focus on the algebraic analogs of the p
seudo-Anosov homeomorphisms and will use techniques that are common to dynamical
systems and geometric group theory.
