
* 9803868
* Topology and the Fundamental Group
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,08/05/1998
* James Cannon,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 73,799.00

9803868 Cannon The most important invariant of three-dimensional spaces is the
fundamental group. The investigator and his coworkers are studying the
fundamental group of three- dimensional manifolds asymptotically via the
recursive patterns at infinity defined by those groups. This approach transfers
difficult problems about three-dimensional spaces to difficult problems about
recursive tiling patterns in the two-dimensional sphere at infinity. The
patterns obtained are very attractive aesthetically and seem to supply deep
connections among three-manifold theory, the geometry of three-manifolds,
geometric and combinatorial group theory, circle packing, classical complex
variable theory, Teichmueller space theory, and the theory of Kleinian and
Fuchsian groups, with potential connections as well to the theories of iterated
rational maps, tiling theory, Blaschke products, Grothendieck's dessins
d'enfants, etc. The initial theory was developed with essentially only one aim
in mind, namely to prove the conjecture that a discrete group is Kleinian if and
only if it is negatively curved in the large (in the sense of Gromov) and has
the two-dimensional sphere as its space at infinity. An affirmative solution to
this problem would fill an important slot in Thurston's program to show that all
three-manifolds admit a geometric structure. The theory of recursive tilings of
the plane and two-sphere is very rich and rewarding and is likely to have
applications well beyond its intended target. Discrete group theory can be used
to model physical motion, geometric symmetries, and biological cell growth. The
generic discrete group is infinite and negatively curved in the large (Gromov
and Olshanskii) and has a recursive self- similarity structure at infinity
(Cannon). One might alternatively say that the generic group casts fractal
shadows at infinity. The investigator and his coworkers are studying this
fractal structure at infinity by using the theory of conformal mappings to
optimize the geometric shape of these shadows. The results have application to
the study of discrete groups, three-dimensional spaces, complex variables,
computational group theory, and, potentially, to the theory of biological cell
growth. ***
