
* 9803713
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1998,05/25/2000
* James Davis,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 180,850.00

9803713 Davis The principal investigators, James F. Davis and Kent E. Orr, are
pursuing several problems in low and high dimensional geometric topology and
exploring connections between combinatorics and topology. The problems in
geometric topology include: cases of the Borel/Novikov conjecture and
applications of the conjecture to manifolds with infinite fundamental group; the
classical topological knot slice problem, including geometrically interpreting
old and newly constructed knot slicing obstructions via Whitney tower
constructions; the problem of slicing knots in even dimensions and the
underlying homotopy obstructions; and better understanding the fundamental
problem of classifying topological four-manifolds within a homology type. This
project also is constructing the foundations of the theory of oriented matroid
bundles and their characteristic classes. This requires deep interactions
between two fields, topology and combinatorics and will be a step towards the
understanding of a new category of manifolds, the combinatorial differential
manifolds of Gelfand-MacPherson. All problems in geometric topology have their
roots in the understanding of manifolds. An n-dimensional manifold is a set of
points which is locally modeled on an n-dimensional linear space. For instance,
a surface is a locally 2-dimensional linear space. Space-time is locally
4-dimensional, but its global properties are harder to grasp. The principal
problem of geometric topology is the classification of manifolds. Two manifolds
are the same if there is a continuous function with a continuous inverse between
the manifolds. This formalizes the notion of rubber sheet topology often
discussed in popular science magazines. Another natural aspect of manifold
theory is the question of how manifolds can sit within other manifolds, i.e.,
knot theory. One pathway to understanding manifolds is through the fundamental
group and homology theory, which provides a transition from geometry to algebra.
Another pathway is to approximate geometry by finite structures, which provides
a transition from geometry to combinatorics. The interaction of these fields of
mathematics reveals techniques and perspectives that would otherwise be
invisible. ***




