
* 9803601
* Localization and Periodicity in Unstable Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,07/17/1998
* Aldridge Bousfield,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 74,700.00

9803601 Bousfield The investigator will continue his research in algebraic
topology, using localization methods to expose and analyze periodic phenomena in
the unstable homotopy theory of spaces. During the past two decades, remarkable
progress has been made toward a global understanding of stable homotopy theory,
showing that some major features arise chromatically from an interplay of
periodic phenomena arranged in a hierarchy. This project is part of an effort to
develop a similar understanding in unstable homotopy theory. The investigator
has introduced a hierarchy of localizations called periodizations, which serve
to resolve a given space into a chromatic tower with monochromatic fibers. He
will work to understand these periodizations as well as the closely related
localizations with respect to Morava K-theories. He recently discovered
surprising new functors between the stable and unstable monochromatic layers of
homotopy theory. Using these functors and other tools, he will explore the
structure of the monochromatic layers. At the classical K-theoretic level, this
work is leading to solutions of old problems concerning periodic homotopy groups
and the K-theory of spaces. Topological or geometric spaces arise, for instance,
as sets of solutions to systems of equations, and they play a central role in
mathematics. Beyond their usual measurements, such spaces have deeper properties
that persist even after drastic deformations. These properties begin very simply
with the number of separate components and the number of "holes" in a low
dimensional space but become tremendously rich and informative in higher
dimensions. The field of homotopy theory is devoted to their study, using
powerful algebraic and geometric techniques. In recent years, an exciting
chromatic approach to the subject has emerged, allowing decompositions of
complicated homotopical phenomena into much simpler periodic parts. However,
this chromatic approach was originally rest ricted to certain stable phenomena.
In the present project, the investigator is working to extend it to a full range
of unstable homotopy theoretic phenomena. ***
