
* 9803518
* Topology and Dynamics of Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,05/05/2000
* William Goldman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 158,500.00

9803518 Goldman A locally homogeneous geometric structure on a manifold M is a
system of local coordinates on open subsets of M with values in a homogeneous
space G/H. On overlapping patches of M, the coordinates are related by
transformations in the Lie group G. Following Cartan and Ehresmann, the
coordinate charts globalize to a "development" of the universal covering space U
of M into G/H, defining a homomorphism of the fundamental group F of M (realized
as the group of deck transformations of U). One forms a moduli space Def(M,G/H)
of geometric structures on M modelled on G/H which classifies structures up to
equivalence. Def(M,G/H) is itself locally homeomorphic to a moduli space of
equivalence classes of homomorphisms Hom(F,G)/G. The prototype of these moduli
spaces is the Teichmuller space, classifying hyperbolic structures (here G/H is
the real hyperbolic plane and G = PSL(2,R)). Moreover the mapping class group of
M acts on both Def(M,G/H) and Hom(F,G)/G, and the holonomy map from Def(M,G/H)
-> Hom(F,G)/G is equivariant with respect to these actions. This investigation
mainly concentrates on the case when F is the fundamental group of a compact
surface. When M is a closed surface, these moduli spaces carry invariant
symplectic structures, and when G is compact the investigator conjectures that
the symplectic measure is ergodic under the action of the mapping class group.
When G is SL(2,R), this moduli space is related to Teichmuller space of
(possibly singular) hyperbolic structures, and the investigator has used
geometric structures to study the dynamics on the moduli space. This dynamical
study relates the action of the discrete mapping class group to certain
Hamiltonian flows on the moduli space. When G/H is Minkowski 2+1-space, the
investigator (in collaboration with Drumm) is studying the deformation spaces of
complete flat manifolds, using "crooked planes" developed in Drumm's thesis and
ideas of Margulis. When G/H is complex hyperbo lic 2-space, Xia has classified
the connected components of Hom(F,G)/G and the investigator (in collaboration
with Leeb and Kapovich) has found discrete embeddings in each component. When
G/H is the real projective plane, the work of the investigator combined with
that of Choi gives a complete description of the deformation space Def(M,G/H).
Such geometric structures represent a way of relating topology and geometry.
According to Felix Klein's Erlangen program, geometry is the study of relations
between objects in a homogeneous space G/H of a Lie group G that are invariant
under the transformations in G. They include "rigid" geometric properties such
as distance, angle, parallelism and collinearity. On the other hand, topology
studies the loose organization of points on a manifold M, where the only
relations derive from continuous mapping. A geometric structure on M more
rigidly organizes its points through local coordinate charts from open sets in M
to G/H. Moduli spaces parametrize equivalence classes of these structures and
closely relate to spaces of homomorphisms of the fundamental group of M into G.
These moduli spaces themselves enjoy rich geometric structures of their own, and
display unusual symmetries arising from their origin as natural geometric
objects. A better understanding of such basic objects has time and again repaid
the effort through insights in related fields, typically in theoretical physics.
***
