
* 9803615
* Combinatorial Models for Manifolds and Vector Bundles
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 08/01/1998,08/03/1998
* Laura Anderson,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 81,544.00

9803615 Anderson This project centers on two combinatorial models for manifolds
and vector bundles: Gelfand and MacPherson's theory of combinatorial
differential manifolds and matroid bundles and Mnev and Mani's theory of locally
polytopal manifolds. The primary focus is on the bundle theory and classifying
spaces within each model. In both of these models, a bundle-theoretic
perspective leads to deep and unexpected new relations between topology and
combinatorics: the primary objective of this research is to expand on these
relations. The project's goals include both combinatorial applications in
topology (for instance, combinatorial formulas for topological invariants) and
topological results in combinatorics (particularly on the topology of posets of
oriented matroids and polytopes). The classifying spaces for Gelfand and
MacPherson's theory derive from certain partially ordered sets of oriented
matroids, and have close ties to the real Grassmannian. Among the objectives of
this research are a closer knowledge of the topology of the combinatorial
Grassmannian and applications of this knowledge both to real vector bundles and
to various combinatorial problems. Mnev and Mani's theory also appears to give
rise to a classifying space of interest in both topology and combinatorics,
relating PL manifolds and convex polytopes. The author will also study a new
type of ``non-Euclidean'' pathology in oriented matroids and its implications
for combinatorial differential manifolds. Much of the power of these
combinatorial models for topology derives from the elegance with which
topological concepts translate into combinatorial analogs. One can, for
instance, derive combinatorial formulas for topological invariants by simply
translating each element of a topological formula into its combinatorial
equivalent. The translation from combinatorics to topology has proven equally
useful: these models have provided a new framework in which to view various
combinatorial topics. Both models have revealed a vector-bundle perspective on
various combinatorial problems that originally appeared to have no connection to
real vector bundles, leading to unexpected topological proofs. This project will
build on recent results in this area whose depth lies in uniting the
combinatorial side of mathematics, rooted in counting things, to the topological
side, rooted in plasticity and spatial continuity. ***
