
* 9803316
* Geometric Group Theory and 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1998,02/24/1999
* John Stallings,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 58,500.00

9803316 Stallings Stallings is working on matters connected with Grushko's
Theorem, with certain delicate questions about surfaces involved. One recent
version of this concerns a map of a compact connected surface T into a wedge of
spaces A and B, which is surjective on fundamental groups; if the boundary
curves all map to one side or the other, except possibly for one which maps with
length two, the map is homotopic to one that splits the surface into two parts
along a connected piece. He is also interested in matters concerning hyperbolic
groups and cut vertices of graphs and Heegaard splittings of 3-manifolds. These
naturally influence his graduate students; and their ideas and plans influence
him too. One student, Kim Whittlesey, has solved an interesting problem
concerning the existence of a subgroup of the mapping class group that consists
only of the trivial element together with pseudo-Anosov maps. Another student is
working on algorithmic matters concerning free groups and is getting deeply into
the theory of equations in free groups. Another student is interested in using
the computer to discover things about geometric objects, and another has started
getting into the theory of automatic and hyperbolic groups in some detail. The
major portion of the grant is for the partial support of students. Group theory
started out as the study of symmetries of geometric or algebraic objects. The
geometry can be softened into topology, and this produces some interesting new
ideas; M. Gromov was one of the originators of this (1980's), and it has
expanded considerably since his first work. In hindsight, one can see that
geometric ideas about groups have occurred in work by Gauss (circa 1800),
Poincare (circa 1900), Whitehead (1930's). The nature of 3-dimensional manifolds
is especially influenced by the fundamental group, and conversely many results
simply about groups have been stimulated by these topological ideas. Several
logical and combinatorial aspects of other areas of mathematics have been
understood or even discovered by this approach. There are many good researchers
in this area and many problems that are now approachable. ***
