
* 9803553
* Topology of the Moduli Spaces of Stable Curves and Stable Maps
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1998,08/04/1998
* Alexander Kabanov,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 55,844.00

9803553 Kabanov In this project the investigator is studying the moduli spaces
of stable curves and their close cousins, the moduli spaces of stable maps.
These spaces play an important role in various areas of mathematics, including
topology, algebraic geometry, geometric analysis, and quantum field theory. For
example, in algebraic geometry these spaces have been fruitfully explored in
solving enumerative problems. In this project, the investigator is studying
intersection numbers on the moduli spaces of stable curves and stable maps. He
intends to use this study in order to understand natural deformations of a
certain class of cohomological field theories. The investigator is also studying
the topology of moduli spaces of stable maps, which are important in their own
right. Even a particular case, the case of the moduli spaces of stable curves,
has generated a lot of interesting mathematics. For the past decade, the
interaction between mathematics and physics has provided many beautiful, and
sometimes unexpected, results and conjectures. In particular, geometry has
incorporated many ideas and much intuition from string theory in physics. String
theory treats a particle as a small loop rather than a point. When a particle
moves in time it traces out a surface. Therefore understanding geometries on
surfaces, which has always been of interest to mathematicians, has also become
important in physics. In this project, the investigator is studying the spaces
that incorporate information about all geometries on a given surface. He is also
studying geometries on surfaces living inside a given space. For example, one
can count the number of surfaces satisfying certain constraints inside the given
space. Amazingly, the origin in physics of this subject is topological gravity.
***
