
* 9803342
* Algebraic K-Theory of Group Rings and Fields
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1998,07/12/2000
* Gunnar Carlsson,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 97,800.00

9803342 Carlsson In this project the investigator will be studying conjectures
of Novikov and Borel, and proposing and working on a new conjecture concerning
the algebraic K-theory of fields. In the Novikov-Borel portion of the project,
he will be attempting to replace geometric conditions (which have allowed the
proof of these conjectures in a number of cases) by more algebraic and homotopy
theoretic conditions concerning the fundamental group. The methods here include
the Pedersen-Weibel``bounded K-theory,'' and a G-theoretic version that studies
non-free modules over the group rings in question. If this is sufficiently
successful, it could lead to the solution of Borel's conjecture that two closed
manifolds whose universal cover is Euclidean n-space are in fact homeomorphic.
In the algebraic K-theory of fields portion, the investigator has developed a
new version of the Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures, which appears to have a
chance of identifying the K-theory of fields ``on the nose'' (rather than in
sufficiently high dimensions) and which depends directly on the representation
theory of the Galois group rather than on the group itself. One hopes that this
will give new arithmetic applications of K-theory. Work on this project will be
directed toward two important problems. The first revolves around the study of
manifolds, spaces (such as spheres, tori, etc.) in which every point has a
neighborhood that resembles ordinary Euclidean space. One notion of equivalence
for such manifolds is homotopy equivalence, a relatively weak condition. For
instance, a circle and an annulus are homotopy equivalent, since one direction
of the annulus can be compressed to obtain a circle. The other notion is
homeomorphism, which is a very strong condition, requiring that there be an
explicit way to identify the points of one manifold with those of the other so
that each point of one corresponds to exactly one in the other. The latter is
typically very hard to verify, while homotopy equivalence is relatively easy to
verify. The conjecture of Borel asserts that for a large class of manifolds
(those whose universal cover is ordinary Euclidean space) homotopy equivalence
implies homeomorphism. The investigator is approaching this conjecture via
algebraic methods, involving algebraic invariants of the manifolds in question.
The second problem studies the so-called ``algebraic K-theory'' of fields
(algebraic objects in which one has addition, multiplication, and division, like
the rational or the real numbers). It proposes a new conjecture for a
description of this K-theory, one which is stronger than the earlier
Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures. In this project, the investigator will be
developing methods for verifying his conjecture in many cases. The hope is that
studying this conjecture will give new applications to arithmetic for this
topological invariant. ***


