
* 9803691
* Geometry of Singularities
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1998,06/13/2002
* Terence Gaffney,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2003
* USD 80,100.00

9803691 Gaffney Gaffney studies the local geometry of analytic sets and
mappings. His goal is to find numbers computable from the equations defining the
sets or components of the mappings that will describe the geometry of the object
under study. A first step is to find numbers of this type whose constancy in a
family of objects implies that the geometry of the family is constant in some
well-defined way. One of the most important conditions that Gaffney considers is
Whitney equisingularity. This condition implies that the embedded topology of
the family is constant. The theory of the integral closure of modules provides a
powerful framework for studying this condition. Working with Kleiman, Gaffney
will solve this problem for families of complete intersections with non-isolated
singularities. This will be done by transporting, with suitable modifications,
the ideas Gaffney used in the case of hypersurfaces with non-isolated
singularities into the framework of complete intersections developed with
Kleiman. Gaffney will also investigate the relation between the geometry of
hypersurface singularities and the components appearing in the exceptional
divisor associated to these singularities. One specific case to be considered
will be discriminants of finitely determined map germs and topologically stable
map germs close to the boundary of the nice dimensions. This study will be a
step toward criteria for families of such maps to be Whitney equisingular. This
project is part of a centuries old effort to fathom the geometry of mappings and
singular shapes. (A mapping is a relation between shapes.) A cone is a simple
example of a shape with a singularity, and a picture of a cone is a simple
example of a mapping. The picture creates a relation between the points of the
cone and the points of a plane, the plane of the picture in this case. If we
take a picture of even a smooth shape, the image will have edges, and the edges
will also often have singula r points, so the study of shapes and mappings are
related. Equations describe shapes. The goal of this study is to start with
equations of a shape and extract numbers from them that give a description of
the geometry of the shape useful for determining when one member of a family of
shapes is different from other members. For example, if you lay a piece of
string across itself, it forms a loop. As you pull the loop tight, it forms a
family of curves, and the loop disappears at some time t. Our intuition says
that the curves in this family are similar until we get to time t, when the loop
disappears. We can write down equations for the members of this family. It is
helpful to study this situation using two scales. There is the macroscopic
level, in which the individual curves bend to form loops, and there is also an
infinitesimal level at which the tangent vectors to the curves and to the union
of the curves exist. As you move around a loop, you can follow the tangent
vectors around. Remarkably, although the loop disappears as time goes to t at
the macroscopic level, the loop leaves a trace at the infinitesimal level. This
trace shows up in the invariant, called the Milnor number, that we use to study
curves in the plane, and it can be calculated from equations of the curves. The
theory of integral closure of modules is a powerful framework for studying sets
at this infinitesimal level and for extracting numbers that detect change at
this level in a family of sets. Because there is a good connection between
algebra and geometry for shapes defined in complex space by analytic functions,
this is the setting for most work to date using this approach. d-dimensional
subsets of complex n-space defined by n-d equations are called complete
intersections. Gaffney and Kleiman will combine their own and others' earlier
approaches to more limited situations to treat families of complete
intersections with singular sets of arbitrary dimension. ***
