
* 9817688
* Spring 1999 Topology Conference, Salt Lake City, Utah
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 04/15/1999,04/07/1999
* Mladen Bestvina,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 03/31/2000
* USD 22,500.00

DMS-9817688 Bestvina

This award will provide partial support for the featured speakers and for some
graduate students to attend the 1999 Spring Topology Conference hosted by the
University of Utah with the help of Brigham Young University. This conference,
one of a series held annually at different institutions around the country, is
now in its 33rd year and has established itself as perhaps the largest and
certainly one of the most successful annual topology conferences in the U.S. Its
traditional emphasis has been broadened in recent years to include dynamical
systems. Still more recently an emphasis on newer topics in geometric topology
has been accelerated, and this will most definitely again be the case in 1999.
The general format will be plenary (semi-expository) talks on the three mornings
of the conference, followed in the afternoons by 3-4 special sessions consisting
of invited one-hour talks and shorter contributed talks. The number of invited
featured speakers is 22, and the total number of registered speakers is 67,
according to the final preconference version of the conference website. The
featured talks will be in geometric topology, manifold theory, geometric group
theory, large scale geometry, continuum theory, dynamical systems, and set
theoretic topology. Participation by younger mathematicians, by women, and by
underrepresented minorities has been encouraged, the first two with notable
success. In fact, four of the featured speakers are women. ***
