
* 9970978
* The chromatic splitting conjecture
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/09/1999
* Mark Hovey,CT,Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 55,968.00

9970978 Hovey The principal investigator, Mark Hovey, is working on the
chromatic splitting conjecture in stable homotopy theory. A standard procedure
in algebra is to study an algebraic object by studying its localizations at
various primes, then reassembling the localizations into a global picture. In
stable homotopy theory, one can localize at an ordinary integer prime p, but
after doing so, more primes become visible. These are known as Morava
K-theories. Denote the localization of a spectrum X with respect to the nth
Morava K-theory K(n) by L(K(n))X. Calculation of L(K(n))X can usually be reduced
to a purely algebraic problem, but little is known about the reassembly of the
L(K(n))X for different n into knowledge of X itself. The chromatic splitting
conjecture, due to Mike Hopkins, is a conjecture about the composition
L(K(m))L(K(n))X for finite spectra X, and it would allow one to recover X from
the different L(K(n))X. The truth of this conjecture is known to have
significant impact on several other conjectures in stable homotopy theory, and
even partial results about it would be a major advance. One of the methods
involved in the principal investigator's approach to this conjecture is the
study of the derived functors of the inverse limit functor in a category of
comodules. Homotopy theory is the study of curves, surfaces, and higher
dimensional spaces up to continuous deformation. That is, in homotopy theory,
the letter A and the letter O are considered equivalent, because one can
gradually deform the letter A into a triangle by pushing in the legs, then
gradually deform the triangle into a circle by pushing out on the corners. A
difficulty with homotopy theory is that different dimensions behave differently.
More precisely, given a space X, one can form its suspension by attaching it
with wires to two points outside X. The suspension of a circle, for example, is
a sphere, and the suspension of a sphere is a sphere of the next higher
dimension. In stable homotopy theory, two spaces X and Y are considered
equivalent if, after suspending X and Y repeatedly, one can be deformed into the
other. For example, the surface of a donut is obtained by attaching a sphere to
two circles that touch at one point (one circle goes around the hole, one circle
goes around the filling, and the surface of the sphere gets spread out over the
rest of the surface of the donut). But a donut cannot be deformed into two
circles and a sphere, all touching at one point. However, the suspension of a
donut can be deformed into two spheres and a 3-dimensional sphere, all touching
at one point. The great advantage of stable homotopy theory is that problems
become much more amenable to algebraic methods of solution. Many geometric
problems turn out to depend only on the stable homotopy type of the space
involved, so stable homotopy theory has been of considerable utility. ***


