
* 9971855
* Calculus of Functors and Homotopy Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/05/1999
* Gregory Arone,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 69,800.00



9971855 Arone Arone is interested in applying the theory of calculus of functors
(developed by T. Goodwillie and M. Weiss) to study the unstable homotopy of such
spaces as spheres and classifying spaces of compact Lie groups. Calculus of
functors allows one to introduce certain ``derivatives'' of homotopy groups. If
one understands these derivatives well, one can use them to recover a lot of
information about unstable homotopy theory (this is analogous to the fact that
if one knows all the derivatives of an ordinary function at a point, one can
often recover a lot of information about the function by means of Taylor
series). The derivatives are really objects of stable homotopy theory, and they
normally come equipped with interesting symmetries of certain classical groups,
such as the symmetric or orthogonal groups (division by the action of the
symmetric group corresponds to division by n! in ordinary Taylor series). Thus
calculus allows one to reduce questions about unstable homotopy theory to
questions about equivariant stable homotopy theory. This does not yield an
effective method for calculating homotopy groups (there probably is no such
method), but it does allow one to make interesting qualitative statements about
the global structure of homotopy theory. Analyzing the derivatives of different
objects, together with the accompanying symmetries, has been the focus of much
of Arone's work. These derivatives seem to be very interesting objects on their
own, and studying them involves combining methods from stable homotopy theory,
equivariant topology, and group cohomology in fresh and unexpected ways. Many
basic questions in mathematics, and in topology, in particular, are of the
following form: given two objects, describe the possible functions between them.
For instance, one can ask to describe the space of continuous maps between two
topological spaces, or the space of embeddings of a circle into some physical
space (this is informally known as the space of ``knots''). These questions are
usually very difficult. This is so because the dependence of the space of
functions on the source and the target is very complicated. Informally, one
could say that the space of functions is a complicated function of two
variables. It turns out that, in analogy to ordinary differential calculus, one
can develop a theory of ``Taylor series'' of sorts for this kind of function and
use it to approximate complicated spaces such as function spaces by simpler
spaces, in much the same way as an ordinary function can be approximated by its
Taylor polynomials. This very striking idea was conceived by T. Goodwillie. Much
of Arone's work has focused on understanding the ``Taylor polynomials'' and the
``Derivatives'' in this context. This has proved to be a fascinating and
rewarding journey, which has already led to interesting new results in
(algebraic) topology. Some of the results are of such a universal nature that
there is at least a slight hope that this work will have an impact on
mathematics outside hardcore algebraic topology. ***


