
* 9971367
* Stratified Spaces and Controlled Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1999,05/22/2001
* C. Bruce Hughes,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2003
* USD 75,310.00

Proposal: DMS-9971367

PI: C. Bruce Hughes

Abstract: This project applies techniques from controlled topology to solve
problems in three broad areas: stratified spaces, nonpositively curved
manifolds, and ends of complexes. An important tool developed previously by the
principal investigator is the theory of manifold approximate fibrations. It will
be used to attack several problems. A stratification presents a decomposition of
the space into manifold pieces. Since the space need not be a manifold itself,
geometric methods cannot be applied until it is understood how the manifold
pieces fit together. One of the most important aspects of this project is the
uncovering of the geometric structure used to join together the manifold pieces.
This structure is not only subject to classification and quantification, but can
also be applied for the development of new geometric tools for studying
stratified spaces. The structure on the neighborhoods of the strata is a bundle
theory, namely manifold stratified approximate fibrations, in the category of
controlled topology. Thus, controlled topology becomes the vehicle for
transforming and applying classical manifold techniques to study these more
intricate manifolds with singularities. In addition to stratified spaces, both
manifolds of nonpositive curvature and ends of complexes lead to controlled
topology and approximate fibrations. The geometry of nonpositively curved
manifolds give boundedness in their universal covers which can then be converted
into controlled information. Ends of complexes lead to obstructions for the
existence of approximate fibrations near infinity. This is then related to the
topology of stratified spaces near the singularities.

Topology's ultimate goal is to classify manifolds, the spaces which are locally
homeomorphic to euclidean spaces. Controlled topology has become the most
powerful new technique toward achieving this goal regarding high-dimensional
manifolds since the development of surgery theory. Even more dramatically,
controlled topology is showing its full force in the study of stratified spaces,
or manifolds with singularities. In controlled topology, the objects of study
come equipped with a map to a metric space, called the control space. The
classical topics of topology (e.g., homotopy equivalences, h-cobordisms, and
ends) are studied with sizing estimates measured in the control space (so that
classical topology is recovered when the control space is a point). Problems in
many different areas of mathematics lead to questions about manifolds with
singularities. It is expected that the research proposed here will give new and
useful tools for dealing with such spaces.
