
* 9971219
* Applications of Algebraic Topology to Geometric Group Theory, Parametrized Fixed Point Theory and Dynamics
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,07/20/1999
* Ross Geoghegan,NY,SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2001
* USD 46,470.00

Proposal: DMS-9971219

PI: Ross Geoghegan

Abstract: Professor Geoghegan is working at the interface of topology, geometry
and group theory. In collaboration with Professor Robert Bieri (Frankfurt,
Germany) he is investigating new topological properties of an arbitrary action
by a group G on a "non-positively curved" space M. They have introduced the idea
of n-connectedness of the action over M and have found that this is an open
condition on the space of all such actions. For actions with discrete orbits
they have identified their conditions as equivalent to well-known finiteness
properties of stabilizers of points in M thus proving that these are also open
properties. Previous work of many authors on a restricted case suggests that
this should be a promising line of investigation, bringing topological methods
into algebra in a new way. They have set their sights on a test case, the
Moebius action of SL(2, Z[1/m]) on the hyperbolic plane (for a positive integer
m). They conjecture that the amount of connectvity is directly related to the
number of prime factors of m, and they propose to prove this among other things.
In collaboration with Professor Andrew Nicas (McMaster, Canada) Professor
Geoghegan will continue his study of parametrized fixed point theory and its
relationship to non-singular flows. They hope to elucidate the geometrical
meaning of some K-theoretic torsions which have been defined for such flows.
They have already achieved part of that program but more remains to be done.

Mathematics involves various styles or forms of thought. Among these are the
geometrical (or visual) and the algebraic (or discrete). For example, "discrete
group theory" (the formal study of symmetries) has traditionally been part of
abstract algebra. But fruitful advances in our understanding of symmetries have
been made in recent years through geometrizing this kind of algebra. One way of
doing this is through the notion of "fundamental group of a topological space".
If the topological space is chosen wisely, much about the algebra of the group
which was previously invisible and unknown becomes clear through applying the
very old and deep field of "algebraic topology" to the group being studied, via
this space. The study of symmetries is basic in many applications of
mathematics, particularly to physics. This approach is being used in the present
proposal to better understand the interplay of group theory with geometry and
number theory (in the part with Bieri) and with flows in dynamics (in the part
with Nicas).
