
* 9971510
* State-Sum Methods in Low-Dimensional Topology and Quantum Gravity - Categorical Underpinnings and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/02/1999
* David Yetter,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00



9971510 Yetter This project pursues a number of interrelated and complementary
lines of research related to state-sum techniques in low-dimensional topology
and quantum gravity. Some of these involve the categorical underpinnings of
state-sum techniques: the investigation of the algebraic structure of TQFT's, of
the deformation theory of categories with structure, and the categorical
underpinnings of ``state-integrals,'' i.e., measure theoretic analogues of the
familiar state-sums. Others aim at applications of the techniques to topology
and quantum gravity: the extension to the Minkowskian signature of the Barrett-
Crane state-sum formulation of Euclidean quantum gravity, the investigation and
construction of topological invariants related to the Barrett-Crane and Crane-
Yetter state-sums and their generalizations, and the investigation of the
relations between categorical deformation theory and the theory of Vassiliev
knot and link invariants. This project seeks to investigate the structure of 3-
and 4-dimensional spaces, both the abstract spaces of topology, and the
structure of physical space-times in certain proposed models for a quantum
theory of gravity. The problem of quantizing gravity is probably the deepest
unsolved theoretical problem in physics. It points to the most fundamental
unknowns in our understanding of the universe, such as the origin of the
universe and black hole physics. Its apparent intractability by using
traditional methods suggests that a radically new type of mathematics may be
necessary to solve the problem. The structure of operators on spaces of quantum
states, the algebraic structures describing the assembly of spaces or knots and
links from simple pieces, and the algebraic data needed to construct state-sums
with suitable invariance properties to investigate both topological structures
and to construct ``spin-foam'' models of quantum gravity, can all conveniently
be described in terms of generalizations and extensions of the theory of
monoidal categories first introduced by MacLane in the early 1960's. These
facts, together with recent progress with the interrelated problems mentioned
above, lead to the hope that the theory of monoidal categories may be the
missing tool. Thus, much of the work uses category theory, not as a substitute
for set theory as a foundations of mathematics, but as the appropriate sort of
algebra for the investigation of spaces abstracted from the one in which we
live. ***
