
* 9971454
* Symplectic Topology and its Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1999,06/29/1999
* Weimin Chen,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2001
* USD 45,182.00

Proposal: DMS-9971454

Principal Investigator: Weimin Chen

Abstract: This project will center on three topics in symplectic topology and
geometry. In the first part the principal investigator (joint with Y. Ruan) will
establish the Gromov-Witten invariants for symplectic orbifolds. This work aims
at computing the Gromov-Witten invariants of a symplectic manifold by
decomposing it into two pieces. Such an operation will in general introduce
orbifold singularities, so the establishment of Gromov-Witten invariants for
symplectic manifolds with orbifold singularities will lay the foundation for a
program of computing Gromov-Witten invariants, which has great potential
applications in symplectic topology as well as other related fields such as
birational geometry. Other motivations come from mirror symmetry and string
theory of theoretical physics, in which there is a demand to consider spaces
with controlled singularities such as orbifold singularities. In the second part
of this project the principal investigator will continue his work on the
3-dimensional Reeb dynamical systems by exploiting a potential connection
between Seiberg-Witten Floer homology and the contact homology. The last part
concerns symplectic structures on smooth 4-manifolds with vanishing second
homotopy group. Currently very less is known about them.

In recent years, one has witnessed some great interactions between different
branches of mathematics in the area of geometry and topology, with the input of
ideas from theoretical physics. This project seeks to exploit the intimate
interplay between these different fields to investigate some very interesting or
fundamental questions in such areas as quantum cohomology, birational geometry,
the existence of periodic orbits of Reeb dynamics on a 3-dimensional space, and
symplectic 4-manifolds. The principal investigator believes that a successful
outcome of this project will make a significant advancement of knowledge in the
areas listed above, which are important not only within mathematics but also in
real life problems. For example, the importance of Reeb dynamics is seen in the
following example. The motion of a satellite in the presence of the
gravitational forces of the sun, the planets and the moon is described
mathematically as a Reeb dynamics. The relevant part of this project aims at
solving the 20-year-old Weinstein conjecture for Reeb dynamical systems on a
3-dimensinal space, which is one of the most important conjectures in the field.
