
* 9971850
* Periodicity Phenomena at the Chromatic Edge, the Chromatic Splitting Conjecture, and the Chromatic Segal Conjecture
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/09/1999
* Henry Sadofsky,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2003
* USD 75,000.00

9971850 Sadofsky The ``chromatic splitting conjecture'' of Mike Hopkins concerns
a decomposition of the localization with respect to the (n-1)st Johnson-Wilson
theory of the localization with respect to the nth Morava K-theory (of a finite
CW-complex). This is a useful step in trying to understand stable homotopy
theory, since the decomposition is expressed in terms of simpler localizations.
In particular, the conjecture would generalize the very beautiful relationships
known between the 0th, 1st, and 2nd chromatic levels. Similarly, the ``chromatic
Segal conjecture'' (due in various forms to combinations of Mike Hopkins, Mark
Mahowald, and Doug Ravenel) deals with a decomposition of the Tate cohomology of
the localization of a finite CW-complex with respect to the nth Morava K-theory.
Again, this conjecture intertwines different chromatic levels in a beautiful
way; together they give some techniques for inductively determining information
about higher chromatic levels from lower ones (like rational homotopy theory and
K-theory). These conjectures both also give data about how the cohomology of the
different Morava stabilizer groups are related. The tool used to attack these
conjectures is a spectral sequence based on ideas from work of Goerss that
computes the BP-homology of various spectra involved in this calculation in
terms of the derived functors of inverse limits of comodules over the Hopf
algebroid of BP-operations. Surprisingly, at least in the first interesting
cases, the higher inverse limits seem to be tractable. This research is
concerned with understanding ``homotopy classes of functions.'' A simple example
of the sort of problem studied is given by considering knot theory. Take a
``knot'' in space to be a loop of string embedded in space in some way. One is
not really interested in *all* ways of embedding that loop of string; if one can
get from one way of embedding the loop to another just by moving the string a
little bit, one considers those two embeddings to be equivalent. Similarly, if
one looks at all ways of putting a loop of string in the plane with the origin
removed, one considers two ways the same if the loop of string is wound around
the origin the same number of times. As the second example makes clear, it is
critical to understand ``holes'' in the space to which one is mapping, and how
the space from which one is mapping interacts with those holes. There are
different sorts of holes, though; a circle has a hole one can pass something
through, while a (hollow) sphere has a different sort of hole. The ``holes''
associated to a map (or to a space) can be sorted into different flavors
(usually referred to as different chromatic components). These components do not
appear to be independent for spaces and maps arising from geometric
considerations, and the goal is to understand these dependencies. Solutions to
this sort of problem are potentially related to questions from geometry, but at
the same time, surprisingly, to objects arising in number theory, something that
gives this work far greater importance than would either aspect alone. ***
