
* 9971030
* Topological Techniques for Computing with Perverse Sheaves
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,02/26/2001
* Mikhail Grinberg,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 11/30/2001
* USD 60,000.00

9971030 Grinberg This award supports the research of Mikhail Grinberg, a
postdoctoral associate of Professor deJong. Perverse sheaves are a part of
algebraic topology that is about twenty years old. They have been applied with
great success to the study of complex algebraic singularities. Perhaps the most
notable applications have been to spaces and stratifications related to
algebraic groups, yielding new insights in representation theory. Over the next
two years, M. Grinberg will work on four research projects whose common goal is
to develop the computational techniques of the subject. Specifically, the focus
is on computing microlocal invariants of sheaves and stratifications and on
computing with nearby cycles sheaves, in the presence of symmetry. The first
problem is to understand the microlocal geometry of the nilcone in a complex
semisimple Lie algebra. The second is to study the geometry of the enveloping
semigroup of a semisimple group, recently introduced by E. Vinberg. The third
project is to explore possible applications of quasi-conical symmetry to the
microlocal study of stratifications. The last project, joint with D. Kazhdan, is
to study the space of formal arcs of finite codimension in a singular variety.
The common theme throughout this work is to learn to extract the key topological
invariants of the singular spaces and maps that arise in the study of algebraic
groups, their representations, and invariants. Loosely speaking, the theory of
perverse sheaves is a systematic way to exploit the fact that, for a singular
space defined over the complex numbers, the real and the imaginary directions
contribute to the topology in dual ways. This theory is a part of algebraic
topology: a branch of mathematics concerned with the properties of higher
dimensional spaces that are preserved under continuous deformations. Most
applications of algebraic topology are based on the following key idea: to
consider all objects of a certain kind as points in a single ``configuration
space'' (sometimes called a ``parameter space'' or a ``phase space''). For
example, all possible states of a mechanical system, or all possible situations
in an economic game (e.g., an auction) may be viewed as points of an appropriate
configuration space. The topological properties of this space may then be used
to determine qualitative properties of the associated objects, such as whether
the mechanical system will evolve towards a periodic motion, or whether the
players in a game have optimal strategies. ***


