
* 9971501
* Strong Shift Equivalence Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/05/1999
* John Wagoner,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2002
* USD 73,197.00

9971501 Wagoner Shift dynamical systems and Markov chains are useful models for
phenomena in areas ranging from discrete time smooth dynamics, to statistical
mechanics, to information and coding theory. In practice, there are generally
many ways of describing or constructing shift systems that have essentially the
same dynamical behaviour. Even in the one-dimensional case, effectively
recognizing when two concrete models are equivalent is a fundamental open
problem. Another natural and related problem is to study the different
equivalencies or symmetries between two systems. Symmetries of a given system
are often called reversible cellular automata. One approach to the
classification and symmetry group problems for one-dimensional shift systems
that has been fruitful involves strong shift equivalence theory. In recent
years, this has led to progress on the Shift Equivalence Problem. This is a
tantalizing question in symbolic dynamics that can be posed in elementary terms
using matrices and graphs and that has been open since since 1974. It has led to
a new type of positive algebraic K-theory for ordered rings by way of the usual
row and column operations on matrices but with certain inequalities imposed.
Strong shift equivalence theory is a combination of algebra and topology that
grew out of the dynamics of systems known as shift systems and their symmetry
groups. It turns out to have unexpected and interesting connections with areas
of mathematics outside dynamics, such as algebraic K-theory, cyclic homology,
and topological quantum field theory. Wagoner will continue to explore these new
developments. ***


