
* 9971404
* Research in Geometry and Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1999,09/04/2001
* Mladen Bestvina,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 318,155.00

9971404 Bestvina The goal of this project is to understand 3-dimensional
Poincare duality groups and pairs, subgroups of mapping class groups and
automorphisms of free groups, complex-hyperbolic surfaces, polygons in symmetric
spaces, line arrangements, Artin groups, and dimension functions on groups. The
project focuses in part on the structure of symmetries of objects naturally
arising in geometry and algebra. The ancient Greeks understood symmetries of
Platonic solids, e.g., a cube or a dodecahedron. Platonic solids are positively
curved, and they have a finite number of symmetries. At the opposite end of the
spectrum are negatively curved objects, such as the Lobachevsky hyperbolic plane
(featured frequently in Escher paintings), and these typically have infinitely
many symmetries. Consequently, the structure of these symmetries is both more
interesting and harder to understand. The symmetries of an object form a
``group.'' One way to measure the ``size'' of a group, even when the group is
infinite, is to talk about its ``dimension.'' For example, the dimension of the
group of symmetries of the hyperbolic plane, depicted in the Escher drawing
mentioned above, is two, reflecting the nature of the plane. In general, the
concept of dimension depends on the background choice of numbering system
(coefficient ring). The project will study this dependence. Yet another part of
the project is the study of polygons. These seemingly simple objects in the
Euclidean plane and space become increasingly more complex as one considers more
complicated spaces. One of the new phenomena is that an edge of a polygon may be
determined not just by its length but also by its ``direction.'' In the case of
ordinary space, if one fixes the origin of an edge, one can rotate the second
end to attain an arbitrary direction. A Euclidean triangle is determined by its
three side-lengths. To construct such a triangle it is enough to satisfy three
``triangle inequalities.'' These properties no longer hold in more general
spaces, which makes study of polygons there much more interesting and
complicated. ***


