
* 9971783
* Low-Dimensional Topology and Subdivision Rules
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,07/20/2000
* William Floyd,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 66,390.00

Proposal: DMS-9971783

PI: William Floyd

Abstract: This project is an attempt to prove the conjecture that a negatively
curved group whose space at infinity is the 2-sphere has a properly
discontinuous, cocompact, isometric action on real hyperbolic 3-space. This is a
major piece of Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, which states that the
interior of every compact 3-manifold has a canonical decomposition into
geometric pieces. Previous work of the investigator and his collaborators has
reduced the conjecture to a difficult problem (proving conformality) about
recursive tilings of the 2-sphere. The recursive structures of the tilings come
from subdivision rules. From a subdivision rule one can define a branched
surface and a self-map of this branched surface. A major aim is to prove that
conformality of a tiling family is equivalent to the existence of a fixed point
on the induced map of the Teichmueller space of the branched surface, and then
to understand when this map has a fixed point. In the special case that the
branched surface is a 2-sphere, this is essentially what is done in proving
Thurston's classification theorem for critically finite branched maps of the
2-sphere. A second aim is to understand further this connection between
conformal subdivision rules and rational maps. A third aim is to develop the
theory of twisted face pairing 3-manifolds. This theory arose as a source of
examples for testing the conjecture, but it has other potential applications in
geometric group theory and 3-manifold topology.

This project is concerned with recursive families of tilings of the plane and
the 2-sphere. Each family is determined by an initial tiling and a subdivision
rule which are encoded by a finite amount of combinatorial information. A key
problem is to determine when the limiting tiles, which may have fractal
boundaries, stay "almost round". In special cases these families of tilings
correspond to rational maps (quotients of polynomials with complex coefficients)
on the 2-sphere. Through this correspondence, work of Thurston on the
topological classification of rational maps suggests a promising approach to
answering this problem. A principal aim of the project is to follow this
approach to completion. If successful, the project would be a major step in
proving Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture, which states that 3-dimensional
spaces (more precisely, compact 3-manifolds) can be naturally decomposed into
geometric pieces. There are potential applications in complex variables,
geometric group theory, 3-dimensional topology, and in the theory of biological
cell growth.
