
* 9971578
* Moduli Spaces, SU(n) Gauge Theory, and 3-Dimensional Topology
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1999,07/22/1999
* Hans Boden,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2002
* USD 58,473.00

Proposal: DMS-9971578

PI: Hans Boden

Abstract: The investigator proposes a study of invariants of knots, links and
3-manifolds obtained from their representation varieties. In joint work with
Chris Herald, he will derive gauge-theoretic formulas for new 3-manifold
invariants by interpreting representations as flat connections and perturbing
the flatness equations. Corresponding invariants of knots and links were defined
by Frohman, Frohman-Long, and Frohman-Nicas. In joint work with Andy Nicas he
will analyze some mysterious combinatorial identities arising from computations
for fibered knots. He will also study the extent to which cut-and-paste methods
can be used to compute the new invariants in joint work with Chris Herald, Paul
Kirk, and Eric Klassen. The principal goal in this line of inquiry is to
establish a formula linking the 3-manifold invariants with the knot and link
invariants. Over surfaces, representation varieties can alternatively be viewed
as moduli spaces of stable bundles, and a study of the geometry and topology of
these moduli spaces is also proposed. This uses methods from algebraic geometry
and will provide an additional perspective for understanding other naturally
occuring spaces, such as moduli spaces of linkages and GIT quotients of
Grassmanians and flag varieties.

The principal objects studied by geometric topologists are called manifolds. A
manifold is a geometric shape which near any point looks like Euclidean space.
Thus manifolds are all locally the same, and in order to distinguish one
manifold from another, mathematicians define invariants which encode the
manifold's global properties. To illustrate this point, consider the following
three commonplace objects: a flat sheet of paper, the surface of a ball, and the
surface of a donut. To a near-sighted insect, each of these objects looks the
same. From any given point the insect can map all nearby points using standard
xy coordinates. The invariant which distinguishes these three shapes is called
the Euler characteristic. It is the number you get by triangulating the object
and counting the number of vertices and triangles and subtracting the number of
edges. For example, the Euler characteristic of a triangle is simply 3+1-3=1.
Performing a similar count for each of the three surfaces, you get 1 for the
sheet of paper, 2 for the surface of a ball, and 0 for the surface of a donut.
This number is called an invariant because it is independent of the choice of
triangulation. One of the most important problems in low-dimensional topology is
that of distinguishing all 3-dimensional manifolds. Understanding the global
structure of these manifolds will have numerous applications to physics,
chemistry and biology. The investigator proposes to construct new invariants of
3-manifolds and to develop methods for computing the invariants. The long-term
goal is to use the new invariants to help in classifying 3-manifolds and knots
and links contained in them.
