
* 9971434
* Operads and Homotopy Algebra
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1999,01/16/2002
* Alexander Voronov,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 46,100.00

9971434 Voronov There are two objectives of this project. One is to work on and
eventually prove the following conjecture of Deligne: There exists the (natural)
structure of an algebra over a chain operad of the little disks operad on the
Hochschild complex of any associative algebra. The other objective is to study
holomorphic line bundles over the moduli space of algebraic curves with a
holomorphic disk and prove the analogue of Borel-Weil-Bott Theorem for this
space, considered as homogeneous space for the Virasoro algebra. The
significance of the project on Deligne's Conjecture consists in studying
presumably deep connections between one complex variable and associative
algebras. The proof of Deligne's Conjecture will also further simplify the proof
of the existence of a deformation quantization of a Poisson manifold, originally
proved by Kontsevich and simplified by Tamarkin. The completion of the Borel-
Weil-Bott part of the project will establish important relationship between the
geometry of the moduli space and the representation theory of the Virasoro
algebra. The structure of an algebra over a chain operad indicates, usually
explicitly, the presence of a ``homotopy something'' algebra, an algebra with
certain identities, such as associativity, satisfied in only an approximate way
known as ``up to homotopy.'' Such structures have been used by Stasheff and May
in their study of loop spaces, Beilinson and Ginzburg and Hinich and Schechtman
in the study of deformation theory of algebraic varieties and vector bundles
over them, and by Kontsevich toward knot invariants. Witten and Zwiebach have
effectively used the homotopy Lie structure in string theory. Deligne's
Conjecture may be reformulated as the existence of a certain string theory
associated to every associative algebra. Thus, the proof of the conjecture will
create ground for considerable progress in studying applications of algebra to
geometry and theoretical physics. The significance of the moduli space part of
the project is in extending the fundamental relationship between the geometry of
a homogeneous space and the representation theory of a semisimple Lie group to
the case of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces and the Virasoro algebra,
respectively. As in the classical case, the completion of this project would
contribute mutually to the two subjects: the geometry of the moduli space and
the representation theory of the Virasoro algebra. Both subjects are much more
complicated and less studied than those in the classical situation. The project
aims to advance the general understanding of each. In general, the study of the
geometry and topology of moduli spaces has recently become very important, as
moduli spaces play now a significant role in four-dimensional topology
(Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants), knot theory (Vassiliev invariants),
higher-dimensional topology (Gromov-Witten invariants), and deformation
quantization (Kontsevich's quantization of Poisson manifolds). Moreover,
although moduli spaces have been classical objects of algebraic geometry (since
the seminal work of P. Deligne and D. Mumford), their topology has not been
understood yet and has presented a challenge for algebraic geometers for the
last twenty years. Thus unraveling the topology of moduli spaces seems to be
very important for progress in both topology and geometry. ***


