
* 9971719
* Efficient Triangulations and Normal Surface Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1999,07/06/1999
* William Jaco,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2003
* USD 115,436.00

Proposal: DMS-9971719

PI: William Jaco

Abstract. This project involves the development and use of efficient
triangulations and normal surface theory in the study and understanding of
3-manifolds. A triangulation of a 3-manifold determines a class of surfaces in
the 3-manifold called normal surfaces. A fundamental principal is that if a
manifold contains an interesting surface, then for any triangulation the
manifold contains an interesting normal surface. The guiding principle of
efficient triangulations is reducing unnecessary normal surfaces and improving
the efficiency of computations for triangulation based algorithms. They have
exhibited remarkable success in doing this and, in addition, have revealed new
combinatorial information intimately related to the topology of 3-manifolds.
These methods have led to new, effective algorithms for recognizing the
3-sphere, determining if a 3-manifold is a Haken manifold, and solving the
unknotting problem.

Low-dimensional manifolds provide the geometric models of most physical
phenomena. It is natural to study and understand all possible such models.
Triangulations and normal surface theory provide an environment for such a
study. Research in these areas is making significant contribution to
computational topology and complexity theory. It seems possible that these
techniques will contribute to better computer visualization and possibly to
advances in medical modeling.
