
* 9971718
* Low-dimensional Manifolds and Knot Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/1999,08/10/2001
* Cameron Gordon,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 182,931.00

Proposal Number: DMS-9971718

Title: Low-dimensional manifolds and knot theory

Principal Investigator: Cameron McA. Gordon

Abstract: The focus of Professor Gordon's project is the study of Dehn filling
on 3-manifolds, and in particular the program to obtain the optimal bounds on
the distances between the various kinds of non-hyperbolic fillings on hyperbolic
manifolds. Many of these bounds are now known, the only remaining cases being
(1) reducible fillings on complements of (hyperbolic) knots in the 3-sphere; (2)
toroidal fillings on knots in lens spaces; and (3) the case where one of the
fillings is a small Seifert fiber space. Professor Gordon will continue to
investigate these questions, as well as other problems concerning Dehn fillings.
A special effort will be made to attack the Cabling Conjecture, which asserts
that no fillings of type (1) above exist.

The area of mathematics which forms the context of Professor Gordon's project is
3-dimensional topology, the general goal of which is to understand the structure
of 3-manifolds. These are objects that are locally like ordinary 3-dimensional
space, but whose global structure may be quite complicated. Since we live in a
3-manifold, one might say that 3-dimensional topology aims to describe what the
mathematical possibilities are for our spatial universe. This aim is still not
realized, although there is tantalizing evidence that such a description might
ultimately be possible. One very interesting application of the mathematical
theory of 3-dimensional manifolds is the "circles in the sky" project, in which,
in two years' time, certain observations will be made from a satellite, on the
basis of which an attempt will be made to mathematically determine the geometric
structure of the universe. An important aspect of 3-dimensional topology is the
theory of knots - a knot being a closed loop embedded in some tangled fashion in
3-dimensional space - and one of the main ways in which knot theory relates to
the general theory of 3-manifolds is through Dehn surgery, a process in which a
solid tube around a knot is removed from space and sewn back in differently,
giving a new 3-manifold. Much effort has been devoted over the last few years to
investigating this construction. Although the impetus for this effort is the
desire to further our understanding of 3-dimensional topology, it is interesting
to note that a theorem about Dehn surgery, the Cyclic Surgery Theorem, has
recently been used to determine the topological action of certain enzymes on
strands of DNA.
