
* 9971561
* 3-Manifold Topology, Character Varieties and Dehn Surgery
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,07/30/1999
* Xingru Zhang,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 72,396.00

Proposal: DMS-9971561

Principal Investigator: Xingru Zhang

Abstract: The main theme of this project is to understand the topology of
hyperbolic knots or links in 3-manifolds and its variation under Dehn surgery
through studying the SL(2,C)-character varieties associated to the knot or link
complements. Applications to exceptional Dehn surgery,especially to the property
P conjecture and the cabling conjecture will be explored. It is well known that
all closed orientable 3-manifolds are interelated topologically through Dehn
surgery on knots and links. This relation is nicely and deeply encoded
algebraically in the SL(2,C)-character varieties of the involved knot or link
complements. Studying the connections between the topology of 3-manifolds and
their character varieties has been very successful in understanding 3-manifolds
and their change under Dehn surgery. This project is a continuation of this line
of investigation, with an eye to possible solutions of some outstanding
conjectures.

3-manifold topology is a branch of mathematics in which we study and classify
certain global structures of "universes" (called 3-manifolds by mathematicians).
It is natural and compelling for human beings to understand 3-manifolds because
we believe we live in one of them. Besides being interesting and beautiful in
its own right, 3-manifold topology has profound connections and interactions
with other branches of mathematics, and also with physics, chemistry, biology
and computer science. It is one of most active and fertile research fields in
modern mathematics. The current project aims at solving several fundamental
problems in 3-manifold topology.
