
* 9971319
* On isomorphism conjectures for assembly maps in algebraic K-theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,08/27/2003
* Boris Goldfarb,NY,SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 59,818.00

9971319 Goldfarb Computation of algebraic K-theory of group rings R[G] is a
problem of importance in both algebra and topology. In topology, the K-groups
house many invariants associated to spaces with fundamental group G. One modern
approach is through the study of so-called assembly maps. They relate the
computable homology of the group G to it K-theory. The isomorphism conjecture
asserts that the assembly maps are isomorphisms in all dimensions when the group
has no torsion elements. The investigator will verify this for many groups that
appear in geometry and geometric group theory. The method is to refine current
techniques whenever they show such maps are injective and to use this refinement
to prove surjectivity. In another direction, the investigator will develop
techniques to handle more groups with combinatorial rather geometric
prescriptions. One of the primary problems in topology is the classification of
topological manifolds. An n-dimensional manifold is a space that locally looks
like n-dimensional Euclidean space. Examples are spheres, tori, and other spaces
often associated to such useful mathematical objects as solutions to
differential equations. The most feasible approach is to classify manifolds
within large subclasses known as homotopy classes, classification of such larger
classes being the major goal of algebraic topology. Research of the investigator
is directed toward resolution of the Borel rigidity conjecture, the simplest
solution to this classification problem. The conjecture asserts that a certain
natural type of manifold (technically, a compact manifold with a contractible
cover) is unique within its homotopy class. If true, this rigidity, together
with the effective ways to compare the homotopy classes in most relevant
geometric situations, will result in a practical classification of these
important manifolds. ***


