
* 9971660
* Topology of Three Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1999,07/13/2001
* Marc Culler,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 169,125.00

Proposal: DMS-9971660

Principal Investigator: Marc Culler and Peter Shalen

Abstract: Culler and Shalen are proposing to study the set of boundary slopes of
a knot, both in the case of an arbitrary closed orientable 3-manifold and in the
case of a manifold with cyclic fundamental group. This is a topic of intrinsic
interest, which Culler and Shalen believe is also related to some of the most
difficult unsolved problems in 3-manifold theory. Their program for applying
results about essential surfaces in knot exteriors to 3-manifold theory have led
Culler and Shalen to a number of questions about the character variety of a
hyperbolic knot group, which they propose to work on. These ideas also lead to
an approach to the very broad problem of giving a quantitative version of
Thurston's Dehn surgery theorem; this can be seen as the problem underlying most
of the existent work on Dehn surgery. The character variety has a distinguished
1-dimensional irreducible component X which is the one that contains the
character of the representation that determines the hyperbolic structure on the
knot. One question which will be addressed by Culler and Shalen is that of
determining properties that distinguish surfaces associated to ideal points of
the main component of the character variety from other essential surfaces in the
knot exterior. Another question involves the relationship between the hyperbolic
volume of the knot complement and properties of a certain factor of the
A-polynomial, this factor being the defining equation of a plane curve closely
related to X. There is a general notion of hyperbolic volume which applies to a
representation whose character lies on X. A third question is that of
understanding what properties of an essential surface associated to an ideal
point of X guarantee that this generalized volume tends to 0 at the ideal point.
Yet another relevant question is that of understanding how often it happens that
the curve X is invariant under complex conjugation, and what it means, in terms
of the topology of the 3-manfiold, for this to happen. In a somewhat different
direction, Culler and Shalen have developed methods for relating the boundary
slopes and the genera of essential surfaces in certain situations. They are
proposing to develop extensions of this theory. Their techniques in this area
may be relevant to the general question of whether every knot in a homotopy
sphere has at least one nonzero integer boundary slope.

A fundamental problem in many areas of mathematics is to classify all examples
of a certain type of mathematical object. The objects of study in this proposal
are 3-manifolds, which are mathematical models of 3-dimensional spaces. Since
our universe is a 3-dimensional space, the classification of 3-manifolds is
directly related to our understanding of nature itself. The classification
problem for 3-manifolds is far from solved, but the work of many mathematicians
over the last 20 years has at least produced a conjectural answer. The work
supported by this problem forms part of the effort to verify the conjectured
geometric classification of 3-manifolds.
