
* 9971667
* The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1999,06/15/2001
* Ronald Stern,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2002
* USD 199,956.00

Proposal: DMS-9971667

Principal Investigator: Ronald J. Stern

Abstract: The recent constructions of smooth 4 dimensional manifolds by the PI
and R. Fintushel have shown out that there are many more smooth 4-manifolds than
previously expected. These examples also indicate that the current technologies,
i.e. the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants, are insufficient to provide a
classification of smooth 4-manifolds. The goal of this research is to develop
new constructions of smooth 4 manifolds in the hope that a general picture
begins to emerge. To begin, there is a conjectured classification (up to blow-
up) of (simply-connected) symplectic 4-manifolds; namely they are the fiber sums
of holomorphic Lefschetz pencils along holomorphic submanifolds. Surprisingly,
most of the new constructions of symplectic 4-manifolds can be shown to be
obtained in this manner. The veracity of this conjecture will be the focus of
the first part of this proposed research. A very effective method, introduced by
the PI and R. Fintushel, which retains the homeomorphism type of a smooth
4-manifold X which contains a homologically essential torus with trivial normal
bundle but alters its diffeomorphism type is the "knot surgery construction".
Here, given a knot K in the 3-sphere, there results a 4-manifold X(K)
homeomorphic to X with the following properties: 1) X(unknot)=X, and 2) if X(K)
is diffeomorphic to X(J), then the Alexander polynomials of J and K are the
same. The second part of this proposal is to better understand the role that the
isotopy classes of knots play in this knot construction.

With time included, our world is four dimensional, but the large-scale structure
of our four-dimensional space is still unknown. The underlying mathematical
issue is to provide a complete list of four-dimensional manifolds; i.e. objects
which are locally modeled on Euclidean 4-space. This turns out to be an
important unsolved problem in mathematics. Strangely enough, manifolds of
dimension larger than 4 are very well understood; yet it is the dimension in
which we live and operate that provides major mathematical challenges. Using
difficult techniques from analysis, geometry, and topology, the PI and R.
Fintushel have developed surgery techniques and workable topological strategies
for counting solutions to differential equations (the Yang-Mills and Seiberg
Witten equations) which effectively distinguish four-dimensional manifolds.
Prior NSF supported research allowed for the construction of an unexpectedly
large number of four-manifolds which provided counterexamples to all the
conjecture classification schemes. This project will more closely examine these
techniques and create new constructions in the hope that a general picture
begins to emerge.
