
* 9971511
* Residual Finiteness and Negative Curvature
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1999,06/03/1999
* Daniel Wise,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2000
* USD 85,981.00

Proposal: DMS-9971511

Principal Investigator: Daniel T. Wise

Abstract:

The investigator will study the relationship between negative curvature and
residual finiteness. The former is a geometric property which has a substantial
impact on topology, and the latter is a purely algebraic property. However, the
investigator has recently developed a surprising connection between these
seemingly unrelated notions. The investigator will show that in many important
cases, negatively curved spaces have residually finite fundamental groups.
Similar methods will often yield the more dramatic result that quasiconvex
subgroups are separable in the profinite topology. One important consequence of
this work will be to demonstrate that certain hyperbolic link complements have
the property that their immersed incompressible surfaces lift to embeddings in
finite covers. A fundamental problem in topology is to classify the different
types of 3-manifolds. When a 3-manifold contains an embedded incompressible
surface, this classification can be achieved. More generally, if a 3-manifold
has a finite cover containing an embedded surface, then this classification can
be achieved. Residual finiteness and the related property of separability, are
crucial ingredients needed to produce these finite covers. The aim of this
project is to add these ingredients to the arsenal of low-dimensional
topologists and geometers.

Nearly all scientific thought concerns itself with discovering and understanding
patterns. Symmetry is one of the most fundamental types of patterns. The study
of symmetry ranges from the Platonic solids of the ancient Greeks to the groups
occurring in modern particle physics. A "group" is the complete set of
symmetries of a geometric object. The symmetries of the object help us to
understand its shape and nature. For example, a ball has infinitely many
symmetries, belonging to two classes: "rotational" symmetries, obtained by
rotating the ball through any axis running through its center (just as our earth
is now rotating), and "bilateral" symmetries, obtained by reflecting the ball
through planes passing through its center (the northern and southern hemispheres
of the earth are interchanged when we reflect through the equatorial plane). The
easiest groups of symmetries to understand are finite groups of symmetries, such
as the group of eight symmetries of a square. Sometimes an infinite group can be
`collapsed' into a finite group. This collapse is similar to the projection of a
shadow, and by examining enough of these shadows, one can glean information
about the original infinite group. The investigator will study various infinite
groups of symmetries that arise in conjunction with certain topological and
geometric objects (3-manifolds and negatively curved spaces), which have
recently been the focus of major study. The investigator will demonstrate that
these infinite groups have sufficiently many finite shadows. This will elucidate
the structure of these infinite groups and in turn will lead to a better
understanding of the original geometric objects.
