
* 9971709
*  Asymptotic topology of metric spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/1999,05/03/2001
* Alexander Dranishnikov,FL,University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2003
* USD 71,529.00

Proposal: DMS-9971709

Principal Investigator: Alexander Dranishnikov

Abstract: Dranishnikov is planning to study the asymptotic topology of metric
spaces in particular, discrete groups and large Riemannian manifolds. The
macroscopic view on unbounded metric spaces allows us to extract the essence of
several important conjectures in modern mathematics. These conjectures are often
called `The Novikov type conjectures', since the first in the list is the
Novikov higher signatures conjecture. Among others conjectures of this type are
the Baum-Connes conjecture, the Borel conjecture, the Gromov-Lawson positive
scalar curvature conjecture, Zero-in-spectrum conjecture. Most of the above
conjectures can be formulated in terms of the large-scale geometry of discrete
groups. An asymptotic approach to investigation of metric spaces can be
accomplished in rigorous frames of special category, called `Coarse category'.
There are parallels between the coarse category and the category of compact
(metrizable) spaces. Partly this analogy is established by the Higson corona
functor, partly this is due to Gromov's work on cultivating basics of dimension
theory and of its dual, connectedness theory, in this new territory. One of the
most difficult problems in the theory of compact spaces was the Alexandroff
Problem about coincidence of geometric (Lebesgue's) and algebraic
(cohomological) dimensions. The problem came from late 20s and it was completely
solved only in late 80s by the PI. Suddenly Alexandroff Problem appeared to be
important in the realm of coarse category. The corresponding equality for a
discrete group would imply most of the above conjecture for that group.

Thus a local technique of general topology such as dimension theory and absolute
neighborhood retract theory can help to resolve problems of asymptotic (global)
topology which in their turn would answer very important and difficult questions
of `local mathematics'.


