
* 9971244
* Combinatorial and Geometric Problems in Knot Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/30/1999
* Morwen Thistlethwaite,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2003
* USD 69,927.00

Proposal: DMS-9971244

PI: Morwen Thistlethwaite

Abstract: Thistlethwaite's research is in classical knot theory, the study of
embeddings of smooth simple closed curves in the 3-sphere. The computer is an
essential tool in his research, in that the problems he addresses are often
suggested by careful observation of data. Thistlethwaite will continue to
investigate the rate of growth of the number of knots, following his
collaboration with C. Sundberg, where the exact growth exponent was determined
for prime, alternating links. He will study optimal configurations of symmetric
knots, and will investigate other geometric problems associated with knot
complements, in particular hyperbolic knot complements containing
essential4-punctured spheres. He will investigate the possibility that
hyperbolic geometry might be used to provide a new, completely geometric proof
of the Tait flyping conjecture. The knot tables will be extended well beyond the
1,701,936 knots currently listed, and these new tables will be used to search
for interesting examples. Development will continue on the freely available
software package "Knotscape", which provides a graphical interface to the knot
tables and access to many invariants.

Thistlethwaite's specialty is classical knot theory, a branch of 3-dimensional
topology with origins in the nineteenth century. A knot is a closed curve in
3-dimensional space; one can imagine a knotted rope with its ends joined
together. Two knots are considered to be equivalent if one can be deformed
continuously to the other, and a knot is deemed to be trivial, or unknotted, if
it is equivalent to a flat circle. Knot theory is a rich subject, as it
interfaces with geometry, topology, algebra and combinatorics. In recent years
it has aroused the interest of chemists and molecular biologists, particularlyin
relation to the knotting of DNA. Knot theory abounds with problems which are
simple to state, but hard to solve; for example, it is often difficult in
practice to prove that two given knots are inequivalent, as it is hard to rule
out the existence of some ingenious method of deforming one to the other. It can
even be hard to decide whether a given knot is trivial. If a knot is laid down
on a flat surface with as few crossovers as possible, the resulting number of
crossovers is called the crossing-number of the knot. To date, Thistlethwaite
has classified by computer the 1,701,936 knots of up to 16 crossings; this
classification was confirmed by an independent tabulation carried out by J.
Hoste and J. Weeks. As part of this project, he will extend the tables to 17 or
18 crossings, thereby expecting to find many new examples with exciting
properties. He will continue to investigate the fundamental problem as to how
fast the number of knots grows in relation to crossing-number. Thistlethwaite
will use hyperbolic geometry, a form of non-Euclidean geometry, to investigate
hidden symmetries of knots, and to determine the structure of alternating knots
(a knot is alternating if it can be arranged so that the rope goes alternately
over and under at successive crossings.) He will continue to develop the
software package "Knotscape", which provides a graphical interface to the knot
tables.
