
* 9972550
* 1999 Summer Conference on General Topology and its Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/15/1999,05/28/1999
* Sheldon Rothman,NY,Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 05/31/2000
* USD 12,430.00

Proposal: DMS-9972550

Principal Investigator: Sheldon Rothman

Abstract:

The conference will have five special sessions. The session on Set-Theoretic
Topology and its Applications will stress the interplay among the classical
topics of topology and analysis, including the newly defined field of study
called set-theoretic analysis. The Dynamical Systems session will include the
application of tools from continuum theory to this subject. A goal of the
session on Topological Groups is to discuss the new methods in this area used in
solving problems in functional analysis and stochastic processes. Topological
vector spaces and rings of continuous functions will be the principal areas of
the Topological Algebraic Structures session. The fifth special session,
Asymmetric Topology/Topology and Computer Science, will be devoted mostly to
applications of techniques from topology to computer science. Talks in this
session will be on such topics as domain theory and semantics of programming
languages, and digital topology and computer visualization. In addition to the
special sessions two workshops will be given. The Dynamics and Topology of
Entire Functions workshop will describe how Cantor bouquets, indecomposable
continua, explosion points, and a topological kneading invariant play a
principal role in determining the dynamics of certain maps, while the workshop
on Topological Groups will discuss projective limits and balanced groups.

The Summer Conference series on General Topology and its Applications began in
1984 at the City College of New York with 35 participants and 13 talks; the 13th
such Conference, in Mexico City, June 1998, was the third held abroad; it had
about 150 participants from across the United States and 27 other countries, and
featured 110 talks. The reason for this growth is in the recent history of
general topology. This field studies generalized shapes and limits, and was
developed to solve problems elsewhere in mathematics. After a time of
concentration on problems internal to it, the emphasis in topology is again
turning toward applications to other areas. Almost half our invited speakers
work outside topology, but apply it; so participants gain new research ideas and
connections between other fields and topology. Here is an example relating
topology and computer science: Exact computation of real numbers is impossible
as long as only finite amounts of information can be stored. But using topology
the set of real numbers and some other such important examples can be shown to
have "approximation models" that allow arbitrarily accurate computation of their
elements, an essential for all sensitive calculations such as those used for
weather prediction and space flight. Joint work by Conference participants,
including some which took place at our Conferences, led to proof that an object
has an approximation model precisely if it is a "Polish space". This is
particularly satisfying since Polish spaces are among the first objects
discovered by topologists, and have been studied for almost a century
