
* 9972546
* Homotopy Theory of Commutative Algebras
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1999,07/18/2000
* James Turner,MI,Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 55,324.00

9972546 Turner The central focus of this project is to translate the methods
and technology of the homotopy theory of spaces to the realm of algebras and
then apply them back to questions in the homotopy theory of spaces. The approach
is to view algebras themselves as special cases of simplicial algebras. In this
larger category, there exists a homotopy theory and notions of homotopy groups
and homology groups, depending on the type of algebras considered, which are
homotopy invariants. Restricting to (simplicial) commutative algebras, the
resulting homology theory is called Andre-Quillen homology, which has proved
useful for both commutative algebra and topology. In particular, understanding
when this homology theory vanishes has implications in both commutative algebra
and topology. On the commutative algebra side, conjectures of Quillen indicate
that the vanishing in high degrees of the Andre-Quillen homology of Noetherian
algebras, over a Noetherian ring, implies the homology must vanish above degree
two. It is the intent of this project to resolve this conjecture and its
implications for commutative algebra. On the topological side, obstructions to
the existence of a topological space with given mod p cohomology, as an unstable
algebra over the Steenrod algebra, lie in certain Andre-Quillen cohomology
groups of that unstable algebra. This project will also investigate finding
conditions for those obstructions to vanish as well as relating other aspects of
the Andre-Quillen cohomology to the homotopy of that space, if it exists.
Central to studying topological spaces is the theory of their homotopy type,
which can be understood using the methods provided by algebraic topology. These
methods involve assigning to spaces algebraic invariants, called homotopy,
homology, and cohomology groups, whose internal structures help discern the
internal structures of the original topological object. A dual perspective can
be developed whereby the methods of homotopy theory can be used to study
algebras on their own grounds. In particular, there is a (co)homology theory,
called Andre-Quillen (co)homology, for commutative algebras that has proved
useful to both commutative algebra and topology. The goal of the present project
is to understand under what conditions this homology theory vanishes, either
locally or globally, and the implications for commutative algebra and topology.
For example, one focus will be on the implications for commutative algebra of
the global vanishing of Andre-Quillen homology in high degrees. Under certain
special conditions, it is known that such a vanishing implies that the imputed
commutative algebra has the very special feature of being a type of algebra
called a local complete intersection. Part of the present project is concerned
with determining the implications of such global vanishing under a weakening of
these special conditions. On the topological side, the cohomology of a space can
be viewed as a commutative algebra. One question that arises is: when can a
given commutative algebra be realized as the cohomology of a space? An answer
can be given in terms of certain elements in the Andre-Quillen cohomology of the
given commutative algebra: the space is realizable if and only if these elements
vanish. Another goal of the present project will be to understand these
obstruction elements and the conditions under which they vanish as well as
relating other aspects of the Andre-Quillen cohomology to the homotopy of that
space, if it exists. ***


