
* 9973232
* Studies in Knot Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/15/1999,08/09/1999
* Joan Birman,NY,Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 60,025.00

Proposal: DMS-9973232 PI: Joan S. Birman

We propose to investigate several problems relating to knots and to3-manifolds:
(1) We hope to find new invariants of Legendrian and transverse knots in
3-space, using the standard contact structure. Every transverse knot can be
represented as a closed braid, and we begin by seeking an appropriate
modification of the classical Markov theorem for transverse knots. We hope to
extend the work of Eliashberg and Fraser, which shows that transverse knots are
determined by their knot type and Bennequin number, to a wider class of knots.
After that we hope to study knots for which we conjecture that their theorem
fails. We have candidates. (2) We propose to study the complexity of the problem
of recognizing the unknot algorithmically. We conjecture the existence of a
polynomial-time algorithm. (3) We propose to study invariants of Heegaard
splittings of closed, orientable 3-manifolds which arise through representations
of the mapping class group of a surface onto various(initially finite) groups.
One such collection of groups arises through the work of Wright and the related
work of Masbaum on the Reshitikhan-Turaev representations of the mapping class
group.

The planet earth is an example of a 2-dimensional manifold. If you stand at any
2 points on the earth (which, to a mathematician, is to be thought of as having
no geographical features and being perfectly round and smooth), then your
surroundings look identical at the 2 points, and give you no hint of the global
topology. A major leap in thinking about the earth occurred when it was learned
that in fact the earth is round, i.e. it is a 2-dimensional manifold, in
particular it is a 2-sphere. But if we add one more dimension, we are in the
position of people before Columbus made his discovery: A `neighborhood of one
point looks just like a neighborhood of another, and we have no idea of the
global picture. All we know is that the world is a 3-dimensional manifold. It
could be a3-dimensional sphere, but there are many other possibilities too, and
the existence of black holes suggests a very complicated structure. The work is
this proposal studies the most accessible examples of 3-dimensionalmanifolds,
namely the space which remains when one removes a knotted circle from a
3-dimensional sphere. Knots are incredibly complicated objects, and
understanding them is very basic to 3-manifold geometry and topology. By finding
ways to recognize individual knots algorithmically, and by finding partial ways
to tell them apart, mathematicians gain insight into deep questions about
topology. We will also study other3-dimensional manifolds by cutting them apart
into two handlebodies which are pasted together along a so-called Heegaard
surface.
