
* 9973119
* The Action of a CAT(0) Group on the Boundary
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/15/1999,07/26/1999
* Kim Ruane,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/2002
* USD 64,314.00

Proposal: DMS-9973119

PI: Kium Ruane

Title: The Action of a CAT(0) Group on the Boundary

Abstract: The basic idea of Geometric Group Theory is to study the structure of
an infinite group G by viewing G as a certain set of rigid motions of a
geometry. In this way, group-theoretic problems are translated into geometric
problems and all the techniques of geometry can then be utilized. A standard
technique in geometry is to study the asymptotics of a space by compactifying it
- i.e. putting a boundary on the space. Word hyperbolic groups are a class of
groups for which this idea has proven to be incredibly useful. This is a class
of groups obtained by assuming a negative curvature condition on the geometry.
It is currently of interest to extend this well-developed theory of word
hyperbolic groups to the ``nonpositively curved'' setting. There have been
several proposed classes of nonpositively curved groups. One such class consists
of groups that arise as a set of rigid motions of a CAT(0) space, groups
referred to here as ``CAT(0) groups". The boundary of a CAT(0) space on which
group G acts as well as the action of G on this boundary will be the main
objects of interest in this proposal. For word hyperbolic groups, studying the
boundary and the action of the group on the boundary has yielded many theorems
about the group. Many of the theorems that hold in that setting should have
generalizations to the nonpositively curved setting and that is the point of
view taken here. It is already known that replacing the phrase "word hyperbolic"
with CAT(0) in many of these theorems is not going to work, but finding the
correct theorems is an important step in unifying the theory of nonpositively
curved groups much like the theory of nonpositively curved manifolds. The
dynamics of the action of a CAT(0)group on the boundary of the space has hardly
been used to answer any questions from the geometric group theory point of view.
Questions about the group and subgroups of the group should translate into
questions about this action, much like in the word hyperbolic setting.

A group is one of the most fundamental objects in mathematics. The set of whole
numbers under addition is an example of a group that everyone is familiar with.
Also, the set of rigid motions of a geometric object forms a group and in fact,
the mathematical properties of this group often characterize the geometric
object. For example, knots are geometric objects which have recently seen
beautiful applications in the study of DNA since the strands of DNA in our body
are often knotted. Being able to tell the difference between two different knots
is an important idea in these applications. There is a natural group associated
to a knot which completely determines the knot. These knot groups are groups of
the type we are interested in here.
