
* 9977099
* Investigations on Normal and Paracompact Spaces
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/1999,05/07/2004
* Dennis Burke,OH,Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 74,340.00

Proposal: DMS9977099

PI: Zoltan Balogh

Title: Investigations on normal and paracompact spaces

Abstract: This project involves applications of the technique of constructing
topological spaces using diagonalizations through elementary submodels.
Applications of this technique to the fundamental classes of normal to
paracompact spaces were pioneered by M.E.Rudin. It has been refined and expanded
by the Principal Investigator during the previous grant period to get answers to
some of the questions left undecided in this area. Specific improvements include
the technique of complete neighborhoods, reflection tricks as well as new
applications. Such constructions are laborious, and so the problems targeted
need to be (a) well-known, preferably old and considered basic; (b) have no
known ad hoc solutions; (c) lend themselves to some "natural" inductive
construction. Examples of such problems are abundant in the classes of spaces
ranging from normal to paracompact. It is expected that the applications will
reach into other areas of topology, analysis and infinite combinatorics.
Research in set-theoretic topology is aimed at finding out the properties of
abstract topological spaces using methods of set theory and model theory. Such
research builds, in the setting of a concrete mathematical discipline, concrete
techniques of handling infinite objects and processes. It is expected that the
techniques will be applicable in other areas of mathematics and interactions
with set theory and model theory will be enriched.


