* 0300435
* Investigations in Combinatorial Optimization and its Applications to DNA Sequencing Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Eva Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This research focuses on theoretical and computational investigations of the
minimum weight common mutated sequence (MWCMS) problem. The study is motivated
by the desire to help quantify the concept of "best" representative sequence in
the evolutionary distance problem. The evolutionary distance problem involves
finding the DNA sequence of the most likely ancestor associated with a given a
set of DNA sequences from distinct but similar organisms. The project consists
of four parts: (1) Develop realistic graph-based models to describe the MWCMS
problem. The models involve setting up a multi-layer supergraph using the DNA
sequences, and construction of conflict graphs based on a collection of complete
paths; (2) Study the complexity of the underlying models; (3) Investigate
computational solution strategies for solving the resulting large-scale node-
packing instances; and, (4) Apply the methods developed to the oncological
problem of finding patterns and similarities among different gene sequences
linked with inactivation of "tumor suppressor'' genes, a phenomenon which leads
to abnormal cell proliferation, which is a hallmark of cancer.

Success of this research will lead to important theoretical results related to
the minimum weight common mutated sequence problem; it will expand and/or
generalize known complexity results for classes of well-studied sequencing
problems; it will help to understand the evolutionary distance problem and
genomic analysis; and it will lead to advances in computational techniques for
solving large-scale node packing problems, problems that arise commonly in
industrial applications, and specifically in our study to DNA sequencing
problems. The oncological application will help cancer biologists and
oncologists to better understand hidden patterns in gene sequences which may be
responsible for inactivation of "tumor suppressor'' genes. Inactivation of such
genes leads to abnormal cell proliferation, a hallmark of cancer. Hence, the
study will help to gain a better understanding of an important cancer formation
mechanism at the genomic level. Educational outreach involves developing
teaching materials related to the project for undergraduate and graduate
students in engineering and in the medical domain. It also involves training two
Ph.D. students in this multidisciplinary research involving optimization,
algorithmic design and cancer treatment. In addition to conferences and public
panel discussions, part of the research project will also be disseminated in the
lectures on information and biotechnology in the course "Cancer Biology and
Biotechnology", developed recently by a group of interdisciplinary faculty
researchers at Georgia Tech with a focus on multi-faceted approaches for
advancing cancer technology.

