* 0300370
* Congestion in Facilities Location and Layout: Deterministic and Stochastic Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Rajan Batta, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 212,000.00

The project aims at developing a common theory base to model movement and
resultant congestion in the context of facilities location and facilities
layout. The motivation stems from the fact that the two bodies of literature in
facility layout and facility location have generally evolved separately. The
objective is to produce a superior class of models that are expected to provide
better performance in real-life applications via the explicit consideration of
slow-downs, congestion, flow capacity, and accurate distances. The research work
has three main tasks. The first one is called the Planar Facility Location
Problem with Generalized Congested Regions that advances and unifies existing
restricted facility location literature by common modeling of: Barriers (no
travel, no location), Forbidden Regions (no location), and Congested Regions (no
location and travel with additional cost). In the dynamic/stochastic version of
this problem the congestion cost might change with time of day (to represent
rush hour traffic) or be a random variable. The second research task is called
the Connection Location Problem, where ``connection'' is used to define a
connected part of a manufacturing facility or an urban flow network that links
different sets of departments/cells or facilities. The stochastic version of
this task concerns selection/location and the service rate of the connections
(and to assign the flows) so as to minimize the sum of the fixed connection
installation costs, the queuing delay cost, and the material movement cost, that
take into consideration the congestion effects. The third task is to embody the
theoretical results of the study in Educational material.

The intellectual merit of the first task is the study the plant layout problem
in which distance measures vary in different sections of the plant, and also
consider location problems in a modeling framework that simultaneously allows
for barriers, forbidden regions and congested regions. The second task would
allow for modeling of aisle capacities and placement and add significantly to
the limited literature available in this area.