* 0300421
* BST Based Linearizers and Matching Circuits for High Efficiency RF Power Amplifiers
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2006
* USD 204,173.00

0300421&lt;br/&gt;Mortazawi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RF power amplifier is one
of the key components in radio frequency communications. It is the determining
factor in cost, power consumption, reliability and system performance. Since the
power amplifier is the most power consuming element in a communication system,
the design of high efficiency power amplifiers has drawn considerable attention
in the past several years. The requirement for high efficiency originates from
the limitations imposed by the available dc power, as well as the size, weight
and cost requirements for the system. These requirements are even more severe
for mobile and space borne communication applications. In response to the above
technology needs, this program proposes to develop novel approaches for the
design of efficient, linear and compact RF power amplifier
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objective of the proposed research
is to incorporate thin film barium strontium titanate (BST) ferroelectrics into
power amplifier circuits for improved linearity and efficiency. This approach
would allow significant benefits in terms of better matching and control of the
circuit properties through the introduction of the ferroelectric components to
yield compact, versatile and reproducible designs. Specifically the PI will
design RF power amplifiers integrated with BST varactor based predistortion
linearizers and tunable matching networks to improve the amplifier's overall
performance and functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit of the Proposed Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
expected to have a significant impact on the design of low cost, power efficient
and compact transmitters for electronic communications at RF, microwave and
millimeter-wave frequencies. Services and applications provided by satellites
will also benefit from these developments due to the limitations on available dc
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of RF Engineering and Materials
Science expertise required here will provide rapid insight and learning into the
development of tunable high frequency electronics for wireless applications,
where there are numerous applications of strong commercial value. The
dissemination of research will be based on journal publications,
conference/workshop presentations and through their collaboration with ATMI. The
Radiation Laboratory at UofM offers biweekly seminars on current research that
are well attended by both graduate as well as undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;