* 0300097
* Patient-Adaptive Feedback Controllers for Heart Assist Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* J. Robert Boston, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Patient-Adaptive Feedback Controllers for Heart Assist Devices&lt;br/&gt;A.
Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Heart transplant candidates often wait long periods
(300 days or more on the average) before a suitable&lt;br/&gt;donor heart
becomes available, and many of these candidate die while awaiting heart
transplantation.&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the medical community has been placing
increased emphasis on the use of mechanical&lt;br/&gt;devices that can
substitute for, or enhance, the function of the natural heart. A Ventricular
Assist Device&lt;br/&gt;(VAD) is such a device. This device if often used as a
bridge to mechanically support a patient while&lt;br/&gt;awaiting heart
transplantation, or while their natural heart recovers. But the ultimate use of
this device is as&lt;br/&gt;a long-term iocurelr for heart failure. In either
case, the goal of a VAD is to provide the patient with as close&lt;br/&gt;to a
normal lifestyle as possible. The goal for all concerned is to allow patients to
return home and return&lt;br/&gt;to the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;An important
challenge facing the increased use of VADs is the development of an appropriate
controller&lt;br/&gt;for these devices. The latest generation of VADs, based on
turbo-dynamic pumps, requires a controller that&lt;br/&gt;can adjust the speed
of the rotor (pump impeller) to meet the circulatory demand of the patient.
Therefore,&lt;br/&gt;in addition to being robust and reliable, such a controller
should be able to adapt to the daily activities and&lt;br/&gt;the physiological
changes of the patient. In this project we propose to investigate the
theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;fundamental issues associated with the development of
such a controller. More specifically, (1) we will&lt;br/&gt;continue our ongoing
work on the development of a generalized model of a rotary blood pump that,
when&lt;br/&gt;coupled to existing model of the human cardiovascular system,
will serve as a simulation model for further&lt;br/&gt;development; (2) we will
develop a robust optimal feedback control algorithm that provides the
flexibility&lt;br/&gt;to incorporate various sensor inputs as available, and (3)
we will implement the control algorithm into a PC&lt;br/&gt;platform and test
its responsiveness in a mock circulating flow loop. The principal functions of
this&lt;br/&gt;feedback controller will be: (1) to determine and maintain
appropriate cardiac output, subject to constraints&lt;br/&gt;imposed by the
device and the patients condition including avoiding ventricular suction; (2) to
identify&lt;br/&gt;system variables and parameters to monitor the patient's
condition, indicating when the patient's&lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular status is
improving or deteriorating and detecting component failures; (3) to
recognize&lt;br/&gt;different operating conditions and data environments,
responding to changes in the signals available for&lt;br/&gt;measurement from
the patient and the assist device; (4) to monitor the control strategy
(algorithm) itself to&lt;br/&gt;avoid uncontrollable situations and
inappropriate or dangerous control actions; and (5) to provide a fail-
safe&lt;br/&gt;mode of operation by entering a preset open-loop operating mode
when a hardware or algorithmic failure&lt;br/&gt;occurs.&lt;br/&gt;The primary
intellectual merit of the proposed research will be to increase our
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;fundamental technical issues related to the control
of non-conventional complex systems, such as the&lt;br/&gt;VADs, that involve
both electromechanical as well as physiological components. A truly
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;approach, with expertise coming from the electrical,
mechanical, and biomedical engineering fields as well&lt;br/&gt;as the medical
profession, is needed to develop the mathematical framework needed to be able
to&lt;br/&gt;effectively control such systems.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the proposed research will primarily be in improving the quality of life
for&lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular patients awaiting heart transplantation. Any
improvement in the existing technology of the&lt;br/&gt;ventricular assist
devices will have a tremendous effect on the physical condition and ultimately
the&lt;br/&gt;recovery of patients suffering from congestive heart failure. It
is hoped that this study, leading to the&lt;br/&gt;development of a patient
adaptive feedback controller, will provide an opportunity for these patients
to&lt;br/&gt;leave the hospital, return home, and re-enter the work force while
awaiting for a donor heart. Another&lt;br/&gt;important impact of this project
is in training engineering graduate (and a few undergraduate)
students&lt;br/&gt;from the electrical, mechanical, and biomedical, departments
to work together as a team in this highly&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary field.
This project will provide an opportunity for students to apply what they
have&lt;br/&gt;learned in the control and signal processing courses to a
realistic (but not very well defined mathematically)&lt;br/&gt;problem that has
a tremendous societal impact.