* 0300649
* CAREER: Development of Millimeter-Wave Polymer-Based Multi-layer Integration:  Organic Micromachining Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Anh-Vu Pham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 06/30/2006
* USD 311,670.00

0093525&lt;br/&gt;Pham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of electronic
integration will require a technology that can combine solid-state integrated
circuits (IC), functional microelectromechanical devices (MEMS), passive
components, and sensors into a package. The demand for this multiple device
integration poses substantial challenges at microwave and millimeter wave
frequencies. Furthermore, a major factor that must be addressed for millimeter
wave applications is the development of integration techniques to miniaturize
electronic components.&lt;br/&gt;The author proposes to develop an organic
micromachining technique which provides revolutionary concepts to address the
need for future millimeter wave integration (28-40 GHz). The organic
micromachining technology will provide a platform for integrating solid-state
ICs, functional MEMS devices, passive components, and sensors into a system on a
package. The compatibility of this technology with multilayer polymer thin-films
is key to integrate ultra-light weight, small size and portable components. The
major tasks of the proposed research include (1) Development of micromachined,
3-dimensional (3-D), polymer-based transmission lines to achieve ultralow loss,
(2) Development of micromachined vertical interconnects to transport signals in
3-D multi-layer structures, and (3) Integration of multiple device technologies
into the organic micromachining platform to develop future communication systems
at millimeter wave frequencies. This integration scheme represents a packaging
paradigm known as a system-on-a-package (SOP). The proposed tasks involve
collaborative efforts with industry and national research centers including
General Electric (GE CRD), Agilent Technologies, the National Science Foundation
(NSF) Center for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films at Clemson University,
and the NSF Packaging Research Center at Georgia Tech. These collaborative
efforts provide infrastructure and skills to study multiple aspects of the
organic micromachining technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
research will lead to innovations and fundamental understanding of the next
generation micromachining technology developed in a multilayer organic platform.
Based on this effort, significant impact is expected upon the development of
future communication systems by providing a means to combine unique
functionalities of heterogeneous components. These systems will be able to
sense, compute, and communicate through a wireless sensor network. Furthermore,
this organic micromachining system, which is processed with conventional spin-
coating and optical lithography to achieve high resolution and high aspect
ratio, can be applied to the development of functional MEMS devices (switches,
resonators, and tunable filters) and their integration with conventional solid-
state ICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's teaching plan addresses the education
from grade school to graduate studies. He has begun and will continue to develop
a research program to assist students in transitioning from high school to
college and from college to graduate studies. He would like to extend the
opportunity to the disabled and under represented students who may have been
traditionally left out of college and graduate studies. He has strong interests
in developing R-F/Wireless design and laboratory courses integrating into the
department's on-going wireless program at Clemson University. He will
incorporate a web-based technology to broadcast interactive laboratory
experiments to outreach high school students and college freshmen.&lt;br/&gt;