* 0300349
* Dynamics and Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Michael Loss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 336,871.00

PI/Co-PI:Michael Loss/Eric Carlen, Georgia, Tech DMS-0300349

ABSTRACT:

The investigators will study a variety of physical problems ranging from a
probabilistic investigation of the rates of equilibration in many particle
systems, to the stability of matter in the presence of a quantized radiation
field. More specifically, in the first problem mentioned, they will be studying
the distance from equilibrium of a many particle system as measured by entropy
or related Lyapunov functions. The goal will be inequalities that yield
realistic rates of approach to equilibrium for initial conditions that are far
away from the equilibrium state. In recent work on the Kac model of molecular
collisions, the investigators developed a method for controlling the rate of
dissipation as a function of the number of molecules in the system. New work
will extend this to other measures of the distance from equilibrium that is
better suited to initial data far from equilibrium. The second problem is
concerned with understanding the stability of matter problem for relativistic
models with pair creation taken into account. Moreover, various questions
concerning the self-energy of systems interacting with radiation and the
existence of ground states will be investigated. All these problems will be
treated from a non-perturbative perspective.

It is a fundamental observation that many laws of nature can be formulated as
maximization or minimization problems. It is therefore important to describe the
configurations of the physical systems that yield these minima or maxima, as
well as understanding how these equilibrium configurations are reached by the
system. This proposal investigates such problems in specific but fundamental
models. These models are physically diverse: both classical and quantum,
deterministic and probabilistic. The common mathematical thread that binds these
problems, and many others discussed in the proposal, is that they all lead to
challenging problems in the calculus of variations. Thus, they are tied together
in that their solutions require new a--priori estimates, in the form of
inequalities. This can be an estimate on the ground state energy in field theory
or an estimate on the rate of dissipation in kinetic theory. Ideally, these
inequalities should be sharp enough to serve as the basis of exact calculations,
and have applicability to problems other than the one that motivated them, as in
the previous work on the Kac model. What makes it especially attractive to work
in this area is that it cuts across the boundaries of mathematics and other
scientific disciplines.

