* 0300055
* Student Travel Awards to Attend the Annual and European Summer Meetings of the ASL
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Charles Steinhorn, Association For Symbolic Logic
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0300055&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Charles I. Steinhorn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds
travel awards to graduate students in logic to&lt;br/&gt;support their
participation in the Annual Meetings and the&lt;br/&gt;European Summer Meetings
(Logic Colloquia) of the Association for&lt;br/&gt;Symbolic Logic. These two
events are arguably the most important&lt;br/&gt;meetings in the field of logic;
since their inception, they have&lt;br/&gt;been international scientific
meetings of the highest standard of&lt;br/&gt;excellence. The Association works
to ensure that these meetings&lt;br/&gt;cover logic comprehensively and that
they represent the highest&lt;br/&gt;quality work being done in this field. They
accordingly have&lt;br/&gt;provided important opportunities for intellectual
exchange, thus&lt;br/&gt;acting as a stimulus to advancement of research. For
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students in logic, the opportunity to attend one or both of
these&lt;br/&gt;ASL meetings is an indispensible component of
serious&lt;br/&gt;participation in the profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Association for Symbolic Logic is the leading
international&lt;br/&gt;professional society for logicians, whose membership
includes&lt;br/&gt;researchers in computer science, cognitive science,
linguistics,&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, and philosophy. It organizes and sponsors a
number&lt;br/&gt;of important meetings. Most prominent among these are its
Annual&lt;br/&gt;Meeting, held each year in North America, and its European
Summer&lt;br/&gt;Meeting. The Association also has met for many years at the
Joint&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics Meetings and with the American
Philosophical&lt;br/&gt;Association. Recent sponsored meetings have taken place
in Asia,&lt;br/&gt;Australia, Europe, and North and South America. During the
last&lt;br/&gt;few years, the Association has actively sought to increase
the&lt;br/&gt;range and number of meetings of which it is a sponsor.
A&lt;br/&gt;particular aim of this effort is to embrace new and
emerging&lt;br/&gt;fields in which logic has come to play an important
role,&lt;br/&gt;including computer science, linguistics, and
cognitive&lt;br/&gt;science. This project will permit the continuation of
a&lt;br/&gt;successful program of graduate student travel awards that
the&lt;br/&gt;Association has administered since 1993 and that has been
partly&lt;br/&gt;funded by NSF since 1997. The program has proved to be a
highly&lt;br/&gt;effective means of bringing students in logic to
important&lt;br/&gt;professional meetings at which they can meet and exchange
ideas&lt;br/&gt;with leading logicians, an experience which is a vital
component&lt;br/&gt;in training future Ph.D.'s in the field. Almost fifty
percent of&lt;br/&gt;the awards funded by N.S.F. during the period 1998-2001
(the&lt;br/&gt;first N.S.F.-supported awards were made in 1998) went to
students&lt;br/&gt;who subsequently have earned their Ph.D.'s in logic.
Further&lt;br/&gt;information on the Association may be found on its web
site:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.aslonline.org.&lt;br/&gt;