* 0300236
* Analysis and Design of a Global Adaptive Critic Controller
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Silvia Ferrari, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 04/30/2006
* USD 167,745.00

Recent advances in a variety of technologies and applications call for improved
performance and reliability, while exacerbating the complexity and uncertainty
of systems and their surroundings. Although classical control and system theory
already allow for a high degree of machine automation, a renewed interest in
systems that display intelligent behavior is emerging across disciplines. This
project will formally investigate the stability and robustness of a novel design
that has proven particularly effective for the full-envelope on-line learning
control of a full nonlinear aircraft simulation, subject to unmodeled dynamics
and unexpected control failures. This adaptive control system will be further
tested on anew and more advanced aircraft simulator capable of reproducing
highly nonlinear phenomena, such as aeroelastic effects, and stall/post-stall
behavior. One major goal is to reduce the rate of loss of aircraft or even
spacecraft under conditions even more extreme then those addressed by more
conventional forms of "reconfigurable flight control."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
design consists of a two-phase learning procedure that is realized through novel
techniques for neural-network function approximation. Firstly, a global
classical control design is incorporated in a network of neural networks off
line, by solving linear systems of equations. Secondly, the network parameters
are updated or fine tuned incrementally over time, through dual-heuristic-
programming adaptive-critic architecture. The author recently showed that this
approach to on-line learning control could considerably improve performance with
respect to the classical control design, under a range of unforeseen conditions.
The proposed research would combine a novel algebraic training approach with
integral-quadratic-constraint techniques to prove closed-loop stability and
establish performance guarantees for this global control
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project consists of
providing a systematic, rigorous framework for understanding the behavior,
quality, and characteristics of intelligent control systems. The design of
systems that are not only adaptive and reconfigurable, but also safe and
reliable would widen the range of workable applications and, thus, encourage
further research in this field. The broader impact of the proposed research is
the creation of new performance metrics for comparing intelligent vs. classical
control systems. Furthermore, the proposed objectives would enhance our
understanding of rational intelligence as a viable paradigm for dealing with
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;