* 0300336
* Invariant Subspaces and Free Probability in the Context of von Neumann algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Kenneth Dykema, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Dykema&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invariant subspace problem
and its cousin, the hyperinvariant subspace problem, are fundamental questions
about the structure of operators on Hilbert space whose solution, especially if
accompanied by further detail about the subspaces and the resulting
decomposition of the operator, would be an enormous advance in our understanding
of such operators. Recently, there has been great progress in the problem of the
existence of invariant subspaces of operators relative to a von Neumann algebra
having a finite trace. A von Neumann algebra with a finite trace is an infinite
dimensional, noncommutative analogue of a probability space, and many important
classes of operators can be found inside von Neumann algebras having finite
traces. However, the essential unsolved case and a key class of operators left
virtually untouched by this recent progress is the class of quasinilpotent
operators in a finite von Neumann algebra. The proposed research seeks to find
invariant subspaces for them, relative to their von Neumann algebras. Free
probability theory is an analogue of usual probability theory where independence
is replaced by freeness, a completely noncommutative notion. Free probability
theory and its off spring, free entropy, have been at the heart of much progress
over the last decade in understanding certain classes of operators and von
Neumann algebras with finite trace, called the free group factors. However, an
outstanding open problem on them is whether all free group factors are
isomorphic to each other or whether they constitute a diverse family. At the
moment, this problem seems intimately bound up with the question of whether free
entropy dimension is an invariant for von Neumann algebras having finite trace,
or whether it can take different values on different sets of generators of a
given von Neumann algebra. A second part of the proposed research will test this
invariance question by computing the free entropy dimension of certain recently
discovered "exotic" generators of free group factors. &lt;br/&gt;