* 0300216
* GOALI: Interconnect Processing Enhancement by Measurement of Nanoscale Dielectric Constant Degradation and Development of Experimentally Verified Models of Nanoscale Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Todd Gross, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2007
* USD 399,465.00

This research combines experimental and modeling activities that are integrated
by the use of scanning force microscopy to measure the effects of different
processing parameters on dielectric properties and deformation in Cu-damascene
interconnect structures with nanoscale resolution. We utilize electrostatic
force microscopy to detect undesirable dielectric constant gradients that are
caused by plasma processing during dielectric deposition, reactive ion etching
of the circuit pattern, oxidizing plasma removal of photoresist, and adhesion
enhancement with inert gas plasmas. This will help optimize plasma processing
parameters to minimize or eliminate dielectric degradation during manufacturing.
In our study of nanoscale deformation, scanning force microscopy (SFM) is used
to measure the out-of-plane deformation resulting from thermal cycling with
nanometer scale resolution. In parallel, finite element strategies to model
interfacial sliding and diffusive deformation are being developed and used to
predict deformation in interconnect structures. These predictions are validated
using our SFM method so the models can be used as reliable design tools to
predict deformation during thermal processing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader technological impacts of this work include a significant collaboration
between UNH and two major semiconductor manufacturers, IBM and Intel, technology
transfer of a new dielectric imaging technique to industry and a development of
an experimentally verified model of nanoscale deformation that will be useful to
the interconnect industry and other nanomanufacturing areas such as MEMS and
NEMS. The broader educational impacts include graduate education in a
technologically important area, incorporation of a real world project in
undergraduate engineering courses, and enhanced participation of women in
science by the support of a female graduate student in an interdisciplinary
setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;