* 0300631
* Novel Bioactive Inorganic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Challa Kumar, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 356,250.00

The aims of this project are to stabilize enzymes in inorganic layered
materials, and to develop a detailed understanding of enzyme-solid interactions.
This research is crucial for the rational design of new materials to maximize
enzyme function for application in biocatalysis, implants, artificial organs,
and biosensors (homeland security). Industrial/laboratory use of enzymes is
severely limited, due partly to enzyme instability towards pH, temperature, and
organic solvents. Enzymes embedded in solids can overcome some of these
limitations, but embedding of enzymes results in significant loss of activity.
The goal of this research is to provide a systematic investigation of enzyme-
solid materials needed to fill this knowledge gap. We will use a novel,
reversible, and robust methodology (tethered-heme approach) to embed enzymes in
solids, and evaluate them using state-of-the-art micro-calorimetric and
spectroscopic methods. Graduate, undergraduate, high school students, and
visiting foreign scholars will be trained in material synthesis, protein
structure, enzyme kinetics, micro-calorimetry, and attenuated total reflectance
- Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR). We will participate in the
outreach programs, "Kids are Scientists Too" for young children; the "Mentor
Connection" for gifted high school students; and the NSF REU program in
Chemistry. We will post educational materials on the web
http://jasmin.chem.uconn.edu) for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes are responsible, directly or
indirectly, for most of the key biochemical processes in the body. The exciting
possibility of using enzymes for industrial/laboratory applications is severely
limited due to the fact that enzymes are available in extremely low quantities,
are expensive, and they are deactivated very readily. The resulting new
knowledge from this project will be essential for the design of novel materials
to maximize enzyme function. Some applications of embedded enzymes would
include, but not be limited to, biocatalysis, implants, artificial organs, and
biosensors (for homeland security).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;