* 0300018
* Development of a Novel Inorganic Dielectric Barrier Layer for Magneto-Resistive Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 05/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This research involves making and investigating high-
resistivity B5C boron carbide as a major, new candidate for the dielectric
barrier material in tunnel magnetoresistive devices. Based on their unique
experience of making and using B5C in a variety of semiconductor applications,
with chosen bandgaps from 0.9 to 2.7 eV, the investigators will use this
material to help understand the fundamental properties of magnet/barrier
interfaces that are highly important in magnetoelectronics and, specifically,
spin electronics (spintronics) - one of the most promising future paths in
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use their abilities in
spin-resolved photoemission to provide information on the surface electronic
states and, since the dielectric film comprises such light atoms, to gain access
to the important buried magnet/boron carbide interface. High-resolution electron
microscopy and spectroscopy techniques will provide structural, dielectric, and
bonding information on the B5C polytypes. Investigations of photoconductivity
under applied magnetic fields will be used to gain better understanding of the
influence of local impurity states in the barrier on magnetoresistance
properties. Control of the orientation and polarization of the incident light
will help identify these states and provide initial data for correlation with
photoemission. Magnetic impurity atoms will be incorporated during dielectric
growth in order to provide additional control of barrier states and so of
magnetoresistance. Since initial results on chromium oxide junctions showed it
is possible to modify the magnetic state of an island in the junctions by
changing the polarity of the applied electric current, magnetic inclusions will
also be incorporated in the barrier in order to test new ideas of spin transfer
in non-oxide magnetic junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: This
project will train graduate and undergraduate students, particularly from
underrepresented groups, in sophisticated experimental techniques and provide
them with opportunities to communicate their results to peers, scientists and
engineers in top journals and at major professional and industrial meetings. The
research will allow the team to improve its capabilities for making boron
carbide-based materials and devices, which have many applications, including
neutron detection as two of the team recently demonstrated. Making magnetic
sensors, or particle detectors, has become increasingly important for ensuring
the security of our nation, and will continue to motivate the students on the
team, and their peers. Opportunities will be sought to encourage understanding
of the results, and their societal benefits, by people in business and industry,
including through technology transfer, and by the general public, legislators
and school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide access to
fundamental understanding of the physics of magnet/barrier interfaces and to
practical technology for applying this understanding to spintronics. The
additional device properties accessible by incorporating metallic inclusions in
the barrier are expected to spur new magnetic memory
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most importantly, the research on boron
carbide dielectric barriers is expected to provide a means of avoiding the
serious reduction in the ferromagnet surface states caused by oxide dielectric
barriers and therefore of avoiding a major problem for the development of
spintronics. The research may therefore provide the basis for a key enabling
technology for spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;