* 0300802
* Integrated Multistage Iso-electric Focusing on a PDMS Microchip.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Cornelius Ivory, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 292,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Integrated Multistage Iso-electric Focusing on a PDMS Microchip
Proposal Number: CTS-0300802 Principal Investigator: Prashanta Dutta
Institution: Washington State University



The objective of the proposed research is to implement multi-stage isoelectric
focusing (IEF) in a poly-dimethlysiloxane (PDMS) chip platform coupled with an
ultraviolet (UV) light detection system. The proposed IEF system will be used to
fractionate proteins more quickly and with greater resolution. Staging allows
the separation to be distributed across a multi-channel array. If the secondary
stages can be run in parallel, it is expected that the process can be
accelerated significantly. Microchannels will be fabricated from PDMS and tested
on an optical bench using a UV detection system. Channels of increasingly
complex geometry will be fabricated so that the fundamental elements required
for staging can be sequentially tested and combined into an advanced chip
design. One-dimensional models of the IEF system will be used to simulate the
effects of channel turns, tees, and crosses so that the system can be optimized
before these chips are fabricated. In terms of the broader impacts, this work
may impact the field of proteomics, which has the potential to establish the
link between gene expression and disease pathology. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this multidisciplinary project.

