* 0300173
* Multiscale Oscillatory Dynamics in Cortical Function
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Munther Dahleh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Project Summary The proposed project aims at developing a model of cortical
oscillation in the brain as they are believed to encode in a precise way all the
different brain-state dynamics. Nowadays, we are able to obtain measurements of
neural activities at multiple scales starting at the molecular level with
detailed chemical interactions, to cellular levels with localized recordings of
synaptic currents and firing dynamic, to networks with recordings from neuronal
assemblies, to systems with recordings of brain activation from multiple
cortical areas. The model will have the following attributes: 1) it is
consistent with physiological hypotheses and experimental recordings under
specific brain states, 2) it is hierarchical, describing the brain activity at
multiple resolutions as well as describing brain state transitions as
information-state refinements and 3) it is amenable to efficient simulations.
This model will further our understanding of several phenomena evident in the
cortical dy- namics of the brain: 1) it will explain the recruitment process the
brain undergoes in terms of synchronization, 2) it will explain the robustness
of the synchronization process, 3) it will explain the smoothness in the
dynamics of brain-state transitions, 4) it will explain the relationship be-
tween the number of synchronized cells and the frequency of synchronization, 5)
it will explain the dynamics and integration of the top-down dynamic evolution
based on internal stimuli and the bottom-up processing of sensory information,
and 5) it will explain the timing properties and efficiency in execution. The
derived detailed cortical model will then be integrated with our existing
system-level model of the motor control system. In particular, we aim to study
the role of oscillations in information transfer across constituent cortical
subsystems, and to subsequently identify unique signatures of motion planning in
scalp EEG recordings. Models of cortical oscillations will have utility in
various ways. On one hand, if used as predictors, they can point to important
experimental activities designed to invalidate the models, which will result in
a substantial progress of our understanding of the brain processes. On the other
hand, these models are critical as a diagnostic tool, for example, such models
can be used to detect seizures and brain tumors, to calibrate drug action during
anesthesia, to study cognitive task signatures, and to study mental retardation.
Finally, they can provide the appropriate dynamic description for a proper
design of neural prosthesis. Intellectual Merit: The proposed research provides
a bridge between neurophysiology, neu- roanatomy, and engineering through the
development of a consistent computational model of cortical activities. The
research is conducted by a multi-disciplinary group with expertise in both
modeling, analysis and design of systems in general, as well as modeling and
analysis of the nervous system in particular, with a track record of
collaboration through NSF support. The proposed research will be augmented with
an experimental component through our ongoing motor system control collaboration
with workers in Massachusetts General Hospital. Broad Impact: Beyond the utility
mentioned above, this research is systematically closing the gap between the
fragmented research on understanding the nervous system conducted by biolo-
gists, statisticians, computer scientists and system theorists. With this
unification, computational biology developments will aid in understanding and
potentially curing much of the neural diseases known. Progress in this research
removes the boundaries between the strongly segregated fields such as sciences
and engineering. Such multi-disciplinary research requires complete interactions
between different groups with different domains of expertise. This research will
result in PhD theses cov- ering both such fields as demonstrated by our KDI
project. In addition, courses across disciplines can be structured to provide
better multi-disciplinary training at the undergraduate level.