* 0300537
* Highly Streamlined Computing Platforms for Sensory Plane Processing in Portable Chemical Analysis Instruments
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Denise Wilson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 03/31/2007
* USD 366,001.00

This research is conducted in three phases. Phase 1 focuses on the development
and demonstration of the three components of the proposed research (SPR sensor
development, architecture optimization, optical computation) as separate
entities. Phase 2 advances and revises these three components but also merges
architecture optimization and optical computation developed during Phase 1 with
modular but non-selective SPR probes, whose structure has been optimized for
reliable detection in the targeted applications. Phase 3 adds multiple, highly
selective SPR probes with optimized surface chemistry for demonstrating system
operation in the representative applications of detecting myoglobin for bedside
heart health monitoring and PAHs (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) for
environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents educational
opportunities in a multidisciplinary collaborative environment for both graduate
and undergraduate students in Engineering and Chemistry. The sensors designed in
this project will be employed in undergraduate laboratory classes taught by
Wilson in Electrical Engineering and by Booksh in Analytical and Environmental
Chemistry. Both Wilson and Booksh have a documented track record of mentoring
and supporting female and minority students. Both PIs expect to continue the
trend with this project. Successful completion of this reject will open doors
for future collaborations between Wilson and Booksh; the integrated data
collection and processing architecture developed here can conceivable be applied
to other sensor geometries with health or national defense
implications.&lt;br/&gt;