* 0300982
* Bridging Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Catalysis:  In-Situ Characterization and Theory of Supported Metal Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Bruce Gates, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2007
* USD 244,777.00

Catalysis plays a central role in chemical manufacturing, energy conversion, and
environmental protection. A central challenge is to bridge homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysts: metal complexes on supports illustrate some of the best
connections between them. However, there is a striking lack of their
characterization with in situ techniques, which allow the structures of these
catalysts to be investigated in their working state. The goal of this research
is to develop and demonstrate methods of in situ spectroscopy and flow reactor
techniques for investigation of oxide-supported transition metal complex
catalysts in the presence of gas-phase reactants, such as paraffins, and
olefins. The techniques include in situ IR, X-ray absorption near edge
structure, and extended X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopies.
Theoretical approaches will utilize density functional theory. The catalysts
will include oxide-supported Ta, Cr, and Zr complexes and a new zeolite-
supported Pt complex. The combined characterization data and theory will permit
determination of how the atomic-scale catalyst structure and the rates of the
catalytic reactions depend on the structure and composition of the adsorbate and
the support, as well as the reaction conditions. There is an excellent
opportunity to identify reactive intermediates and establish reaction
mechanisms. The grand challenge will be to predict catalytic activities. The
research will have strong broader impacts through a mentorship program that
involves students from underrepresented groups in research projects. An
interdisciplinary IGERT program is in place that focuses on nanoscience and
technology.