* 0300064
* Applications of Quiver Representations to Algebra and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jerzy Weyman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Principal Investigator: Jerzy Weyman Proposal Number: 0300064 Institution:
Northeastern University

Abstract: Applications of Quiver Representations to Algebra and Geometry

Technical description. The proposal consists of several interrelated parts. The
first part is to study the rings of semi-invariants of quivers and the
combinatorial invariants they define. The investigator proposes to continue to
study the walls of cones of weights of rings of semiinvariants and the
multiplicities of weight spaces for these rings. In one particular case this
includes the cones defined by Klyachko inequalities. This part also includes the
study of modules of covariants for quiver representations. The investigator
proposes to compute the defect of the dimension vectors for the Dynkin quivers.
The second part is concerned with semi-invariants for quivers with relations.
The main problem here is to characterize in terms of semi-invariants those
quivers with relations that are tame and have finite type. The third part is to
study the generalized quivers associated to reductive groups. In particular the
investigator proposes to study the rings of semi-invariants of symmetric
quivers. His graduate student Steve Lovett studies the orbit closures for such
quivers. The last part consists of studying how the defining ideals of orbit
closures of codimension three and four for quivers and symmetric quivers are
connected to the structure theory of perfect ideals of codimension three and
Gorenstein ideals of codimension four.

Non-technical description.

This proposal is related to two branches of algebra: representations of quivers
and commutative algebra. A representation of a quiver is a way to associate
vector data to the vertices of some oriented graph. The edges of a graph can be
viewed as relations between these data. Abstract algebra allows us to study such
objects systematically. The results of this research might lead to better
algorithms for dealing with linear algebra problems. In fact some of the
published research of the investigator has led to such algorithms. Commutative
algebra studies sets defined by polynomial equations. The last part of the
proposal relates certain types of objects defined by such equations (Gorenstein
ideals of codimension four) to representations of quivers. If successful this
would lead to a combinatorial description of such objects.

