* 0300477
* Some nonlinear problems in analysis and geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Nicola Garofalo, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 238,001.00

PI: Nicola Garofalo, Purdue University DMS-0300477

Abstract:

The development of analysis and geometry during the past century has been
greatly influenced by the desire of solving various basic problems involving
some special partial differential equations, mostly of nonlinear type. While
most of these problems have by now been settled in the classical Euclidean or
Riemannian settings, their sub-Riemannian counterparts presently form a body of
fundamental open questions. One of the broader objectives of this proposal is to
study some of them. This PI is concerned with developing a new theory of minimal
surfaces, or more in general surfaces with bounded mean curvature, in sub-
Riemannian spaces, study their regularity and classify the isoperimetric sets in
some model spaces with symmetries. He proposes a calculus on hypersurfaces which
hinges on the idea of horizontal Gauss map, and leads to a new notion of mean
curvature The analysis of the ensuing nonlinear equations and systems
constitutes a challenging new avenue of study. Within such calculus, minimal
surfaces are thus hypersurfaces of zero mean curvature, and a problem of
fundamental interest is a sub-Riemannian version of the famous conjecture of
Bernstein. The latter displays a marked discrepancy with its classical ancestor
and there is a host of new geometric phenomena connected with the singularities
of the Gauss map which generically occur at those points where the subbundle
which generates the sub-Riemannian structure becomes part of the tangent space
to the hypersurface. Given the role of the classical Bernstein problem in the
development of last century's mathematics, it is foreseeable that the theory of
sub-Riemannian minimal surfaces and the corresponding Bernstein problem will
sparkle a broad development. The PI also proposes to find the minimizers in the
Folland-Stein embedding for groups of Heisenberg type and Siegel domain of type
2, and thereby compute the best constants. This program is instrumental to
attacking the compact CR Yamabe problem for CR manifolds of higher codimension.
In connection with the CR Yamabe problem the PI proposes to investigate a CR
version of the positive mass theorem from relativity due to Schoen and Yau. It
is expected that the theory of minimal surfaces previously mentioned will play
an important role. Another emerging theory in sub-Riemannian geometry is that of
equations of Monge-Amp\`ere type, which occupy a central position in geometry as
well as in the calculus of variations in view of their tight connection with the
problem of mass transport. The PI proposes to investigate a new estimate
connected with a sub-Riemannian version of the geometric maximum principle of
Alexandrov, Bakelman, and Pucci. In joint work he has recently obtained results
for the appropriate class of ``convex" functions, and, inspired by N.Krylov's
approach, established monotonicity type results for a functional involving the
symmetrized horizontal Hessian along with some appropriate commutators. Another
problem included in this proposal is the optimal regularity for nonlinear
equations arising in the study of quasiregular mappings between Carnot groups.
This is presently a fundamental open question and, without its solution, it will
be impossible to make substantial advances in nonlinear potential theory for
sub-Riemannian spaces. In this connection the PI also plans to analyze the
delicate question of the uniqueness of the fundamental solution and Green
function, and study the geometric properties of their level sets. Other
directions of investigation are the analysis of boundary value problems
(Dirichlet, Neumann) for subelliptic equations and their associated heat flows,
the study of free boundary problems, and the analysis of global properties of
solutions to some pde's arising in geometry and mathematical physics. Partial
differential equations and systems formed by the latter are the basic laws,
which describe most natural phenomena. An understanding of the physical world
also requires grasping the underlying geometric structure of the latter in its
various forms. The present proposal belongs to the mainstream of research, which
sits at the confluence of the theory of partial differential equations and
systems, mostly of nonlinear type, and their connections with an emerging type
of geometry, called sub-Riemannian geometry. Both theories have witnessed an
explosion of interest in the last decade and they continue to attract the
interest of various schools of mathematicians both nationwide and abroad. This
proposal is also concerned with problems from mathematical physics and geometry
in which symmetry plays an important role. Symmetry is present everywhere in
nature, a remarkable instance being the fundamental laws of gravitation and
electrostatic attraction. The study of conditions under which a natural
phenomenon develops symmetries is important both for practical consequences and
for its implications in the furthering of our knowledge.

