* 0301441
* Real-time Intelligent Monitoring of Reinforced Concrete Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Mohammad Noori, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 04/30/2008
* USD 259,361.00

Real-time Intelligent Monitoring of Reinforced Concrete Structures, CMS proposal
0301441

PI: Yuan, NC State University

With a growing concern on the premature deterioration of civil infrastructure
systems, the demand for the development of strategies in quantifying physical
condition is ever increasing. The widely used steel-reinforced concrete (RC)
structures are normally massive and complex and are subjected to harsh
environment for a rather long service life. The leading cause of degradation of
RC structures is corrosion damage to the rebar embedded in the concrete.
Additional corrosion induces cracks leading to debonding of the rebar. This form
of deterioration in RC structures often outweighs other forms of deterioration.
Despite the potential damages, and sometimes potentially catastrophic ones, an
efficient and effective structural health monitoring system (SHMS) that provides
quantitative information of damage inside RC structures is still lacking. It is
clear that a robust monitoring system needs to be developed to provide timely
maintenance action and safety for civil structures. The objective of this
research is to develop an active distributed sensing system for quantifying and
visualizing location and sizing of embedded damage in RC structures in real
time. The work goes beyond a simple monitoring system; it merely detects the
presence of damage without identifying its importance on the safety of the
structure. The proposed work builds on a proof-of-concept study in which the PI
demonstrated the identification of different sizes and shapes of damages and
their locations in metals utilizing migration technique, which is widely used in
geophysical exploration. In that work, a linear array of piezoelectric patches
analogous to the geophones was used in the experiments as actuators and sensors.
With this preliminary success in homogeneous plates, the proposed research aims
at quantifying the damage in highly inhomogeneous RC structures, in particular
the corrosion and crack-induced debonding of the rebars from the concrete using
a distributed piezo actuator/FBG sensor network. Excitation signals will be
emitted from piezo actuators, either mounted on the concrete or on the rebars;
low-cost and reliable optical fiber distributed sensors will be embedded in the
concrete to provide dynamic strain sensing along their lengths for reinforced
concrete.

The research plan consists of four major tasks. Namely: Development of a robust
and real-time prestack migration technique using ray theory for wave propagation
modeling and scattering; Laboratory measurements of physical models of prototype
RC structures; Determination of sensitivity of corrosion/debonding to selective
diagnostic signals and to piezo and optical fiber placement; Development of
signal processing techniques and imaging visualization algorithms for
unambiguous identification in location and sizing of the damages with high
resolution. This study will identify and address basic scientific and
engineering challenges toward establishing SHMS in RC structures. The proposed
research will lay the groundwork for the future use of a distributed piezo
actuator/FBG sensor network for damage identification and continuous monitoring
using migration technique. It is envisioned that the proposed work will
significantly advance scientific knowledge in the areas of sensor technology,
stress wave simulation, innovative migration technique, damage reconstruction
and visualization, and laboratory methodologies with stress wave measurements.
Developed knowledge and methodologies will be integrated into education via
development of relevant courses and professional workshops.

Through involvement of undergraduate students in the experimental work in the
laboratory testing and analysis, the graduate research work will be integrated
with undergraduate program. Through existing ties with North Carolina A&T
University, a historically black university, effort will be made to attract
female and minority students in performing the proposed research. Moreover,
through an existing Industrial Partnership Program in the Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, industrial partners will be involved as
members of the graduate thesis committee in other relevant work.