* 0301678
* Topology Optimization for Passive and Active Damping Materials Using Homogenization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Arnold Lumsdaine, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2007
* USD 222,116.00

In recent years, much research effort has gone into the development of different
passive and active damping layer configurations. Some hybrid configurations have
shown the promise of producing greater damping levels than is possible with
purely active or purely passive damping layers. However, prior studies,
(including optimization studies) have assumed a certain topology of the various
constituents. The proposed research will use the homogenization method to
optimize the topology of laminated active and passive damping treatments,
producing the optimal configuration of the various damping components. Five
cases will be examined, with the problem complexity increasing with each
successive case:&lt;br/&gt;1) A plain viscoelastic damping
treatment;&lt;br/&gt;2) A viscoelastic and stiff elastic treatment, such as a
constrained damping layer;&lt;br/&gt;3) A plain piezoelectric
treatment;&lt;br/&gt;4) A piezoelectric and viscoelastic treatment, such as an
active constrained damping layer;&lt;br/&gt;5) A piezoelectric, viscoelastic,
and stiff elastic treatment, such as an active damping composite.&lt;br/&gt;
Structures will be optimized to maximize the damping properties (measured by the
system loss factor and/or peak displacement in the base elastic structure) over
the first mode. Several different control strategies will also be examined for
Cases 3, 4, and 5, and the impact of the control strategy on the resulting
topology and the optimum objective will be examined. Finally, the computational
results will be confirmed experimentally.&lt;br/&gt; This research will involve
both graduate and undergraduate students. It is expected that certain aspects of
the material will be integrated into existing graduate and undergraduate
courses, giving a wide range of students some familiarity with the topic.
Concern will be taken to recruit students from underrepresented groups, and to
involve Master's level students in presenting research results in regional and
international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;