* 0301457
* A Comprehensive Approach to Modeling Stress-strain Behavior of Unsaturated Soils for Geohazard Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Changfu Wei, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 188,058.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0301457, K. K. Muraleetharan, University of Oklahoma-
Norman&lt;br/&gt;"A comprehensive approach to modeling stress-strain behavior of
unsaturated soils for geohazard mitigation"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project addresses geohazards and the economic design of geotechnical engineering
structures associated with unsaturated soils. Swelling and shrinking unsaturated
soils can result in damage to the civil engineering infrastructure, such as
slope failures in residual soils caused by rainfall. Unsaturated soils are
three-phase porous media consisting of the solid soil skeleton, pore gas, and
pore liquid. The soil suction (pore gas pressure minus pore liquid pressure)
plays a major role in the behavior of unsaturated soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
key aspect of the proposed constitutive model is the choice of stress measures
derived based on mixture theory. Another key aspect is the description of the
soil-water characteristic curve (SWCC) within the framework of elastoplasticity
and full coupling of it with the deformation of the soil skeleton. The coupling
between the SWCC and soil deformation allows the model to describe phenomena
such as shrinkage induced by reduction in water content, wetting induced
collapse, and the influence of soil deformation on SWCC. Once developed, the
constitutive model will be first validated in the general stress space using a
series of laboratory tests performed on a compacted silty soil (Minco Silt)
using triaxial and Hollow Cylinder Apparatuses (HCA) for unsaturated soil
testing. Once validated at the single element level, the constitutive model will
be incorporated into fully coupled 2- and 3-dimensional computer codes. These
computer codes will then be used to simulate static and dynamic centrifuge model
test results such as embankment settlement induced by wetting and base shaking
of compacted soil embankments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to provide
engineers with a capability to analyze complex 2-D and 3-D geotechnical
engineering structures subjected to static and dynamic loading under a variety
of soil moisture conditions. The research will be integrated into education
through the participation of graduate and undergraduate students in the proposed
research, as well as through course work and innovative curriculum reform
projects, such as the Sooner City Project, currently underway at the University
of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;