* 0301809
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Testosterone and the Handicap Principle: Testing Fundamental Predictions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Kevin Pilz, Pilz                    Kevin          M
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2005
* USD 179,800.00

0301809 Pilz

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Kevin M. Pilz
to work with Dr. Jose Martin at the National Museum of Natural Sciences in
Madrid, Spain.

This research project will examine the relationship between testosterone and
fitness in male vertebrates to answer a central question in behavioral ecology:
Why do males honestly signal their quality to conspecifics when exaggerated
signaling could enhance competitive specifics? The predominant explanation
asserts that signals are honest because they represent handicaps, i.e., elevated
signaling carries costs which only high quality males can afford to pay. The
handicap principle explicitly predicts that males whose signals exaggerate their
quality should have decreased fitness, i.e., decreased lifetime reproductive
success (LRS). Breeding season testosterone levels are believed to mediate
handicaps, because testosterone enhances phenotypic characters that benefit
males (e.g., attractiveness), as well as characters that are costly (e.g.,
ectoparasite load). However, the effect of testosterone on LRS has not yet been
tested. This effect will be studied in small island populations of Iberian wall
lizards, Podarcis hispanica. The effects of testosterone on yearly reproductive
success, survival, coloration, immunocompetence and behavior will also be
determined. This research will elucidate general principles regarding the
evolution of vertebrate social behavior and communication, and regarding
physiological mechanisms of vertebrate reproductive strategies.

Dr. Jose Martin has extensive experience studying aspects of behavioral ecology,
including intraspecific communication, inter-male aggression and mating
strategies in Podarcis hispanica and other lizards.