* 0301834
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Effects of Soils and Precipitation on Plant and Ecosystem Traits in South African Savanna
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Joseph Craine, Craine, Joseph M
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2005
* USD 76,453.00

0301834 Craine

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen month research fellowship by Dr. Joseph
Craine to work with Dr. William Bond at the University of Cape Town in South
Africa and with Dr. Peter Reich at the University of Minnesota.

This project will combine broad-scale surveys of several root and shoot traits
(chemical, stable isotope and tissue densities) to relate to large gradients in
soil type and annual precipitation in the Kruger National Park. The humid
grasslands in some parts of Africa have a faunal assemblage that has not been
depleted like on other continents. Along broad precipitation gradients in
Kruger, the PI will characterize traits of roots and leaves of a wide variety of
herbaceous species as well as to characterize the nitrogen cycles of the
grasslands and their responses to N and P fertilization. These studies may serve
as a useful model system for understanding the basic drivers of grassland-grazer
interactions and ecosystem function. The key to understanding why grazers reach
their highest abundance in the drier grasslands (and on certain soil types)
requires understanding relationships among the construction and functioning of
roots and leaves, grazing, and nutrient cycling. Aside from the importance of
understanding the African grazing ecosystems in and of themselves, as many in
North America seek to reintroduce bison, elk, horses and other species to areas
of the Great Plains of North America, it is important to first understand the
functioning of grasslands that still have a full complement of grazers.