* 0301178
* GOALI: Novel Wide Energy Bandgap Semiconductor Based Gas and Liquid Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Fan Ren, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2006
* USD 308,953.00

Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wide bandgap semiconductor gas and liquid sensors
have potential uses in detecting fuel leaks in spacecraft, automobiles and
aircraft, fire detectors, exhaust diagnosis and emissions from industrial
processes as well as in in-situ monitoring in chemical processes. Gallium
nitride (GaN) and silicon carbide (SiC) are capable of operating in harsh
environments and higher temperatures than more conventional semiconductors such
as silicone (Si) because of their large bandgap. Simple Schottky diodes, metal
oxide semiconductor (MOS) diodes, or field-effect transistor structures
fabricated of GaN or SiC are sensitive to a number of gases, including hydrogen
and some hydrocarbons. An additional attractive attribute of GaN and SiC
materials is that gas sensors based on them can be integrated with high-
temperature electronic devices on the same chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has
demonstrated the feasibility of combustion gas detectors with extremely fast
response times and capable of operating at high temperatures, eliminating bulky
and expensive cooling systems. The device structure is essentially identical to
that employed for power rectifiers and emphasizes how similar structures can be
used for both gas sensing and high power electronics applications. To expand the
capabilities of such solid-state, dual-use systems, the PI is planning to
develop several new classes of gas and liquid sensors for inexpensive, low-cost,
low weight monitoring of gases and liquids released during fires. The devices
take advantage of a strong materials and manufacturing base at Sterling
Semiconductor and the sensor design and fabrication abilities of faculty and
students at the University of Florida. The basic science behind the sensing
mechanisms in GaN and SiC structures will be investigated, and
design/optimization will be carried out based on the results from new, stable
metalization schemes and novel approaches to sensing the relevant gases and
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Florida has a Student Science Training Program run every summer by
its Center for Precollegiate Education and Training. The program brings in a
select group of 10th and 11th grade students to do research in science and
engineering. Two of these students will participate in this research. The Center
also runs an NSF Teacher Research Update Experience (TRUE) program during the
summer. The PI will present a lecture on solid-state sensors at the program and
will collaborate with interested teachers to translate the research experience
into modules, which can be taken back to middle and high schools. At the end of
their stay, the modules will be tested on students participating in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;