* 0301445
* Scaling of Metal Plasticity on Approach to Nanoscale: Asymptotic Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 09/30/2007
* USD 293,312.00

On approach to nano-scale, the spacing of dislocations in crystal lattice of
metal grains, the crystal grain sizes governing the thickness of boundary layers
and texture gradation in thin films in micro-electronic devices, and the size of
fracture triggering micro-voids, cease being negligible compared to the spacing
of particles or fibers in nanocomposites, to thickness of thin films in
miniature electronic components, and to size of MEMS components. This may or
might not cause major beneficial size effects such as strength increase by an
order of magnitude, which must be understood to ensure reliability and optimize
performance. Several strain gradient theories were recently proposed for the
micrometer range but their asymptotic properties on approach to nanoscale appear
to be unrealistic. An improved strain-gradient theory is, therefore, developed.
Since the small-size asymptotic solutions are much simpler than the solutions
for the practical range, the technique of asymptotic matching is used to obtain
simple analytical solutions for that range. The strain gradient theory,enhanced
through incorporation of boundary layers of different properties and continuous
crystal size or texture gradation, is then used to model the effect of particle
size on the stiffness and strength of metal-matrix nanocomposites. The macro-
scale methods for composites, such as Hashin's composite spheres model and
Dvorak's transformation field analysis, are extended to micro-scale by replacing
the strain gradient effect with eigenstrains. The size effects on strength and
postpeak softening, recently observed in tensioned free thin films of
micrometerthicknesses are also clarified. Finally, the role of strain gradients
in micro-void formation that triggers fracture is also analyzed.