* 0301035
* Experimental Studies of Nanoscale Energy Localization in Periodic Condensed Matter Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Albert Sievers, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2007
* USD 360,000.00

This individual investigator award supports a research program focused on the
experimental investigation of nonlinear nanoscale localization phenomena and
discrete pattern formation in condensed matter physics. One way to produce such
intrinsic energy localization over a nanoscale region is by making use of the
modulational instability of specific large amplitude nonlinear plane wave
excitations. To better understand the pathways from plane wave instability to
nanoscale energy localization in crystals, three different classes of
experiments will be carried out: (a) Intrinsic localized modes (ILMs) in 1D
micromechanical arrays will make possible the study of the long time production
of monochromatic energy localization phenomena. (b) Intrinsic localized spin
wave modes in classical 1D-like antiferromagnetic crystals will be studied in an
attempt to observe the newly predicted localized spin flop, which represents a
more localized and larger energy excitation than does an ILM. (c) Intrinsic
nanoscale energy localization in quantum antiferromagnets and also in soft mode
paraelectric crystals will be investigated using high-intensity broadband THz
radiation produced at the Jefferson Laboratory. In carrying out nonlinear
experiments coupled with numerical simulations both graduate and undergraduate
students will develop expertise in this developing interdisciplinary field.

Both nonlinearity and lattice discreteness have played important roles in many
branches of physics. The traditional approach in condensed matter physics has
been to treat these two items separately. Recently it has been predicted and
realized that completely new kinds of dynamical phenomena occur in strongly
nonlinear discrete systems. For example, large amplitude long wavelength
vibrations in a solid can rapidly cascade down and localize at the atomic scale
with a large increase in the vibrational amplitude. The resulting discrete
nanoscale patterns in the crystal are predicted to give rise to different
physical states. This experimental research program explores such new phenomena.
The rapid growth of scientific activity in nonlinear energy localization
behavior has shown there are a variety of areas where these effects may play a
role, such as friction, and crack propagation. Still other developing areas
involve somewhat larger length scales such as optical switches, nonlinear
photonic crystal waveguides, periodic electrical Josephson junction arrays,
micro-electrical-mechanical silicon systems, and, at the largest scale, the
localization within multibunch modes in high energy accelerators. Graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project will receive training in
nonlinear dynamics in condensed matter systems involving technologically
important length scales.