* 0301894
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:  Seismic Hazard Assessment and Seismological Study in the Korean Peninsula using Modern and Historical Earthquake Catalog Data
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Jer-Ming Chiu, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 02/28/2007
* USD 43,600.00

0301894&lt;br/&gt;Chiu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A reliable seismic hazard
assessment has become an essential scientific and economic issue for the Korean
Peninsula as well as for the central and eastern U.S.A. that are considered in a
stable intraplate continental environment. Via this joint research effort
between the Center for Earthquake Research and Information, the University of
Memphis, USA, and the School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Seoul National
University, Korea, a few most fundamental but not well understood questions
concerning earthquake activities in a stable continental region will be studied.
These questions include but are not limited to (1) Why significant earthquakes
occur in intraplate regions far away from plate boundaries? (2) Can surface
geology be correlated to historical and modern earthquake activities? Can active
faults be identified from reliably determined seismicity? (3) Are there any
recurrence patterns for large intraplate earthquakes in historical records? Will
the next large earthquake occur near any previous location? (4) Can historical
earthquake information be used to predict the most probable mode of faulting for
the next large earthquake and how large the future faulting area will be? (5)
What role does the upper mantle structure play in a regional tectonic evolution
and in the occurrence of damaging earthquakes? Some of these questions are very
difficult to answer in the central and eastern U.S. mainly because of a
relatively short period of modern and historical data that is, however, not the
case for the Korean Peninsula. A historical earthquake catalog covering over
~2000 years is available for Korea and the modern Korean seismic network is
surrounded by one of the world's most seismic active regions including Japan,
Ryukyu, Taiwan, and northeastern China. Furthermore, the selection and
construction criteria, and safety management of the existing and future critical
facilities, e.g. nuclear power plants and high technology centers, in the Korean
Peninsula also depend on a reliable seismic hazard assessment which is not only
a local problem but has evolved into an international concern. The ultimate
goals of this joint NSF-KOSEF project will emphasize on (1) the compilation of a
consistent Korean historical earthquake catalog and the conversion of its
intensity information to the moment magnitude scale, (2) the evaluation of
seismicity and crustal and upper mantle structure beneath the Korean Peninsula
using modern seismic network data and their implications for regional tectonic
evolution, and (3) an assessment of earthquake hazard in the Korean Peninsula
from the revised modern and historical earthquake catalog data. Therefore
broader impacts of the proposed research will include (1) a safer site selection
and management of numerous critical facilities on the Korean Peninsula that is
significant for regional and global environment and economics, and (2) a better
understanding of how earthquakes work in a stable continent and its applications
to other intraplate regions around the world where long historical earthquake
catalog may not be available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;