* 0301826
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Mechanisms of Sulfur Transfer in Biotin Synthase Catalysis and Iron-Sulfur Cluster Biosynthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Jon Rubach, Rubach                  Jon            K
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2007
* USD 82,800.00

0301826 Rubach

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Jon K. Rubach
to work with Dr. Marc Fontecave at Universite Joseph Fourier in Grenoble,
France.

The goals of this project are to examine the mechanisms of catalysis by E. coli
biotin synthase and to determine the proteins and mechanisms involved in iron-
sulfur cluster biosynthesis. Biotin synthase is part of a unique family of Fe-S
cluster-containing enzymes that utilize S-adenosylmethionine as source of
5'-deoxyadenosyl radical, which is used to promote difficult chemical
transformations. The mechanism of sulfur transfer catalyzed by biotin synthase
will be examined through isotope labeling, chemical labeling and mass
spectrometry studies. These studies will determine if the sulfur in the product
biotin is donated from cysteine through a mechanism using pyridoxal-5'-phosphate
and will determine the oxidation states of the cysteine residues during
catalysis by biotin synthase. The components necessary for steady-state turnover
of biotin synthase will be identified by fractionation of cell lysate. Altered
metabolism of Fe-S clusters could be a factor in aging and neurodegeneration.
The necessary components and the chemical mechanisms for Fe-S cluster
biosynthesis will be examined through in vitro reconstitution of the
biosynthetic pathway. The three dimensional structures of the proteins and
protein complexes involved in Fe-S cluster biosynthesis will be determined using
x-ray crystallography.