* 0301951
* Crystal-Field Engineering of Transition Metal Doped Chalcogenide Laser Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Uwe Hommerich, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 255,000.00

This project addresses new dopant-host combinations of transition metal (TM)
doped II-VI semi-conductors to extend current solid-state laser wavelength
coverage. Materials include TM (Cr, Fe, Co) doped Cd1-xRxTe, with R being either
a IIa (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba) or IIb (Zn, Hg) ele-ment. The composition of the host
will be varied in order to modify crystal-field effects on opti-cal and laser
properties of TM ions. The proposed materials will be grown by a Bridgman tech-
nique at Hampton University, and collaboration with industrial partners at
Brimrose Corporation of America will provide additional samples. All materials
will be characterized through tempera-ture dependent transmission spectroscopy,
steady-state and time-resolved emission studies, and laser performance studies.
The spectroscopic results will be modeled within the framework of crystal field
theory to derive crystal-field parameters, electron-phonon coupling strengths,
and emission quenching activation energies. The results of the modeling will be
used to derive struc-ture- property relations, which can guide the optimization
of selected materials to achieve better laser performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues
associated with electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance.
The multi-disciplinary nature of the project enhances the quality of education
in several science and engineering disciplines at Hampton University. The
research will be incorporated in the training of students seeking degrees in
physics, chemis-try, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering.
Educational efforts include: (1) increase of students participating in research
projects, (2) continuation and extension of an industrial intern-ship program,
and (3) outreach activities. This program is expected to increase the skilled
work-force in an important field of optoelectronics and lasers with a special
emphasis on enhancing the participation of under-represented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;