* 0301779
* RUI: Formulation for Coupled Composition-Thermoelectromechanics in Polycrystalline Thin Film Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Lori Bassman, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2006
* USD 146,414.00

RUI: Formulation for Coupled Composition-Thermoelectromechanics
in&lt;br/&gt;Polycrystalline Thin Film Structures&lt;br/&gt;Lori C.
Bassman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thin film metal lines that comprise
microelectronic interconnects&lt;br/&gt;experience large variations in thermal
conditions. During&lt;br/&gt;fabrication, processing steps at different
temperatures result in&lt;br/&gt;significant thermal stresses, and under
operating conditions the heat&lt;br/&gt;generated through Joule heating subjects
the lines to elevated&lt;br/&gt;temperatures. The focus of this project is to
incorporate the effects&lt;br/&gt;of spatially varying temperature, along with
electrical conduction,&lt;br/&gt;into a lattice-level model for the coupled
composition and mechanics&lt;br/&gt;of thin film polycrystalline materials. The
ability to solve coupled&lt;br/&gt;composition, mechanics, electrical, and
thermal problems on a general&lt;br/&gt;polycrystalline domain will provide
opportunities for greater&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the physical phenomena
occurring in ever-smaller&lt;br/&gt;interconnect structures. It also will
enhance general capability to&lt;br/&gt;study these phenomena in a variety of
crystalline materials relevant&lt;br/&gt;to the microelectronics industry. All
facets of this project,&lt;br/&gt;including expansion of the formulation,
implementation in a finite&lt;br/&gt;element code using specialized numerical
methods, and validation of&lt;br/&gt;the model with experimental studies from
the literature, are to be&lt;br/&gt;completed with substantial participation of
undergraduate students at&lt;br/&gt;Harvey Mudd College.&lt;br/&gt;