* 0301312
* Performance of Microbiologically Enhanced Concrete Structural Elements
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Venkataswamy Ramakrishnan, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing grant
* lawrence bank
* 07/31/2007
* USD 182,629.00

The thrust of this proposed research is to enhance the performance of concrete
using novel microbial products of genetically engineered microorganisms (GEMs).
The prime microbial product to be studied is the extracellular polymeric
substance (EPS) that promotes microbes to adhere to various types of the surface
structures. Selective cementation properties of the microbial organic polymer
will be compared with those of the microbiologically induced inorganic calcite
that was introduced from our previous studies. In this study, we propose an
ambitious plan to develop GEMs that harbor and express genes responsible for the
biopolymer production as well as calcite precipitation simultaneously. With the
reduced budget, the scope of this research has been revised (1) to develop GEMs
that produce various types of biosealant for concrete remediation and (2) to
apply these genetically engineered microbial products in concrete in a reduced
scale.

The intellectual merit of the proposed study is to introduce new, advanced and
innovative approaches in microbial concrete enhancement, intending not to merely
continue the previous research, rather elevating this concept to the next level.
The most significant aspects of the proposed research are the identification of
alternative biological products that can be used for concrete remediation
effectively without any adverse impact to environments and the use of cutting-
edge molecular DNA and immobilization technology in concrete remediation,
utilizing preliminary findings from on-going research on recombinant microbial
urease. Further, this proposed research scheme includes the development of a
method that can preserve microbial sealing material for an extended period of
time.

Through previous NSF funded projects (CMS-9802127 and INT-0002608), Dr. Bang
(Environmental Microbiologist) and Dr. Ramakrishnan (Civil/Concrete Engineer) at
the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T) have established close
interdisciplinary research collaboration. The collaborative research efforts
between the PIs have emphasized engineering application of basic concepts of
microbiologically induced calcite precipitation, which is the underlying
cornerstone of this proposal. In addition, through the current funding from the
NSF/INT program, our research collaboration has expanded to include an
Australian research team, Dr. J.R. Warmington (School of Biomedical Sciences)
and Dr. B.V. Rangan (School of Civil Engineering) of the Curtin University of
Technology, Perth, Australia. This international collaboration between SDSM&T
and Australian research teams has provided an opportunity to complement two
campuses' expertise and laid major groundwork for this proposal. The broader
impacts of the proposed activity emphasize the following two aspects: (1) REU
supplementary funding will be requested to recruit underrepresented minority
students on campus and from adjacent tribal colleges in South Dakota. These
undergraduate students will actively participate in the project, assisting
graduate students' research and further developing their own independent
research topics. Students will be encouraged to participate in hands-on
experiments, analysis and assembly of data, presentation at conferences, and
preparation of scientific papers. Our interdisciplinary research efforts will
also provide unique opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students,
through which students will gain significant research experience and develop
critical thinking skills. (2) As for potential applications beyond concrete
reinforcement, these environmentally innocuous biological products may be
utilized with slight modification as sealing or caulking agents for the gaps in
building structures, bioremediation means to confine contaminated aquifers or
subsurface soils through selective cementation, and possibly dust control for
surface soils. Therefore, the importance and significance of the proposed novel
approaches span not only the feasibility of application in concrete enhancement
but also further applicability of the technique in other areas of remediation.