* 0301792
* Performance-Based Seismic Design of Concentrically Braced Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Dawn Lehman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 11/30/2006
* USD 311,278.00

Performance-Based Seismic Design of Concentrically Braced Frames&lt;br/&gt;
0301792&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Charles Roeder, University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance-based seismic design requires
structures that can be designed to meet multiple
performance&lt;br/&gt;objectives and engineering models that are accurate enough
to assess the system performance. Steel concentrically braced frames (CBFs) can
be designed to meet the required objectives of PBSD. CBF are stiff and strong,
which are attributes need for serviceability limit states. In addition, special
concentrically braced frames (SCBFs) have been developed to assure stable cyclic
inelastic seismic performance, which enables SCBF to satisfy life safety and
collapse prevention performance levels as well. More recent research has
resulted in the development of unbonded brace CBFs (UBCBFs). In these framing
systems, the unbonded braces yield in both tension and compression without brace
buckling to provide a superior level of seismic resistance and are ideal
candidates for PBSD. Currently, the seismic performance of both SCBFs and UBCBFs
is limited by the connection performance or the connection design requirements.
Current design provisions for SCBFs attempt to ensure adequate connection
resistance to avoid premature connection failure, while permitting significant
inelastic connection rotation due to brace buckling. Connections of UBCBFs must
be designed to prevent buckling or excessive deformation prior to development of
the full bonded brace ductility. Although these design requirements are
conceptually simple, the objectives are difficult to achieve using current
design provisions since engineers must use approximate and empirical rules to
accomplish these design objectives. For example, for SCBFs, design provisions
required that the factored resistance is larger than the expected tensile yield
strength of the brace. Although the provisions attempt to achieve a rational
yielding hierarchy, the present application is flawed. The use of the resistance
factor severely penalizes the connection design and may result in uneconomically
large connections that adversely affect the seismic performance of the system.
Even for proportional connections, the seismic performance of the system is
unknown, and therefore, brace fracture may precede connection yielding,
significantly decreasing the system capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome
the shortcomings of current design, a rational, PBSD procedure will be developed
to improve&lt;br/&gt;the connection design and seismic performance of both UBCBF
and SCBF systems. The research will build upon the existing CBF design
requirements and use innovative techniques developed for moment-resisting steel
frames during the SAC Steel Project. In that project, design procedures were
developed to balance desirable yield mechanisms and to restrict undesirable
failure modes to achieve the desired seismic performance. Here, similar design
procedures will be developed to balance the brace and connection behavior to
achieve multiple performance objectives. The research program will evaluate and
improve existing engineering models, develop a rational PBSD procedure for both
SCBF and UBCBF systems, evaluate, modify and validate the design procedure using
experimental research results. Finally, the procedure will be used to design
several frames. A conceptual test frame will be developed for
proposed&lt;br/&gt;future testing to demonstrate the performance of the complete
system using the future University of Minnesota NEES
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural engineering profession recognizes
that the connection design provisions for CBFs represent a&lt;br/&gt;significant
gap present in current design provisions. The proposed research program will
result in robust design procedures and accurate engineering models. These tools
will permit engineers to design efficient and effective SCBF systems to fulfill
current and future seismic engineering needs. To facilitate the transfer of the
research result to practice, the research team will partner with prominent
structural engineers and structural engineering societies (letters provided in
Supplementary Documents). In addition to educating today's engineers, the
researcher team will use the research process and results to educate future
engineers, including graduate and undergraduate students. Students will observe
the testing to familiarize them with the experimental research process. In the
classroom, the student will compare the test results to estimates of the
connection strength using code standards (undergraduate) and engineering models
(graduate) found in the literature. The students will use the proposed design
equations and compare the results with the code standards. This exercise will
provide the students with a basis for discussion of and insight into alternative
design methods.&lt;br/&gt;