* 0301893
* International Research Fellowship Program: Syndrome of Voracity in the Australian Redback Spider
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2005
* James Johnson, Johnson, James C
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2005
* USD 113,436.00

0301893&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month (within
a duration of 27 months) research fellowship by Dr. James Chadwick Johnson to
work with Dr. Maydianne Andrade at the University of Toronto-Scarborough in
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the study of sexual
cannibalism and a syndrome of voracity in the Australian red-back spider. This
project will give insight into proximate mechanisms influencing sexual
cannibalism by understanding individual variation in voraciousness, which has
important implications in the field of sexual selection and the evolution of
mating systems. This approach is novel using proven techniques like laser
vibrometry (for quantifying how individual spiders vary in their response to
vibrations from prey) and whether metabolic rate varies in individuals voracious
responses. His research will further understanding of how life history and
behavior correlate with variation in fitness. Spiders, because of their large
clutch sizes and short generation time are ideal for studies of behavioral
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;