* 0301186
* SGER:  The Impact of a Sea Surface Skin Temperature Parameterization on Tropical Convection in Climate System Model (CSM)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Carl Mears, Remote Sensing Systems
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

The PIs will develop a method to improve the specification of sea surface
temperature (SST) in coupled ocean-atmosphere models, specifically for the
Community Climate System Model (CCSM). The issue is that various temperature
sensing methods measure the ocean "surface" temperature at various depths;
satellites at about 1 mm, in situ thermometers about 1 m, drifters about 5 m,
and ships about 5-10 m. These disparate data are "blended" into a "bulk" SST
data set to represent ocean temperature at 1 m. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But, the
air-sea fluxes that couple the domains of the ocean and atmosphere in nature
occur at their interface and SST at the interface cannot be measured using
current observing technologies. The best we can do is observe SST by infrared or
microwave sensors at a few microns depth ("skin" temperature) or a few
millimeters depth (sub-skin temperature).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
develop an adjustment algorithm to account for the differences in SST bulk and
SST skin, to produce an SST data set that can be used as a lower boundary
condition in the CCSM atmospheric model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this project would result in improved model representation of important ocean-
atmosphere coupling processes. Over 100 scientists and students use the CCSM to
conduct their research. Furthermore, the CCSM is one of two U.S. climate models
used in national and international climate change projections and assessments,
and it thus provides scientific knowledge relevant for U.S. and international
energy/environment policy deliberations.