* 0301432
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Durability of Nanostructured, Surface Functional, Titanium Dioxide Based Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Nathan Mellott, Mellott                 Nathan         P
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2005
* USD 89,638.00

0301432 Mellott

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eighteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Nathan P.
Mellott to work with Dr. Massimo Guglielmi at the University of Padova in
Padova, Italy. Co-support is provided by the Math and Physical Sciences
Directorate's Office of Multi-disciplinary Activities.

This project will study the durability of nanostructured, surface functional,
titanium dioxide (TiO2) based thin films. The research will work to determine
the breakdown mechanisms of these films, and determine the effects of the
associated changes in material properties on photocatalytic activity,
wettability (Hydrophylicity), visible transmission, adhesion, and abrasion-
resistance. In this way, a link between nanoscale processes and changes in the
film chemistry and structure can be made to macroscale phenomena observed with
corrosion of self-cleaning films. Titanium dioxide-based films will be exposed
to a variety of environmental conditions and changes in nano-, micro-, and
macro-scale, bulk and surface properties including, photocatalytic activity,
wettability, adhesion, abrasion resistance, and visible transmission will be
measured on pre- and post-reacted samples. The study of TiO2 coatings is an
important area for research since they are widely used as photocatalysts and in
such products as self-cleaning glasses and photochemical cells.