* 0301874
*  ITR: Collaborative Research: Development of Head-mounted Projective Display for Distance Collaborative Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Hong Hua, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 124,000.00

This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award. A demanding
application area of virtual or augmented environment is multi-user collaborative
environment where multiple users at either a local site or remote sites
communicate with each other and interact with a synthetic or virtual scene.
Among the necessary sensors and devices, an effective visualization device and a
real-time image acquisition system are two main challenges. The objective of
this project is to develop a novel visualization device referred to as head-
mounted projective display (HMPD), build a multi-user interactive workbench by
integrating the developed HMPD technology with a unique real-time image
acquisition system known as an omni-focus camera, and evaluate and quantify the
system as an effective tool for remote collaboration. The head-mounted
projective display (HMPD) proposed is coupled with a supple, non-distorting and
durable projection surface as an alternative to current visualization devices.
Its novel concept suggests solutions to part of the problems of state-of-art
visualization devices, such as large distortion with wide field of view,
occlusion contradiction between virtual and real objects, and brightness
conflict with background illumination. Several properties of the proposed HMPD
make it extremely suitable for multiple-user collaborative applications.
Research efforts will be made to design and implement a lightweight and compact
head-mounted prototype by introducing diffractive optical element (DOE) and
plastic materials, and investigate approaches to optimize the illumination of
the display and retro-reflective material properties for imaging purpose. At one
site, a multi-user interactive bench prototype with tele-presence capability
will be built by using the HMPD concept and adding an image acquisition system
developed from a unique omni-focus camera system. At the other site, a mural
display system will be built with conventional stereoscopic video system located
near the mural display, where one or several collaborators will also gather.
Tele-collaborative work will be tested between the Beckman Institute at the
University of Illinois--Urbana Champaign and the School of Optics-CREOL at the
University of Central Florida through the Internet II connection linking our
laboratories. Finally, the PIs will quantify the depth and size representation
and perception accuracy, evaluate occlusion perception aspects, and set up a
comprehensive calibration procedure for the HMPD and the workbench and mural
prototypes. The results are expected to impact a wide range of applications such
as collaboration/tele-collaboration, tele-presence, tele-manipulation, and
visualized education/tele-education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;