* 0301900
* The Nano-Precision HARPSS-CMOS Process for RF and Sensory Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Farrokh Ayazi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yogesh B. Gianchandani
* 04/30/2007
* USD 281,848.00

0301900&lt;br/&gt;Ayazi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at the
integration of a high aspect-ratio, sub-100nm vertical
airgap&lt;br/&gt;MEMS/NEMS technology with a 1um gate-length CMOS process, and
the application of the&lt;br/&gt;resulting high aspect ratio CMOS-MEMS process
to high-performance RF-sensory microsystems,&lt;br/&gt;as well as mixed-signal
circuits. The implementation of the following two testbeds is proposed
as&lt;br/&gt;technology demonstrators:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The high-
performance sensor system testbed: Implementation of a novel CMOS-
integrated&lt;br/&gt;inertial-grade (sub-ug resolution) acceleration/vibration
sensor system with direct digital output.&lt;br/&gt;This single-chip sensor
system will have 3-4 orders of magnitude higher sensitivity compared
to&lt;br/&gt;the current state of the art integrated microsystem. It consists of
a nano-precision lateral&lt;br/&gt;accelerometer and a high-performance mixed-
signal interface circuit which utilizes 200um tall&lt;br/&gt;vertical poly-poly
capacitors, yielding 2 orders of magnitude reduction in the die
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The wireless RF components testbed: Implementation
of MEMS-based high-Q on-chip&lt;br/&gt;frequency references "over a wide
frequency range extending into GHz" integrated with CMOS&lt;br/&gt;electronics
(MEMS-based VCO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few decades, CMOS and CMOS-
like processes have substantially grown in the&lt;br/&gt;number and thickness of
the deposited layers on the surface of the Si substrate (the so-
called&lt;br/&gt;back-end processes). However, the front-end processes have not
grown proportionally and&lt;br/&gt;remained limited to the steps necessary to
create the transistors. The out of silicon thickness of&lt;br/&gt;CMOS has grown
to be almost an order of magnitude larger than the inside silicon thickness of
it.&lt;br/&gt;The development of the integrated MEMS processes has followed the
same model with&lt;br/&gt;integration of surface micromachined structures. The
question is: can the front-end of the CMOS&lt;br/&gt;process be modified to
bring new life to integrated MEMS by enhancing the performance
and&lt;br/&gt;providing higher levels of functionality?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to modify the front-end of the
CMOS&lt;br/&gt;process using the deep reactive ion etching and refill technique
to make use of the third&lt;br/&gt;dimension into the silicon and embed
functionality (both electrical and mechanical) inside the&lt;br/&gt;CMOS-grade
silicon substrate. The proposed process will allow the scaling of
micromechanical&lt;br/&gt;structures into the nanometer domain through its
unique ability to create sub-100nm vertical gaps&lt;br/&gt;and sub-micron
silicon features. High aspect ratio poly and single crystal silicon structures
(with&lt;br/&gt;high quality factors) separated by nanometer in size gaps will
be integrated with CMOS circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
resulting from the proposed activity is the ability to bring about significantly
higher levels of performance and integration to the integrated MEMS and mixed-
signal circuits. Higher performance levels and the ability to communicate
wireless on a single silicon chip can open up the door to new opportunities and
applications. Imagine having a tiny MEMS-CMOS silicon chip that can not only
monitor very small changes in the environment, but also can transmit the
monitored data real time in digital form to a receiver base, or communicate with
a network of wireless sensory nodes. Such wireless sensory nodes can find
numerous applications in various forms of environmental monitoring and energy-
efficient systems.&lt;br/&gt;