* 0302744
* GEOMETRIC DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Gang Tian, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2007
* USD 543,600.00

ABSTRACT

GEOMETRIC DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND APPLICATIONS P.I.: Gang Tian (M.I.T.)

This proposal concerns existence and regularity problems of the Einstein
equation, the Yang-Mills equation on Riemannian manifolds and pseudo-holomorphic
curves, as well as applications of these equations to geometry and topology. For
the Einstein equation, we will focus mainly on (1) the existence of its
solutions, particularly, K\"ahler-Einstein metrics in complex geometry and (2)
behavior of its singular solutions. I will also study the associated K\"ahler-
Ricci flow and its soliton-type solutions. The Yang-Mills equation is a
nonlinear equation and may have singular solutions. We will study the basic
problem how singular solutions behave along their singularity, e.q., the size of
singularity. It has been found in my previous works that there is a connection
between singularity formation of Yang-Mills fields and classical minimal
submanifolds. I intend to explore this more and its related compactness problem
for Yang-Mills fields, particularly, the interaction between self-dual solutions
the Yang-Mills equation and calibrated geometry. I also intend to continue his
study in symplectic geometry. The problems include symplectic isotopy problem in
a rational surface and its applications toward classifying symplectic four
dimensional spaces, computing well-defined symplectic invariants, such as the
Gromov-Witten invariants, constructing new deformation invariants.

Problems in this proposal arose naturally from our attempts to understanding
nonlinear differential equations from geometry and physics. These equations
include static Einstein equation, Yang-Mills fields as well as holomorphic maps.
They played a fundamental role in our understanding of nature through
mathematical means. They also have found many deep applications in geometry and
topology, such as Seiberg-Witten theory, Mirror symmetry of Calabi-Yau spaces.
The resolution of these problems will provide mathematical foundations for some
physical theories and have profound applications to long-standing mathematical
problems. Most natural phenomena are nonlinear and possess singular behaviors.
These are reflected in possible singular solutions to the differential equations
which describe those phenomena. It is still challenging to have a complete
mathematical understanding of these singular solutions. This proposal will
address some of these basic problems. I will also try to find more solutions of
these nonlinear equations -and apply them to studying basic problems in geometry
and topology.

