* 0302940
* Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics for Community College Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Kenneth Kubo, Los Rios Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 03/31/2007
* USD 262,883.00

This professional development project is improving the instructional
capabilities of community colleges in genomic technologies and bioinformatics.
The project combines an intensive five-day workshop with a subsequent online
course and industry internship. The project includes conducting five-day summer
workshops for instructors to learn the basics of informatics and biological
applications. The workshop participants then participate in a semester-long
online class in the fall to further enhance their knowledge and comfort level
with bioinformatics. The following spring, the faculty participates in
internships in&lt;br/&gt;local labs to use their new skills, work with real-
world data and applications of the new technology, and form relationships with
local bioinformatics scientists. Project products are community college faculty
highly trained and prepared to train students for jobs in bioinformatics,
accessible, relevant, and easily updateable instructional materials, and
relationships with local bioinformaticists to provide support and
consultation.&lt;br/&gt;By training community college instructors, the project
has a broad impact. Community colleges are the frontline of higher education and
serve many more students than do four-year institutions, due to greater
accessibility and lower costs. Through these instructors, we are impacting the
greatest number of workforce-bound individuals possible. Based on class size at
several community colleges, we estimate that this project is exposing an
estimated 2,000 students to bioinformatics in a single school year. Courses,
follow-up-services, instructional manuals and informational updates facilitate
institutionalizing bioinformatics into the local community college curricula. We
are targeting faculty from community colleges with proportionally higher
populations of underrepresented groups. By training a cadre of faculty, this
project is permanently impacting the capacity of the community colleges to teach
bioinformatics, and create relationships among trained faculty, UC Davis
personnel, and industry scientists.&lt;br/&gt;