* 0302538
* A New Model for Producing Highly Resolved Mobile Source Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Debbie Niemeier, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 03/31/2007
* USD 301,574.00

0302538 Niemeier The importance of improving the spatial and temporal inputs and
methods associated with estimating mobile source inventories was recently
identified as a key concern in a recent National Academy of Science report
(National Research Council 2000). As the science behind the modeling of mobile
emissions has advanced, it has become clear that new modeling developments at
the interface between transportation and air quality modeling are needed to
fully encompass contemporary scientific and technological insights. We propose
to develop and test a new mobile source emissions inventory modeling platform.
Specifically, three major advances will be incorporated into the model: 1) a new
gridding algorithm that will improve the spatial representation of mobile
emission generating activities and resolve current inventory scaling issues; 2)
a new algorithm for estimating the emissions using more discrete vehicle
operation (accel/decel) characteristics, and finally, 3) a new algorithm that
will allow important emissions-related factors, such as control technology and
vehicle distribution, to be specified at the grid scale. We will then apply the
new model to the Sacramento region and compare the differences between the
gridded inventory emissions under a base scenario and several alternative
scenarios. By examining different scenarios, we will be able to characterize how
emissions vary spatially due to two factors: the types of emission factors used
and the modeling method used to disaggregate transportation activity. The new
model will be capable of producing the inventories needed for more accurate
gridded emissions for photochemical modeling as well as the inventories needed
for regulatory purposes (e.g., state implementation plans (SIPs) and
transportation air quality conformity). The model will include both current
regulatory emission factors (i.e., those produced by EPA or approved by EPA as
in the California case), which will allow comparison to current inventories, as
well as new cutting edge emission factors that better account for emissions
resulting from variability in discrete vehicle operations.