* 0302481
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Building Negotiation: Architecture and Social Relations at Chau Hiix, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* K. Anne Pyburn, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2005
* USD 11,946.00

Under the direction of Dr. K. Anne Pyburn, Christopher R. Andres will analyze
data gathered during his archaeological investigations of the Maya site of Chau
Hiix in northern Belize. Chau Hiix is a medium-sized ceremonial center
distinguished by a lengthy occupational history extending from at least 1000
B.C. through 1450 A.D. The community is notable because it was continuously
occupied into the contact period and may have provided refuge for individuals
displaced when Spanish entradas penetrated the region in the 15th century. Chau
Hiix not only maintained a significant population following this period of
upheaval, but reflects spatial patterns in its architecture which depart from
those of earlier periods. &lt;br/&gt;Andres' project will examine the extent to
which Maya monumental architecture may have played a more active role in pre-
Hispanic society than has traditionally been acknowledged. While the Maya built
environment is often viewed as a product of human activity, there is growing
evidence that buildings were systematically manipulated to structure social
relations. As a form of material culture involved in the negotiation of social
relations, architecture at Chau Hiix offers insight into changing relationships
between members of different social groups. Preliminary investigations suggest
these changes between the Classic and Postclassic periods involve construction
activity at previously undeveloped locations, remodeling of existing buildings,
and changing patterns of accessibility to the central precinct and its
constituent structures. Andres' excavations will further document these
architectural alterations. Changing access and traffic patterns will be examined
using formal methods of spatial analysis and compared with similar data from the
neighboring Maya sites of Lamanai and Altun Ha, Belize. These analyses will
serve as a basis for explanations of architectural change and should help
illuminate inter- and intra-site socio-political relationships in northern
Belize between the Classic and Postclassic periods. &lt;br/&gt;Besides
addressing questions of interest to architects and social scientists, this
project will build on a decade-long effort by Pyburn to involve members of the
Belizean community of Crooked Tree in the scientific investigation of the past
and in protection of archaeological resources. Public understanding of work at
Chau Hiix will be enhanced through excavations carried out collaboratively with
members of Crooked Tree Village; by presentation of research findings in the
Crooked Tree Museum and during the annual Cashew Festival; and through guided
tours of excavations available to visitors to Chau Hiix. Communication of our
findings to residents of other parts of Belize will take place at the Belize
Archaeological Conference held in San Ignacio, Belize in July of 2003. In the
US, research results will be presented to the general public and academic
community at open houses including Indiana University's annual Archaeology Day
and through the Chau Hiix Archaeological Project's website. American
undergraduate students will receive training in a variety of skill sets,
including excavation of monumental architecture. The author will be trained in
methods of architectural analysis. Following the analyses discussed above,
research results will be communicated to the scientific community through
conference presentations and contributions to edited volumes and refereed
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;