* 0302636
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-Scaling Conservation: The Political Ecology of Community-Based Forest Management in Southern Malawi
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Ezekiel Kalipeni, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Over the past decade, the re-scaling of conservation from the national to the
village scale through the community-based natural resources management model has
become the trend in African conservation, yet its relative benefits and costs
remain unclear. While there are strong theoretical reasons in development and
common-pool resource management theory to expect both conservation and social
benefits from the model, initial evidence suggests that expected improvements in
levels of local participation, conservation initiatives and resource management,
economic and administrative efficiency, social equity, and development often
fail to materialize. The objective of this research is to conduct an assessment
of community-based forest management (CBFM) in southern Malawi as a solution to
the escalating environmental "crisis" arising from deforestation; and to find
out what "works" and does not, and why. Cognizant of the complexity of
human/environment interactions, the study will integrate biophysical and socio-
spatial factors of landscape change in the miombo biome of southern Africa. The
central hypothesis is that a mismatch exists between the ecological scale of
forest fragmentation processes and the social scale of forest management imposed
by the CBFM model, and that this scalar mismatch undermines forest conservation
efforts. To test this, the study will combine approaches from landscape ecology,
land use/land cover change studies, common-pool resource theory, and political
ecology. Data will be gathered from (1) satellite image analyses to give a
characterization of recent forest cover and landscape pattern changes, (2)
spatially explicit analyses that combine statistical regression with geographic
information systems (GIS) to provide a linkage to possible social and
biophysical factors associated with that change, and 3) various interview and
survey methods to provide contextual information on the sociospatial and
institutional relations of power surrounding forest access and use in the study
area, and to compare local perceptions of forest change processes with patterns
revealed by remotely sensed data.

The results should contribute a unique spatio-scalar approach that combines
social and biophysical considerations in the analysis of deforestation and
conservation interventions in Africa. The results will questions standard
paradigms surrounding the CBFM model and common-pool resources theory, and help
to reconcile the promise and rhetoric of CBFM to reality, suggest improvements
in the analysis and practice of CBFM, and raise policy and research questions
that allow the search for alternatives to CBNRM where needed. The study will
also increase the current knowledge in the land use and land cover change
literature on the methodological challenges for integrating dominant paradigms
in the social and natural sciences, and integrating social and biophysical data
in explaining such change, and specifically demonstrate contributions of
geographic political ecology to such literature. The study will also add to
knowledge on the change processes taking place in the miombo biome of southern
Africa. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.