* 0302554
* Imaging in Silicon: Tomography based Sensors for Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Kameshwar Poolla, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 09/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

This proposal deals with investigating the feasibility of developing a new class
of sensors.The target application of these sensors is semiconductor
manufacturing.The common theme shared by this class of sensors is that they are
based on Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT).EIT is an in vivo imaging
technology that has found widespread use in biomedical applications, but its use
in semiconductor manufacturing applications as suggested in this proposal is
novel. Broader Impact Semiconductor manufacturing is a vital industrial engine
that continues to drive worldwide eco- nomic growth.The next generation of
integrated electronics calls for the reliable and cost-effective manufacture of
0 .13 micron linewidth circuits across large 300 mm substrates.It is widely
recog- nized that sensors will play a vital role in realizing this objective,by
providing the means to optimize process parameters,engineer more complex
equipment,and by enabling integrated process control. The proposed research
offers the possibility of in situ sensors for monitoring processing conditions
at the wafer surface during semiconductor processing.The EIT based sensors that
will be developed in this work can offer unprecedented spatial resolution with
modest cost-of-ownership.These sensors would enable rapid equipmen
diagnostics,recipe optimization,and eventually closed-loop equipmen
control.Effectively,this would lead to improved yield,time-to-yield,and
throughput. The proposed research is the seed componen in this overall vision.
Finally,and most importantly,is the immediate and direct impact of the proposed
work in bring- ing students uniquely versatile in both hardware and system
aspects to the semiconductor industry. Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit
of this proposal is its novelty.The proposed work is interdisciplinary in
nature,bringing techniques and ideas from biomedical applications to the
semiconductor industry. This will require the imaginative blend of analytical
ideas with hardware design. Sensors are traditionally viewed as stand alone
hardware components.The proposed work takes a more nuanced approach where the
systems aspect of sensors is vital to their function.The particular tomography
problems that arise in the context of this proposal are novel and will require
innovative analytical approaches.In contrast with biomedical tomography,the
objects being imaged (the proposed sensors)have the luxury of being
optimized.The medical analogue is that of being able to arrange bones,organs,and
tissue in positions that are favorable to the imaging technique. First
principles analysis will permit the design of the proposed sensors for optimal
sensitivity.