* 0302642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Producing Pastoral Power:  Youth and the Cultural Politics of Education and Conservation in Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will help to understand
how conservation and resource management in Africa influences political action
by youth. The research explores politics in Tanzania through a comparative study
of education, land and rights among Maasai youth and seeks to answer the
following questions: 1) What factors most significantly contribute to the
genesis of youth movements? 2) In what ways is the struggle for control of land
and other natural resources an idiom of political alliance and action by rural
youth? And 3) What rights discourses and political tactics are employed by youth
in order to challenge the authority of elders? This study argues that 1) the
character of educational institutions, e.g. community, state, and church run
schools, 2) the history of landscapes, specifically in the ways that land has
been commodified and alienated e.g. small-holder agricultural migrants, large
scale commercial farms, or national conservation areas, and 3) the linking of
rights with a guarantor other than lineage, e.g. the state, international law,
or social movements, articulate in different ways to produce youth who challenge
the political economic system on which the authority of elders rests. While
these three forces are at work in two regions in northern Tanzania, Loliondo and
Monduli, locality makes a difference in each case. Through geographically
specific histories of educational institutions, land dynamics, and the framing
of Maasai politics in the language of universal citizenship and democratization,
ethnic autonomy or transnational indigenous rights, this study will demonstrate
how youth are both productive of new discourses of nature, nation, and politics,
as well as produced by them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through linking the history
of youth and environmental politics in East Africa this project will provide a
foundation for rethinking democratization in Africa, local resource conflict,
and changing inter-generational and ethnic politics. These questions are central
to theoretical and policy debates about social and political change in Africa.
Through illustrating the interrelations between land struggles, education and
political strategy, this research will shed light on how and why youth are
increasingly at the center of regional, national and international politics and
the geographical and historical conditions that influence their different
trajectories. The results of this study will demonstrate how local struggles for
control of material and symbolic resources reconfigure generational and gender
relations and influence patterns of political mobilization. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;