* 0302357
* Dynamics in Two Complex Variables
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* John Smillie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 180,529.00

PI: John Smillie, Cornell University DMS-0302357

Abstract

The study of mathematical models that describe how systems change with time
continues to provide fundamental mathematical challenges. When the models are
nonlinear the long-term behavior, or dynamics, of these models can be chaotic
and the dependence of the dynamics on the parameters of the model can be
extraordinarily delicate. One classic approach to understanding the fundamental
mechanisms that explain nonlinear dynamics is to look for generic behavior in
the collection of all maps or diffeomorphisms; another approach is to look
carefully at well chosen special families. Recent advances in one variable
dynamics show that these approaches can be complementary. In particular the
study of the complex quadratic family has led to new results about analytic and
smooth unimodal families of real maps. The PI will study a particular family of
two-dimensional dynamical systems: polynomial diffeomorphisms in two complex
dimensions. These will be studied from many points of view. The PI will use
ideas from the study of smooth diffeomorphisms of surfaces, methods from
potential theory, methods from dynamics in one complex variable and computer
tools. The hope is to provide a pathway for the migration of ideas from one-
dimensional complex dynamics to higher dimensional real and complex dynamics.

The understanding of mathematical models that describe how systems evolve with
time continues to provide essential insights in many areas of science. Such
models are used to describe the rhythms of the heart, the pulsing of lasers and
the spread of disease. Despite the progress that has been made there are still
fundamental problems remaining in the study of such mathematical models. Even
seemingly simple models can present formidable mathematical difficulties. In the
past 20 years important progress has been made in using ideas connected with
fractal objects such as Julia sets and the Mandelbrot set in understanding the
dynamics of systems with one degree of freedom. The aim of the proposed research
is to bring some of these new methods and concepts to bear on the problem of
understanding systems with two degrees of freedom. If these ideas prove fruitful
there could be a positive effect on the field of dynamical systems. This could
in turn have an influence on a range of scientific fields in which mathematical
models of time evolution play a role.

