* 0302758
* Studies of Model Systems in Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Barry McCoy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 306,000.00

This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research and
Mathematical Sciences. The research focus is on the statistical mechanics of
strongly interacting many-body systems and their connections with pure
mathematics. Two topics of particular interest are the eight-vertex model and
the hard-sphere fluid in D-dimensions. The results of these investigations will
be used in a new textbook on statistical mechanics being written by the
principal investigator (PI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has discovered an
unexpected new infinite dimensional symmetry of the six-vertex model at rational
values of the coupling constant that explains what had previously been
mysterious degeneracies in the spectrum of the transfer matrix. In the course of
extending this work to the eight-vertex model the PI has discovered significant
problems with the solutions of this famous thirty-year old problem. It is
proposed here to solve these problems and thus provide the first complete
solution for the spectrum of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has also
found that it is possible to greatly extend the computations of the virial
coefficients of the hard sphere fluid. For suitable low orders numerical
computations will be replaced by exact analytic computations and for higher
orders significant new results will be obtained numerically. In particular the
question of negative signs in the virial coefficients will be studied and the
new data will be used to critically assess the existing theories of
freezing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, it is proposed to use new developments
in the Ising model susceptibility to investigate the possibility that there are
deviations from the scaling theory of critical
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides connections between pure
mathematics and condensed matter physics. It also trains students in this
interdisciplinary area of research. Finally, the proposed textbook on
statistical mechanics will make this research available to a wider
audience.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant is funded jointly by the Divisions
of Materials Research and Mathematical Sciences. The research focus is on the
statistical mechanics of strongly interacting many-body systems and their
connections with pure mathematics. Two topics of particular interest are the
eight-vertex model and the hard-sphere fluid in D-dimensions. The results of
these investigations will be used in a new textbook on statistical mechanics
being written by the principal investigator (PI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research provides connections between pure mathematics and condensed matter
physics. It also trains students in this interdisciplinary area of research.
Finally, the proposed textbook on statistical mechanics will make this research
available to a wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;