* 0302248
* Definability, Constructibility and Transfer
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Hans Schoutens, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2004
* USD 52,468.00



In this research project, the investigator studies the uniform nature of
constructions from Algebraic Geometry and Commutative Algebra. Uniformity has to
be understood here in the following sense. Suppose an algebraic-geometric
object, such as a variety or a coherent sheaf, is presented to us by means of
some polynomials over an algebraically closed field. From this object other
objects or invariants can be derived by applying some algebraic-geometric
process. The question posed is now when can this construction be carried out by
using only polynomials of degree bounded by the degree of the initial
polynomials? In particular, when is an invariant associated to this object
uniformly bounded by the initial degrees only? Provided such uniform bounds
exist, the following transfer principle can be applied. Encode, allowing
negations and quantification, the construction or some of its properties in the
field by means of the coefficients of the polynomials involved--the existence of
uniform bounds is certainly a necessary, but often even a sufficient condition
for this to hold. Then use the Lefschetz Principle to carry over results from
positive characteristic to zero characteristic, or, conversely, from zero
characteristic to almost all positive characteristics. The investigator has
already successfully applied this method to the following non-trivial facts: the
Bass Conjecture, the Zariski-Lipman Conjecture and the New Intersection Theorem.
In this proposal, he is especially interested in applications to tight closure
in characteristic zero. Moreover, he proposes to infer from the existence of
uniform bounds, the constructible nature of certain algebraic-geometric
constructions. For instance, he seeks to continue the following program
originally initiated by Nagata and Grothendieck: for a given geometric property
of a point on a variety, when is the set of all points on the variety for which
this property holds, constructible?

This program provides an alternative approach to some open problems in the
field, as well as a simplified treatment of previous results. The author takes a
special interest in the following old problem, simple to state but yet so far
resisting all known proof methods: is every curve in three dimensional space
obtained by intersecting two surfaces? On a deeper level, the current proposal
can be seen as an attempt to analyze and better understand the constructive
nature of Algebraic Geometry, by looking at it from a logicians point of view.
In this way, the Principal Investigator intends to present the domain in a more
coherent and unified way and obtain an improved link between Geometry and
Algebra.