* 0302670
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactions between Higher Education Systems and Industry for Regional Economic Growth/Development
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* James Harrington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,024.00

Given the widely recognized increase in the economic importance of individual
skills, organizational knowledge, and technical innovation, higher education
systems have been increasingly emphasized in economic growth and development
theory and practice. Universities and colleges are recognized as important
providers of human capital and contributors to industrial innovation, a key to
bring economic growth and development. Many regional economic growth/development
policies pursue closer links between higher education systems and industry. The
purpose of this research is to understand the role of higher education systems
in regional economic growth and development under different regional settings:
various firm strategies influenced by firm size, universities and colleges of
varying quality, physical and organizational distance, technological match
between industry and universities/colleges, and regional institutional
arrangements. Diverse channels (labor supply, occupational training, research
collaboration, and spin-offs) and different geographies of interactions between
higher education systems and industry will be examined in Information
Technology-related fields and industry sectors for metropolitan areas in the
U.S. Secondary data including patent citation will be analyzed, and a mail
questionnaire survey will be conducted both to universities/colleges and firms
in three case study areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research should contribute
to understanding the role of higher education systems in providing human capital
and fostering industrial innovation. It will provide an indication of strategies
of firms and higher education institutions in their interactions and contribute
to building regional policies for industry-higher education system interactions
that reflect characteristics of universities/colleges and industry in different
settings of regions. The results of this study will be valuable to practitioners
in the field of regional economic growth and development. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;