* 0302119
* Induction and Mentoring in a Middle Grades Science and Mathematics Accelerated Teacher Preparation Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Eric Gutstein, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2008
* USD 900,000.00

This project addresses the induction and mentoring components of an alternative
teacher certification program and examines the effectiveness of these practices
on teacher retention in urban schools. The Middle Grades Science (MGS) and
Mathematics (MGM) program is a existing collaboration between the University of
Illinois-Chicago (UIC) and the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) that involves the
recruitment of individuals with strong science and mathematics backgrounds from
underrepresented populations to teach in struggling urban schools. To retain
these talented teacher interns, the induction and mentoring components are being
redesigned to extend from one to three years, and a comprehensive professional
development program is being added for both interns and their mentors. The
professional development component is a joint effort of scientists,
mathematicians, and education faculty. These individuals teach seminars and
workshops that have been designed to deepen the understanding of content,
demonstrate the integration of content and pedagogy, and educate interns on how
to best address the varied instructional needs of a diverse student population.
Significant program enhancements include: action-research projects, culturally
relevant pedagogical practice, joint professional development for intern-mentor
cohorts, creation of an on-line community, teaching and learning seminars led by
scientists and mathematicians, and access by interns and mentors to advanced
study in mathematics and science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
component examines the identities that beginning teachers in an alternative
certification program construct in relation to teaching middle grades science or
mathematics in an urban context, and explores the role that mentoring practices
play in supporting the construction of reform-minded teaching practices among
science and mathematics teachers in an alternative certification program during
this induction phase. The study participants include the MGS/MGM interns during
their first three years of teaching in CPS, focusing on particular cohorts and
interns at targeted stages within this extended induction
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By hearing firsthand from these beginning teachers,
it is possible to learn how urban teacher identities are constructed at the
intersections of personal experience, school culture, and broader educational
policies that inform teacher preparation. The study has important implications
for understanding how teachers prepared in an alternative certification program
attempt to counteract the 50% attrition rate of new science teachers in urban
schools through establishing communities of practice that sustain them as
professionals and nurture their instruction and adds to the understanding of how
best to service the science and mathematics instructional needs of middle grade
students in urban schools.&lt;br/&gt;