* 0302498
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Dimensions and Ecological Modeling of Mangrove Change in Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Jon Stallins, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2004
* USD 11,998.00

Wetland valuation is contested because of the coexistence of many diverse ideas
about their value and use. This proposed research operates from the central
premise that critical inquiry should be directed towards documenting how these
competing constructions play out in legal and geographical realms. The Florida
Mangrove Preservation Act (MPA) of 1996 was enacted as a means to lessen the
alteration and destruction of these contested coastal habitats. Although
ultimate responsibility for the enforcement of the MPA rests with the Florida
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), regulatory status has been granted
to some smaller scales of governance. Within these regulatory jurisdictions
(regional, county, and municipal), numerous attempts have been made to alter the
MPA as a result of conflict over the intended uses of mangrove habitats. In
Naples, for example, development interests and environmentalists both attempted
to rewrite the mangrove law and gain local control of Naples "mangrove space"
through referendum. This study proposes to document how different areas of the
state address mangrove management under the guidance of the same general law.
Moreover it documents how competing constructions of mangrove habitat manifest
themselves within the institutions granted regulatory jurisdiction under the
Mangrove Protection Act of 1996, and how these institutions, in turn, shape the
spatial and temporal patterns of mangrove alteration. The study has three
specific objectives: 1) to characterize the historical distribution of mangroves
in the state of Florida; 2) to document variability in the protection of
mangroves at regional, county, and municipal scales; and 3) to model future
mangrove distribution. To these ends, a synthesis of remote sensing, policy
analysis, and Markovian modeling will be invoked. A spatially and temporally
consistent study of mangrove inventory has not been conducted in Florida. Remote
sensing change detection, utilizing a combination of principle components
analysis and band ratio techniques, will be employed to identify regional trends
in mangrove loss or gain from the mid 1980s until the present. Because
enforcement of the MPA goes beyond the simple empirics of change detection,
open-ended interviews and formal surveys will be administered at various scales
of governance. Through the application of multidimensional scaling and case
study analysis, interview and survey data will provide a more nuanced
characterization as to how jurisdictions interpret and enact the provisions of
the MPA. Markovian modeling will weight the historic trends in mangrove loss or
gain according to policies and perceptions delineated from survey data so as to
identify which jurisdictions are most likely to incur mangrove loss in the
future. Through the multiple permutations of the jurisdictional weightings a
range of mangrove alteration scenarios, each within the codes specified by the
MPA, will be obtained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study provide a
template for incorporating quantitative and qualitative information into a
spatially explicit, temporal framework. These results will present the first
historically consistent view of the spatial extent of mangroves in the state of
Florida, one that incorporates the role of individual actors and institutional
dynamics. The research is also of importance to larger theoretical issues
embedded in the human-environment interaction It explores the diversity of
valuation patterns and processes, which may afford more critical insight than
debates over the exact dollar value of wetlands. Furthermore, this projects
attempts to fuse together the equally important, but disparate veins of thought
that constitute human and physical geography. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;