* 0302674
* Development and Implementation of a Laboratory Project to Promote Pre-engineering and Marine Robotics Technology in Regional High Schools
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Ike Coffman, Alvin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey G. Ryan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 249,848.00

The demand for technologically literate workers is increasing. However, many
students are not being adequately prepared for technical careers. A program is
needed that will take technical training into high schools, significantly raise
the interest level among students and teachers for technology education, and
then encourage more students to enroll in these programs at the college level.
This project is accomplishing this mission by delivering an underwater robotics
program to regional high schools. Alvin Community College recently received
approval to offer both a one-year certificate and a two-year Associate in
Applied Science degree program in Marine Robotics Technology. The Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board recognized the need for this program to help supply
a properly trained workforce for a demand occupation. The College is now
expanding the delivery of this marine technology education into area high
schools. This project is creating a marine robotics lab, complete with equipment
and educational support, and delivering these materials to selected high school
classes in 10 regional high schools. Teacher training is provided during the
initial presentation and through follow-up visits in order to facilitate the
integration of technology into the normal curriculum. High school Counselors and
Career and Technology Education Directors are selecting appropriate sophomore
and junior level high school classes to receive this training. We are
specifically targeting under-represented groups as part of this educational
experience, particularly minority and female students. The project is striving
to implement innovative and highly technical instruction into regional high
schools with the subsequent goal of producing highly skilled individuals to
enter the marine robotics field.