* 0302685
* Project to Expand and Institutionalize Learning Through Simulated Information Technology Enterprises (L-SITEs)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Vincent DiNoto, Haywood Community College
* Continuing grant
* Timothy V. Fossum
* 07/31/2007
* USD 678,706.00

The Learning Through Simulated Information Technology Enterprises (L-SITEs)
curriculum, first developed and piloted in 2000-2002, imparts innovative,
systemic learning in information technology and business by embedding community
college students in realistic but fictitious enterprises. This project refines,
expands, and institutionalizes adoption of L-SITEs through a collaborative of
community colleges, industry experts, and national organizations. Participant
support is increasing the numbers of institutions and faculty who use the
simulation. Each participating college takes part in faculty workshops for
training on implementation and adaptation of L-SITEs, scenarios, and website
use. Project teams serve as facilitators, augmented by industry and academic
partners. User feedback provides continuous improvement, and project management
upgrades L-SITEs through enhanced design and technology of web-based delivery.
Students experience longitudinal impact of business and technical decisions via
enhanced business and financial management methods, which allow simulated
enterprises to track and link financials like profit and loss over semester and
longer timeframes. To increase breadth and depth, L-SITEs' content integrates IT
skills standards, as developed by the National Workforce Center for Emerging
Technologies; and creates a model for innovative 'soft skills' certification. A
partnership with technical colleges from the Trans-Atlantic Technology and
Training Alliance-funded through the European Union-makes L-SITEs a more widely
adopted learning environment with an international business element.