* 0302259
* Prediction of Human Gait Adaptations Using Optimization principles
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Antonie van den Bogert, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 10/31/2004
* USD 108,578.00

0302259&lt;br/&gt;van den Bogert&lt;br/&gt;Humans typically perform movements in
a repeatable manner, and adjust their movement to requirements of the task and
to constraints imposed by the musculoskeletal system. For instance, a prosthetic
limb will lead to an abnormal gait that is not a direct consequence of the
device, but is rather the result of adaptations in the control of muscles in the
unaffected part of the body. This research tests the hypothesis that such
adaptations are governed by a general optimization principle, and can therefore
be predicted. Musculoskeletal modeling and optimization will be used to predict
the adaptation of human gait to ten different conditions: five speeds, two
uphill slopes, two downhill slopes, and walking backwards. Theoretical
predictions will be made using four optimization principles: minimal fatigue,
minimal metabolic energy, minimal muscle force, minimal perceived effort. The
predictions will be compared to the corresponding responses in twelve human
subjects to test their validity, with expectations that the principle of minimal
metabolic energy will produce the best predictions. A broader impact of this
research will include its contribution to a unification of motor control,
biomechanics, and bioenergetics for human locomotion. The findings will be
applicable to the design of rehabilitation devices, prosthetics, surgical
interventions, human-operated machines, and sport equipment. The computational
techniques will be made publicly available through an interactive web interface
for a target audience of high school and undergraduate students. Visitors will
be able to define task conditions and optimization criterion and use the
modeling engine to predict human behavior, which will be visualized using
animation.