* 0302583
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Market Forces, Government, and Regional Development: A Case Study of the Appalachian Regional Commission
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Amy Glasmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 09/30/2004
* USD 1,980.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award provides a scientific case
study of the Appalachian Regional Commission (ARC), an agency designated by
Congress in 1965 to improve the socioeconomic conditions of Appalachia. Although
the ARC's activities provide a rich resource for understanding federal regional
development efforts in economically depressed areas, currently available
research provides limited insight into the ARC's experience, and much remains to
be understood. This research addresses a number of specific issues that are
essential to understanding the ARC, including: how federal expenditures within
Appalachia have compared to federal expenditures elsewhere in the U.S. during
the course of the ARC's existence; the variation in ARC policy over time,
including the spatial variation in the agency's expenditures and private sector
interaction with such expenditures; and socioeconomic outcomes associated with
ARC policy. This analysis utilizes a range of quantitative and qualitative
techniques, including descriptive statistics, econometric modeling, document
analysis, and interviews. It also draws upon an array of resources, including an
ARC expenditure database, which contains information about all ARC expenditures
from 1965 through 2002; project files consisting of detailed descriptions of ARC
projects; federal government expenditure data for the entire U.S.; and an
historical database of social and economic data. The case study is situated in
the broad theoretical context of neoclassical economics, due to the need for
empirical and theoretical evaluation of how a regional development agency can
operate effectively in a social, political, and economic context that largely
privileges the basic tenets of such theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
ARC is in many respects a relic of an era when federal regional development
concerns and endeavors in the U.S. were more prominent than they are today, a
renewed interest in regional development initiatives has surfaced in the federal
government over the past few years. There is evidence for this in the recent
creation of two new development agencies - the Delta Regional Authority and the
Denali Commission - as well as in discussions in Congress about creating
regional development agencies in other economically depressed areas of the U.S.
The ARC has in many ways served as a model for these new and proposed agencies.
However, a lack of empirically informed research related to the ARC has resulted
in insufficient knowledge about the efficacy with which the agency has carried
out its mandate. This case study will broaden the understanding of the ARC and
of the effectiveness of the agency's efforts. In many ways, the ARC stands as a
test case for how a federal development agency can meet with success, and
failure, within the American political and economic system. Such understanding
can be important to guiding future development efforts in the U.S. and
elsewhere. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;