* 0302812
* Random Gaussian Curvatures, Image Centroids and Caustic Surfaces in Gravitational Lensing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Arlie Petters, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 141,500.00

ABSTRACT: NSF Proposal, DMS-0302812 (Petters)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
presents a two part research program that&lt;br/&gt;creates a synergistic
interaction between mathematics and astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;Program 1 aims at
developing a mathematical theory to determine the&lt;br/&gt;probability
distributions of Gaussian curvatures&lt;br/&gt;at critical points of random
time-delay functions. This research program&lt;br/&gt;opens up new mathematical
directions that bridge singularity theory with&lt;br/&gt;probability theory
(e.g., zeros of random polynomials and&lt;br/&gt;limit theorems in Rayleigh-Levy
statistics). In addition, Program 1 has&lt;br/&gt;direct applications to
understanding the nature of dark matter in galactic&lt;br/&gt;halos via the flux
ratio anomalies in the lensing signatures of galaxies. &lt;br/&gt;Program 2
seeks to extend the classification of light curves and image&lt;br/&gt;centroids
of sources near caustics in thin-screen, weak-field microlensing&lt;br/&gt;to
the strong gravitational field of a Kerr spacetime. This involves
&lt;br/&gt;studying the global topology, geometry, and singular theoretic
structure of&lt;br/&gt;light caustic surfaces in a spacetime. Program 2 points
to new mathematical&lt;br/&gt;issues relating the geometry of light caustic
surfaces to topological&lt;br/&gt;invariants of the matter singularities of
gravitational lenses. This program&lt;br/&gt;may also yield tests of Einstein's
General Theory of Relativity, especially as&lt;br/&gt;it pertains to the massive
black hole believed to lie in the nucleus of
our&lt;br/&gt;galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dark matter in
galactic halos and the black hole in&lt;br/&gt;the center of our galaxy are two
central and pressing topics in astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;These issues are directly
impacted by the powerful mathematical methods of&lt;br/&gt;geometric analysis
because gravitational lensing is simultaneously a unique&lt;br/&gt;tool for
probing the nature of dark matter distributions and black holes, and
&lt;br/&gt;a theory that is built on geometric, analytical, and probabilistic
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;The dark matter study requires developing a mathematical
theory that allows&lt;br/&gt;one to differentiate generic dark matter lensing
signatures from features that&lt;br/&gt;are specific to the particular choice
simple lens model used for dark matter.&lt;br/&gt; The first part of the
proposal deals with formulating such a mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory. This work
would open up new mathematical directions that bridge the&lt;br/&gt;geometric
aspects of singularity theory with several areas in probability&lt;br/&gt;theory
(Rayleigh-Levy statistics, zeros of random polynomials, etc.).
The&lt;br/&gt;second part of the proposal focuses on one of the fundamental
predictions of&lt;br/&gt;Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, namely,the
existence of black holes.&lt;br/&gt; Though a black hole cannot be seen
directly, its extremely strong&lt;br/&gt;gravitational field warps the spacetime
about the black hole causing light&lt;br/&gt;rays that managed to get through
the region to be bent with impressively large&lt;br/&gt;angles (e.g., rays can
loop around a black hole numerous times before arriving&lt;br/&gt;at the
observer). The probing of such extremes of gravity would be a
critical&lt;br/&gt;test of our understanding of the nature of space and time.
The proposal&lt;br/&gt;explores mathematically the lensing signatures of the
strong gravitational&lt;br/&gt;field due to the massive black hole generally
believed to be at the center of&lt;br/&gt;our galaxy. This should draw upon
techniques from differential geometry and&lt;br/&gt;singularity theory, and
create synergies between these mathematical&lt;br/&gt;topics and the physics of
black holes.&lt;br/&gt;