* 0302942
* Regional Information Systems Security Center: A consortium for security education, training and services
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Blyzka, Mount San Antonio College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2007
* USD 899,690.00

This project cuts across disciplines in computer science, computer information
system, networking technology, and criminal justice. This multi-disciplinary
approach to information system security requires understanding, cooperation, and
collaboration of faculty from these fields which itself is a significant
intellectual challenge. The project partners are using a Common Body of
Knowledge (CBK), which is a recognized international standard for practitioners
of Information System Security (ISS). The CBK identifies ISS domains as defined
by experts from major IS industries. These domains are being used to build a
matrix of existing courses that have a security component for possible inclusion
into certificate programs, Associate, Bachelor and even Master Degrees. This
analysis includes the identification of possible gaps among the schools ISS
curriculum. A result of this effort is curriculum development involving
upgrading of existing courses and development of new courses in the following
CBK domains on each campus: Access Control Systems and Methodology; Applications
and Systems Development Security; Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
Planning; Cryptography; Cyberlaw, Investigations and Ethics; Operations
Security; Security Architecture and Models; Telecommunications and Network
Security.