* 0302653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Moving Out:  Section 8 and Public Housing Relocation in Chicago
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Allan Schnaiberg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,200.00

This dissertation will study the settlement patterns and housing choice
decisions of African American households in Chicago as they move out of public
housing and into the private market using Chicago Housing Authority Section 8
housing vouchers. It will examine where these relocation households are moving,
how their settlement patterns compare with those of other Section 8 recipients,
and how these patterns reflect the local housing market. It will analyze whether
different types of households, and households from different CHA developments,
are moving to different neighborhoods. And, it will ask how relocation decisions
are shaped by the choices and constraints that characterize the housing search
process in the context of: 1) the CHA's redevelopment and relocation programs;
2) the specific dynamics of Chicago's housing market; and 3) the differences in
the households' composition, needs, and preferences. Finally, it will explore
how these choices and constraints help to explain the patterns of settlement in
the local housing market. The proposed research design is multi-method. It will
combine quantitative and spatial analysis (Phase I), interviews with expert
respondents (Phase II), and qualitative semi-structured interviews with a
stratified sample of public housing relocation households (Phase III). The
quantitative analysis will use administrative data for Chicago's regular Section
8 and relocation programs, tract level U.S. Census data, and current housing
market data. Visual representations of geographic settlement and demographic
patterns will be generated using GIS tools. Statistical tests will include:
ANOVA analysis of differences between Section 8 populations; OLS regression
analysis of neighborhood characteristics on the number of households from each
program in the census tract; and, OLS regression analysis of the effects of
different household characteristics, on the proportion of African American
households and the poverty rates of the receiving tracts. Spatial variables
generated using GIS tools will be incorporated into these analyses as controls.
Transcripts of interviews with relocation households will be analyzed using a
hierarchical database computer program (Phase IV). This research is designed to
bring a range of social-scientific methodological perspectives to bear on
current housing-assistance and public-housing relocation programs in order to
generate results valuable to both national policy makers and local managers
charged with program implementation. It will advance broader explorations of the
mechanisms of racial and economic segregation that limits the opportunities of
disadvantaged populations. It will also support the continued integration of
emergent GIS tools and spatial analysis into social-policy analysis and social-
scientific studies of urban systems. The research will contribute to social
science in several ways: The findings will be disseminated to both academic and
practitioner audiences. The Co-PI has worked closely with local stakeholders in
developing the project, and has agreed to share findings both informally and
through presentations to an established civic network in Chicago. The findings
will be shared with interdisciplinary academic and policy-making communities
through a series of conference papers (2-3), and scholarly publications (2). In
addition, the full dissertation will be publicized through the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development's web page, and made available through HUD-User.