* 0302676
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Fate of Maize Genetic Resources in Chiapas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Stephen Brush, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2005
* USD 10,495.00

Loss of genetic variability, or genetic erosion, in centers of crop origin and
evolution has been identified as a negative result of social and agricultural
cultural change. A key step in improving the way we manage the loss of genetic
resources in agriculture is to take stock of the extent, condition and trends
that cause this erosion. A critical need is to develop research tools for larger
spatial scales to assess the scope of social and environmental processes that
affect genetic resources and identify opportunities for effective conservation.
Mexico is the primary center of wild and cultivated maize resources, one of the
world's most three important crops, but the survival of maize genetic resources
is threatened by landscape changes taking place across the country. It is
against this background, and with the ultimate goal of improving crop genetic
resource conservation strategies, that this project will investigate the effects
of climate change and land conversion on maize diversity across the state of
Chiapas in southern Mexico. Until recently, agricultural modernization posed the
greatest threat to the loss of genetic variability. Coupled with current
patterns of land conversion, future climate change may surpass these effects, in
both magnitude and extent, by endangering the integrity of the highly adaptive
ecological-niches where most traditional maize landraces are grown. Combining
traditional field data with current spatial analytic techniques, the
relationship between maize diversity and patterns of land conversion will be
examined through the use of spatial analytic methods coupled with a time-series
database of both maize diversity and land use. A special emphasis is placed on
modeling the biophysical and socio-economic constraints that are likely to
negatively impact the existing diversity of maize varieties in view of expected
climate and land-use/land-cover changes. Modeling will adopt a spatial
perspective. The project will apply this information to identify priority zones
for conservation efforts, and will generate a model of land use to promote
conservation efforts in the future.

As a reservoir of traits of great value to breeders, maize genetic resources are
a resource for both present and future food production. Conserving crop genetic
resources has been adopted as an international imperative and is included in the
mandate of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Thus far, efforts to
understand and cope with genetic erosion are hampered by the lack of models that
integrate these factors as the landscape level, focusing instead on two opposing
spatial scales: micro-level studies of crop diversity and farmer choice, and
global or hemispheric studies of crop-climate relationships. Research at the
sub-national level could help to integrate these data, resulting in an
understanding of the factors that operate within, and interact across, the
various scales to maintain crop diversity. A particular challenge for
researchers in the field of conservation of crop genetic resources is in
developing sustainable management models for a region's habitats, in which both
biophysical specificity required by these resources and human resource needs are
made compatible. This project will develop databases, theory, and methodology to
address this challenge. The project represents a major step forward in the study
of the basis of crop evolution and an important contribution to the theory and
design of genetic resource conservation. The identification of effective
environments of different types of maize and the methodology employed could be
used to identify priority zones in crop conservation in other regions of the
world and would also be helpful in the development of more efficient sampling
strategies for monitoring maize diversity. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

