* 0302591
* South Carolina Upstate Photonics Center
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* James Wood, Tri-County Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2006
* USD 197,646.00

This is a three-year regional initiative involving an Alliance comprised of
three South Carolina technical colleges, Greenville Technical College,
Spartanburg Technical College and Tri-County Technical College and Clemson
University's Center for Optical Material Science and Technologies (COMSET) in
the training of photonics technicians to support the photonics field as an
emerging research, development and manufacturing industry in seven target
counties: Anderson, Cherokee, Greenville, Oconee, Pickens, Spartanburg, and
Union.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applications for photonics in the 21st century
are increasing in an ever-changing world that relies more and more on fiber
optics to conduct business, perform laser surgery, and monitor environmental
issues, to mention a few. These applications and the implementation of new
photonics developments requires technicians who understand how integrated
systems operate and who can support engineers at all levels. The Alliance uses a
variety of resources, including collaborations with institutions/organizations
knowledgeable in photonics, past experiences in the design and implementation of
SC's ATE Center of Excellence, etc., to focus on building the capacity for
Upstate South Carolina to compete in drawing photonics research and development
companies to the Upstate. Four objectives are identified: 1) to increase the
awareness of photonics as a career choice at the high school level; 2) to
increase faculty capacity to develop distance learning and remote laboratories
for photonics courses; 3) to align photonics courses to existing engineering
technology curricula through the development of a scope and sequence; and 4)
adapt content materials developed at the Center for Organization Research and
Development (CORD) with a problem-based emphasis and ready the material for
distance learning. The design elements of this project address the need to focus
on attracting diverse population groups to the photonics industry. This is
particularly true in the high school awareness component. Lessons learned from
the SC ATE Center of Excellence project are particularly beneficial in this
initiative since recruitment of women and under-represented minorities are
identified as one of four critical success factors. The Alliance will
disseminate the results learned from these activities through presentations at
national, regional, and state workshops and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;