* 0302575
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-Politcal Dimensions of Solid Waste Disposal
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2004
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2004
* USD 11,996.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will analyze conflicts
over municipal solid waste in the city of Oaxaca, Mexico. The research will
contrast the spatial and representational tactics and strategies of two core
groups and their allies, all of whom are engaged in political infighting over
MSW management in the city. These two main groups are: (a) neighborhood
activists, who are opposed to the current location and management of the dump;
and (b) scavengers, who have squatted on the dump and make their living
recycling items from it. These two groups employ different representations of
garbage (as risk or resource); implement distinct spatial-organizational
strategies; and forge competing networks with state and non-state (NGO), local
and global, organizations. These networks enable the two core groups to affect
management of the dumpsite and the direction of broader urban development
policy. In order to assess these politics, the research addresses the following
primary question: How are different perspectives on garbage - from risk to
resource - mobilized through (a) the spatial strategies of the organizations
(including how they operate in urban space, the spaces they appropriate during
protests, and their coalition building), and (b) their representations of the
garbage problem? A set of ancillary questions is: To what extent do views of
garbage as a resource or risk vary for the rank-and-file members of the
organizations? How does this variability affect organizational cohesion? And, to
what extent is this cohesion mediated by intra-organizational differences along
the lines of class, gender, and indigeneity (among Oaxaca's 16 different
indigenous groups).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More generally, this research will
contribute to the understanding of MSW problems and solutions in the global
south. While much attention has been paid to the "garbage crisis" in northern
countries, especially the United States, less attention has been paid to the
politics of garbage in the global south. Ironically, at the time that northern
countries are dealing with the aftermath of decades of siting problems and
costly and environmentally suspect MSW technologies, countries like Mexico are
trying to import these very same knowledges and practices in an effort to
"modernize". Within this very different cultural milieu, however, garbage is not
simply "waste," but also "ore" - a resource mined as a part of household
survival strategies. These distinct understandings and uses of garbage underlie
a number of key conflicts over urban land and struggles over social reproduction
in the global south. In short, in Oaxaca as in many other growing cities in
Latin America, Africa, and Asia, the politics of MSW are rooted in conflicts
between neighborhood activists, eager to secure a healthy environment, and
scavengers, who survive on the discards of the formal economy. Further, the
ideals of sustainable development as proposed by local NGO leaders and national
and international organizations are realized only in and through particular
places such as Oaxaca. As urbanization increases throughout the global south,
the identification of locally appropriate technologies to deal with concomitant
pollutions concerns relies therefore, on inquiries grounded in the local
realities of issues such as municipal solid waste management. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;