* 0302645
* Molecular Genetic Characterization of Contaminated Environments as a Tool for the Assessment of Remediation Technology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Jay Simonds, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 02/29/2008
* USD 448,319.00

0302645 Nies Molecular genetic analysis of microbial community structure and
function can provide a direct and powerful tool to assess stressed, impacted,
and recovering ecosystems. This information can improve bioremediation system
design and operation, evaluation of monitored natural attenuation (MNA) and
resource allocation, and it will increase the use of sound science in decision
making and regulatory oversight. Intellectual Merit. We have developed a set of
primers and a real-time PCR protocol to detect and enumerate aromatic oxygenase
genes, and have used them in parallel with PCR-DGGE community analysis, to
assess the feasibility of using this biotechnology as a bioremediation
assessment and monitoring tool. The detection of oxygenase genes yields direct
insight into the assimilative function of the local ecosystem, i.e. the
occurrence of aerobic biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Our primers have
been tested in well controlled experiments with pure cultures, in soil
microcosms, and on samples from two field sites. Tracking catabolic genes
involved in the biodegradation of priority pollutants can be used to optimize
remediation systems and evaluate MNA. Reliable in-situ methods currently do not
exist to evaluate the effectiveness of the components used for bioremediation
aeration, such as vacuum pumps, air spargers, or oxygen releasing amendments.
The direct measurement of genes encoding aromatic oxygenases would provide an
effective tool for monitoring engineered aeration systems and for MNA. Aromatic
oxygenase genes were chosen as indicators because they play a key role in the
biodegradation of BTEX, the pollutants of principal concern at gasoline-
contaminated sites. The utilization of expensive aeration technologies and
oxygen releasing amendments could be significantly optimized by the development
of modern biotechnology tools. We propose to evaluate the feasibility of using
molecular genetic characterization of the microbial community structure, and
catabolic function, to advance the state-of-the-art of LUST site remediation in
a field-scale university-industry collaboration. Over a three year period, our
interdisciplinary university-industry team proposes to conduct a research
project that will obtain field performance data about this recently developed
tool for monitoring petroleum contaminated sites. We expect that sites of
different 'ages,' geochemistry and geology will have characteristic and
detectable molecular signatures.