* 0302521
* Doctoral Dissertation: Processes of Legitimation: The University of Phoenix and Its Institutional Environments
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,380.00

In the past quarter-century the University of Phoenix has become the leading
for-profit provider of higher education. It has achieved legitimacy despite
appearing and behaving differently from other leading higher education
organizations, and without conforming to many of the rules, values, and ideas of
how a legitimate higher education organization should look and act. The proposed
dissertation research seeks to answer four questions about the origins and
development of the University of Phoenix. Each question is a case study in
organizational legitimacy and focuses on specific processes of legitimation: (1)
the process of accreditation by the North Central Association; (2) the process
of obtaining a license in four US states; (3) the process of being certified for
an initial public stock offering; and (4) the process of two audit
investigations by the US Department of Education. Because the research questions
are "how" and "why" questions, the method employed will be a multiple embedded
case study, using historical and documentary evidence supplemented by interview
data. A proposed stage-process model of organizational legitimation will be
applied to each case, as well as to the history of the organization as a whole.
The primary objectives of the proposed dissertation project are to investigate
(a) the interplay of regulatory, moral-normative, and cultural-cognitive
organizational legitimacies; (b) the dynamics of organizational conformity and
nonconformity to prescribed institutional models; (c) the contours of multiple
institutional logics in the organizational field of higher education; and (d)
the historical and contextual nature of legitimation processes. More broadly,
the proposed research will make important contributions to the sociological
understanding of higher education organizations, with a particular emphasis on
those that are organized for-profit. A better understanding of for-profit higher
education organizations will inform debates and decisions in educational
administration, and policy set at the national, state, and local levels.