* 0302801
* Diversity in Engineering Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Gregory Watkins, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 06/30/2007
* USD 898,561.00

This project addresses the issue of increasing the pool of qualified
technicians, technologists, and scientists in the region by increasing the
interest of secondary school students from historically underrepresented groups
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. To reach out
to students in public schools, technology clubs are established at public
schools, summer technology camps are sponsored, and engineering and technology
competitions are sponsored. Technology club coordinators selected from
underrepresented groups serve as strong role models, and college and university
student chapters of professional societies provide mentors for secondary school
students.

This project includes an awareness program to effect a new appreciation in the
community for the career and educational opportunities that exist in STEM.
Secondary school mathematics and science teachers and counselors attend
workshops that address issues related to encouraging underrepresented students
interested in mathematics and science. Parents receive information about STEM
careers and methods to encourage their children in mathematics and science and a
project web site includes information for students, teachers, counselors and
parents. At the collegiate level, project leaders collaborate to improve the
alignment of technology curricula between the community colleges and UNC
Charlotte to articulate the preparation of students for the B.S. degree. College
students mentor and advise high school students; both groups are encouraged to
consider careers in academic fields. Internships, technical classes, and
shadowing experiences for high school teachers improve math, science, and
technology content in the high school and college programs. The project assesses
student participation in technology clubs and high school science and
mathematics courses in the high schools as well as student performance in
courses and on college entrance exams to assess knowledge of STEM fundamentals.

The intellectual merit of this project lies in its unique approach to increasing
the pool of qualified technicians, technologists, and scientists in the region
by recruiting secondary school students underrepresented in STEM fields, and by
providing strong role models and effective mentoring programs. The broader
impacts of this project are its innovative approaches to advance learning and
awareness of STEM principles and career opportunities while promoting learning
and teaching in secondary schools, community colleges, and the university. The
concentration on creation and enhancement of technology clubs in inner city and
rural areas and the careful selection of effective role models broaden
participation of individuals from targeted groups in STEM. The collaborative
efforts enhance the infrastructure of education and encourage further
participation from the community.