* 0302656
* Enhancing the Two-Year Biotechnology/Chemistry Program with Instrumentation, Faculty Development and Technical Experience
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Ying Mao, Camden County College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 158,627.00

Camden County College is purchasing a gas chromatography - mass
spectrophotometer (GC/MS) to integrate gas chromatography-mass spectrophotometry
technology used in industry into all aspects of the two-year college
biotechnology/chemistry laboratory experience. Basic theory and hands-on use of
the GC/MS begins in the Organic and General Chemistry courses, where it enhances
the science experience of both biotechnology majors and traditional science
majors. In addition, GC/MS is being implemented in the Chemistry and Society
courses for non-science majors, the new Biochemistry courses (part of the
biotechnology program), and Forensic Chemistry. In collaboration with the county
police academy (located on campus) and the state forensics laboratory, students
are using the instrument in real-life forensic applications. To maximize the
implementation of technology across the curriculum, this project also includes
extensive faculty development activities in the use, calibration, and
maintenance of the GC/MS, as well as industrial field experiences for faculty at
area Biotechnology companies. Focusing on inquiry-based learning improves
student understanding of important science principles by reinforcing these
principles with industry-related demonstrations and experiments. With the
adaptation and implementation of lab experiments across the curriculum, the
students have repetitive use of the equipment and gain a familiarity with the
techniques and computer systems used in an industry setting. This
instrumentation is having a significant effect in raising the quality and scope
of the science experience of two-year college students, facilitating inquiry-
based learning and fostering critical thinking and problem solving skills.
Appropriate assessment of project activities is being conducted throughout the
project to measure improvements in student learning. This project is having an
impact beyond the biotechnology program at Camden County College. It is
enhancing each course in the chemistry curriculum, and also cuts across
disciplines, affecting courses such as genetics (biology), clinical chemistry
and immunology (clinical lab science) as well as courses for the allied health
majors. As a result, students, especially women and minorities, are being better
prepared to enter the job market directly, or transfer to a four-year
institution to continue their education. Most importantly, this project is
providing the surrounding tri-state region (New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and
Delaware) with sorely needed, well-trained bio-technicians.