* 0302885
* Terrorist Agent Control Technology (TACT)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Douglas Feil, Kirkwood Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 459,932.00

Kirkwood Community College and partner institutions, St Louis University, the
University of Tennessee, and the NSF AgKnowledge Center are developing a program
that applies principals of physics, biology and chemistry to control biological,
chemical and nuclear agents that threaten the security of the workplace and the
working environment of technicians in Environmental Health &amp; Safety
(EH&amp;S) in the United States. With this program, the EH&amp;S technicians
gain the skills and knowledge to recognize agents, understand how they are
dispersed through vulnerable pathways, assess threats, detect contaminants,
contain agents, decontaminate the workplace, and dispose of contaminants in an
environmentally sound way. Further, they learn how to plan for contingencies and
recommend engineering controls that prevent infiltration. The objectives of the
Terrorist Agent Control Technology (TACT) project are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Develop new curriculum and educational materials for
national dissemination. Three new courses are being developed by Kirkwood with
advice and review by an Advisory Council, the AgKnowledge University Council and
two prominent environmental research universities: the University of Tennessee
and St. Louis University. The three courses are (I) Biological, Chemical and
Nuclear Agents, (II) Threat Assessment and Detection, and (III) Contingency
Planning and Engineering Controls;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Improve efficiency
and effectiveness of learning by developing blended web-based courses with
required hands-on laboratories;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Offer professional
development activities that prepare 130 instructors annually to offer the
courses, hands-on applications, and certifications;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) To
improve EH&amp;S programs by adding student certifications in Terrorist Agent
Control Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TACT project is led by capable
faculty, practicing scientists and engineers with recent and relevant experience
and it is supported by a National Advisory Council comprised of leaders in risk
assessment, risk management, exposure assessment, industrial hygiene,
toxicology, air and water pollution, environmental epidemiology, performance
engineering, distance learning, and academic research. Dissemination of this
project includes a minimum of 50 project partners offering TACT courses and
certifications across the nation. Our goal is certifying five hundred
technicians by the end of the three years to work in industry, agriculture and
municipal services nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;