* 0303902
* NIRT:  Modeling and Simulation Framework at the Nanoscale.  Application to Process Simulation, Nanodevices, and Nanostructured Composites
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Mark Shephard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,018,000.00

NIRT: Modeling and Simulation Framework at the
Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, category
NIRT. The goal of the research effort is the development of a generalized
multiscale modeling and simulation methodology for nanostructured material
systems. Project efforts will include the development of (i) a mathematically
rigorous multiscale modeling methodology capable of coupling behaviors from the
atomic scale through full scale system, (ii) a computational simulation
framework built around this methodology into which techniques for investigating
behaviors at the various scales can be effectively integrated, and (iii) a proof
of concept of the developed core technologies using synergetic interactions with
experimental work currently under way at Rensselaer. The project will bring
together researchers with complementary expertise in: nanomechanics, multibody
dynamics, multiscale computational techniques, and computational
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliability of modeling and simulation at the
nanoscale based on the formalism of adaptive hierarchical modeling is the key
aspect of the project. Efforts will focus on the coupling of modeling methods
applied at the atomic and continuum levels, including bridging of the
appropriate time scales and integrating various physical phenomena. Specific
consideration will be given to the estimates of modeling errors. These estimates
will be based on a posteriori measurements that will be employed in new
procedures for the adaptive selection of scales and methods applied throughout
the space/time domain of the simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
technologies developed will be incorporated into a component-based simulation
framework. Building on advanced software technologies, this framework will
efficiently support distributed parallel calculations on the evolving structures
of adaptive multiscale simulations. To address the computational requirements of
these simulations new numerical methods that reduce the computational effort of
these simulations will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is
expected to impact science and industry's ability to model, analyze, and
understand a vast array of nanomaterials used in applications, such as engines,
lightweight components used in the aerospace and automotive industries, and
coupled electro-mechanical devices (sensors). These applications represent
enabling technologies for major U.S industries. Solid theoretical foundations
and associated simulation capabilities are needed to support the breakthrough
developments central to the growth of these industries. This project will take
advantage of the faculty, programs and facilities being supported through the
Rensselaer Strategic Plan. The program will also develop new interdisciplinary
graduate and short courses in multiscale modeling with applications to
nanotechnology in order to train a generation of scientists and engineers with
superior mathematical and technological skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;