* 0303395
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration: Investgation of Grain Scale Deformation and Recrystallization In Columnar Grained Electrical Steels with a &amp;lt;100&amp;gt; Fiber Texture
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Surya Kalidindi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2007
* USD 349,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration between the groups of R. Doherty and
S. Kalinindi at Drexel University and F. Landgraf at the Institute of
Technological Research (IPT) in Sao Paolo, Brazil examines the evolution of
texture during plastic deformation of electrical steels. The project focuses on
the retention of the desirable &lt;100&gt; fiber texture normal to the sheet in
rolled and recrystallized Fe-Si electrical steel. This texture is known to be
the ideal texture of motor cores that are radially magnetized. A related effort
on the modeling of the magnetic properties of the textured steel is carried out
by M. Sablik, Southwest Research Institute, and C. Gutierrez, Southwest Texas
State University, in collaboration with the Brazilian group. The research
examines the development of the deformation microstructure, on a grain-by-grain
basis, in fully characterized, directionally solidified, Fe-Si columnar samples,
during plane strain compression. The compression is applied along the fiber
axis. The objectives are (i) to develop the insights required for fully
predictive models and (ii) to provide samples in which the microstructure,
relevant for recrystallization, has been characterized as a function of
deformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processing method, developed for the
scientifically studied columned-grained ingots, is then, in close collaboration
with the Brazilian group, applied to the industrially important twin-roll cast
sheets. The final technical objective is improved electrical motor steel. In
addition this project increases further the scientific and education interaction
with the group in Brazil, adding a valuable education experience for the
students in both countries. This award is supported by the Division of Materials
Research, the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;