* 0303620
* RI:  Wide-Area-Network in a Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Harvey Newman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,998,695.00

The development of robust and stable ultrascale networking, at 100 Gbps and
higher speeds in the wide area, is critical to support the new generation of
ultrascale computing and petabyte to exabyte datasets that promise to drive
discoveries in fundamental and applied sciences of the next decade. Continued
advances in computing, communication, and storage technologies, combined with
the development of national and global Grid systems, hold the promise of
providing the required capacities and an effective environment for computing and
science. A key challenge to overcome is that some of the current network control
and resource sharing algorithms cannot scale to this regime. The goal of the
Caltech FAST Project is to develop theories and algorithms for the future
ultrascale networks, implement and demonstrate them in state-of-the-art
testbeds, and deploy them in communities that have a clear and urgent need
today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical component of this effort is an
experimental infrastructure on which to develop, test, and demonstrate new
algorithms at both high speed and large delay. It is impossible to conduct this
research on network simulators or in the high performance wide-area networks
(WAN) available today. The propose project will build such a facility: WAN in
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WAN in Lab will consist of four major building
blocks: high speed servers, programmable routers, electronic crossconnects, and
WDM equipment including long-haul fibers with associated optical amplifiers,
dispersion compensation modules and optical multiplexers and
demultiplexers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This "wind tunnel" of networking has five
features that combine to make it a truly unique facility in the
world:&lt;br/&gt;1. It is literally a WAN, not an emulation, that provides both
high speed and large distance, critical for developing protocols for ultrascale
networking. &lt;br/&gt;2. It can be easily configured into logical networks of
different topologies, link speeds and delays, and can stay cutting-edge by
incorporating latest advances in optical technologies, routers, or servers, as
need arises and funds become available.&lt;br/&gt;3. WAN in Lab will have built-
in passive monitoring facilities that will complement end-to-end monitoring
tools such as Web100. These are critical to resolve many performance problems
that arise only in live networks but that are hard to debug from just end-to-end
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;4. It is a network that can break and is suitable for
risky experiments, possibly including those that involve reprogramming the
routers.&lt;br/&gt;5. It will be integrated with global high performance
research networks and will be a shared resource for the networking
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: WAN in Lab will be part of the
Federated Emulab led by University of Utah's Jay Lepreau and will be managed on
a uniform software platform. It complements nicely the existing facility in
Emulab, which focuses on large scale (&gt;200 servers) but low speed (100Mbps
network interface card). Participation in Federated Emulab makes WAN in Lab
instantly available to the Emulab user community and useful to those projects
that need both high capacity and large distance, as FAST does. This facility is
expected to serve much more projects than the few that motivated
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wan in Lab is a key element in the overall process of
research/in-lab development/experimental networks for field trials/production
networks. We are engaged in this process on an ongoing basis to get the next
generation(s) of protocols into production, in the service of science and
engineering. We have been working with the HENP community and their partners to
achieve the transition to production. We are partnering closely with SURFnet,
Starlight and in the future UKlight to provide a global 10 Gbps UltraLight
testbed. These activities and WAN in Lab complement and leverage on each
other.&lt;br/&gt;