* 0303880
* U.S. - Japan Joint Seminar:  Earthquake-Resistant Design of Lifelines Facilities and Countermeasures Against Soil Liquefaction
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 02/28/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0303880&lt;br/&gt;Bardet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists and engineers in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar
on earthquake-resistant design of lifelines facilities and countermeasures
against soil liquefaction to be held in Tokyo, Japan. The co-organizers are
Professor Jean-Pierre Bardet at the University of Southern California in Los
Angeles and Professor Masanori Hamada at Waseda University in Tokyo, Japan. The
meeting will bring together research scientists from the U.S. and Japan, two
countries where important and exciting progress in this area of science is being
undertaken. During past earthquakes, soil liquefaction has repeatedly damaged
lifelines (gas, water and electric utility lines) and foundations of bridges and
highway overpasses. There has been much research undertaken on the effects of
liquefaction-induced deformation on foundations and lifelines systems in the
1994 Northridge and 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquakes. This resulted in proposed
engineering solutions that mitigate the devastating effects of soil liquefaction
in future earthquakes. These findings will be discussed, as they are critical to
the implementation of performance-based design in geotechnical and structural
engineering in the United States and Japan. The meeting will then define
directions for future research in geotechnical earthquake
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the
best scientists and engineers to participate. The seminar is expected to yield
results that will impact not only engineering practice but also fundamental
research in engineering. The seminar organizers have made a special effort to
involve postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students as both
participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts
in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will
set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the seminar the
organizers plan to establish a workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be
published on this web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;