* 0303324
* Paleoclimate and Flooding History in the Southern San Joaquin Valley, CA: Community-Centered Research for Improving Minority Participation in the Geosciences
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Negrini, California State University Bakersfield Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 325,842.00

ABSTRACT

Paleoclimate and Flooding History in the Southern San Joaquin Valley, CA

The proposing institution, California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB), is
the only four-year university within a one-hundred-mile radius in the Southern
San Joaquin Valley. It is located in a rapidly growing area with a large and
fast-growing minority population and one of the lowest college attendance rates
in the state. Enrollment of minority college students in geology remains
disproportionately low. Further exacerbating the situation is the lack of K-12
teachers with a geoscience background. This project was developed in
collaboration with the Bakersfield City School District and the Kern County
Superintendent of Schools. The overall goal of "Paleoclimate and Flooding
History in the Southern San Joaquin Valley, CA" is to strengthen the
understanding of the geosciences in teaching and learning and to improve access
and retention of students in underrepresented groups. To achieve this goal, the
program provides high-quality scientific research on important issues relevant
to the local community and society at large, increases professional development
for Kern County middle and high school teachers, improves geoscience teaching at
Kern County middle and high schools, recruits students from underrepresented
groups into CSUB.s geology program, increases achievement and retention of
CSUB.s minority geology students, and raises geoscience awareness in the broader
community. This project centers around a summer research program and offers
numerous opportunities for student involvement and training at multiple levels,
while addressing important scientific questions.