* 0303768
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Paleoecological Modeling and the Evolution of Early Eocene Primates in the Bighorn Basin, WY
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Kenneth Rose, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 11/30/2004
* USD 8,434.00

This study is proposed to advance the current understanding of the origin and
evolution of the earliest primates. A broad-based, multidisciplinary approach
will be used to analyze one of the most complete sequences of early fossil
primates known. Though important contributions will also be made to the sciences
of paleontology and paleoecology (the study of the interactions of ancient
ecosystems), the main goal of this project is to relate primate evolution to
environmental and community changes. The Willwood Formation of the Bighorn
Basin, Wyoming, contains an extraordinary record of the history of early modern
mammals. Deposited between 55 and 52.5 million years ago, it is one of the
richest and most continuous early Eocene sequences in the world. Primates formed
a significant and diverse element of the fauna preserved in the Willwood
Formation, accounting for 10-20% of the individuals from many Willwood
assemblages. Most of the fossil localities from the southern part of the Bighorn
Basin have been tied into a composite sedimentary section of nearly 700m in
thickness that is exposed over an area of more than 3000 km2. Intense fossil
collecting efforts have been focused in the southern Bighorn Basin since the
early 1960s, resulting in an enormous collection of fossils conservatively
estimated to include as many as 100,000 vertebrate specimens. Recently,
paleoenvironmental studies of the Bighorn Basin have incorporated innovations in
stable isotope analysis to characterize the climate and depositional environment
of these sediments. These new data are in excellent accord with previous
paleoenvironmental reconstructions based on fossil soils and plant leaf
physiognomy. With the emergence of these exciting and varied lines of evidence,
it is now possible to examine the evolution of the Willwood primates in a
tightly constrained time frame and in the context of a changing, regional
environment. Studies of this type, grouped loosely under the heading
'paleoecology', have been critical in shaping hypotheses of primate and hominid
evolution. The proposed project aims to accomplish a paleoecological analysis of
the southern Bighorn Basin mammal community in two stages. The first is to
quantify, using a random-sampling procedure, the pattern of faunal evolution
during the first 2.5 million years of the Eocene in the southern Bighorn Basin.
Preliminary analysis suggests that there have been episodes of concentrated
faunal change (turnover). In the second stage, the resultant pattern will be
tested for correspondence with the predictions of eight different current
hypotheses of ecological models for evolutionary change. The results of this
study will have important implications for scenarios of the evolution of the
earliest primates and current arguments surrounding the paleoecological modeling
of ancient ecosystems. The broader impacts of this study will include a
contribution to current debates surrounding the impact of climate change on
modern mammalian ecosystems. The results will illustrate the behavior and
evolution of an ancient ecosystem in the face of changing regional temperature
and moisture regimes, and shifting geological environments. In addition, the
broader impacts include the graduate training of the Co-PI. The data collected
will be useful in further research and will advance the scientific career of the
Co-PI.