* 0303976
* NIRT: Bottom Up Assembly of Metal and Semiconductor Nanowires: Fundamental Forces to Nanoelectronic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Theresa Mayer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,087,898.00

NIRT: Bottom Up Assembly of Metal and Semiconductor Nanowires: Fundamental
Forces to Electronic
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF
02-148, category NIRT. The technical goal of this project is to enable bottom-up
assembly of nanoparticles by controlling fundamental forces. Compared with top-
down nanoparticle assembly, bottom-up assembly provides an inexpensive route to
making bulk quantities of nanomaterials, including high-density nanoelectronics.
Promising methods have been developed by one of the investigators to produce
nanoassemblies using bead templating assembly and DNA-directed bead templating
assembly. By engineering the fundamental forces (e.g., van der Waals, solvation,
depletion), this proposal seeks to minimize undesired aggregation and control
either nondeterministic or deterministic assembly. The principles of fundamental
nanoparticle forces learned in this research will be tested in the construction
of a functional logic circuit based on quantum mechanical ideas, and the same
principles will provide a basis for scaling up production quantities of this
circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The logic circuit to be built consists of
hexagonal or square arrays of semiconductor nanowires (e.g., silicon, gallium
arsenide), with metal (e.g., gold, platinum) gate wires. This project has five
objectives. 1) Simple versions of the device will be built with larger wires at
the Penn State Nanofab Facility, using electrofluidic techniques. This will
enable development of circuit testing procedures required for later tests with
the circuit built using directed assembly. 2) A non-deterministic bead
templating technique will exploit physical forces (e.g., electrostatics, steric,
solvation) to assemble from the bottom up various types of functional nanowires.
Essential to this work is the screening of co-solvent/particle systems that
aggregate uncontrollably, and this will benefit greatly from phase diagrams
simulated with molecular level simulations. 3) Unique sphere-rod interparticle
force measurements will synergize with molecular dynamics simulations to produce
predictive models and heuristics that will be broadly applicable in stabilizing
nanoparticle dispersions, for instance by minimizing van der Waals forces and
maximizing the stabilizing solvation forces. 4) Bead templating with DNA-
directed assembly will be combined with the heuristics from the third objective
to guide assembly while preventing undesired particle interactions as the DNA
links the nanowires in the desired configuration. The undesired aggregation has
been a critical barrier to otherwise very promising techniques. In both
subprojects 2 and 4, the circuits will contain chemical specificity that
enables, for instance, metal-semiconductor junctions, facilitating objective 1,
because the nanocircuits will need to connect to instrumentation large enough to
take useful measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact resulting from
this project will be improved public ability to make "nano" decisions through
hands on experience. Nanotechnology has many new capabilities, some, which will
be unfamiliar to even the technologically, educated public. It is imperative
that the public have sufficient experience with nanotechnology to make ethical
and voting decisions. In order that the public gain "hands on" experience with
nanotechnology, we will conduct semi-annual workshop booths at the "Central
Pennsylvania Festival of the Arts" in State College, Pennsylvania. This event
attracts approximately 200 000 participants annually, providing an extremely
public forum. The hypothesis to be tested is that as the public participates,
their comfort in accepting the technology and voting on decisions will be
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important activity will be to "teach
teachers to teach nano", building the knowledge of State College Pennsylvania
k-12 teachers using "research experience for teachers"-type programs to leverage
our own expertise into local students and their parents. For this part of the
course, summer lab work with local k-12 instructors will enable the development
of interactive modules for use in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;