* 0303575
* RI:  Toward a Petabyte Storage Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* James Demmel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mohamed G. Gouda
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,800,000.00

Emerging directions in computing are likely to dramatically increase storage
demands. Traditional drivers for storage-large databases, scientific data sets
and general personal and institutional information needs-continue to increase,
while new elements impose even greater, more complex needs. Such new elements
include "collected" materials, i.e., digital libraries of textual documents,
images, and video, as well as streaming data from widely distributed and widely
varied networked sensors integrated with the physical world. With the continued
miniaturization of CMOS technology, this last category may increase in scale at
a rate similar to Moore's law, rather than being limited by the pace of human
creative activities, and it will feed into higher level processing and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In anticipation of these developments, we propose
to provide a set of storage services targeted at supporting research projects
with profound current and future storage needs. In particular, we
propose&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. experimenting with providing low-cost petabyte-
scale generic "object storage", via the use of commodity components and tape-
less (i.e., disk-to-disk) backup&lt;br/&gt;2. providing a fast disk cache for a
scientific cluster computing facility, to support large computations that
require significant local storage&lt;br/&gt;3. providing a few thousand
environmental sensors to support experimenting with collecting and storing large
sensor-derived environmental data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
object storage experiment is central to this project. The cost of providing
storage to users today is dominated by administrative costs, and, left to its
own devices, the situation will only grow worse. For example, IT support
organizations report that the cost of storage hardware accounts for only 10-15%
of the fully loaded cost of providing storage, which is dominated by the cost of
backups. In addition, the higher-end servers used to dispense bytes reliably are
much more expensive than generic low-end servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal
is to provide a generic storage service that offers attractive "enterprise"
qualities, but at a cost that tracks advances in hardware, and which can grow to
a potentially much larger scale. We plan to address the issues of availability
and durability by storing objects on multiple, inexpensive servers, some
geographically distributed, and without tapes or extensive operations personnel.
We believe that recent developments in a number of areas, particularly
versioning, location-independent routing, and Byzantine Agreement, will make
such a solution viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We plan to use the
facilities developed through this grant to support projects affiliated with the
Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society (CITRIS),
a university-industry-state partnership that aims to create and harness
information technology to tackle society's most critical needs. Included among
these projects are digital library applications, analyzing traffic videos to
learn the characteristic signatures of various traffic incidents databases,
cluster computing applications (including finding boundaries between objects in
natural images, detecting high-energy neutrinos from astrophysical point
sources, and autonomous aerial vehicles support problems), the Ivy "Smart
Buildings" test environment (a research infrastructure comprising sensor
networks of fixed and mobile motes in a number of buildings on and off campus,
and experimenting with energy efficient building operation, "demand responsive"
electricity management systems, fire safety and disaster preparedness, and
structural integrity monitoring), and the Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative,
a global collaboration of nearly 800 affiliates and over 120 project supporting
applications that combine global mapping, imagery, and texts, and which provides
scholars and other users with digital research resources for the visual
presentation of complex combinations of data from multiple
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;