* 0303979
* NUE: Building Models and Manipulating Molecules-Active Learning for Nanoscience Education
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Melissa Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award, funded by the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Physics, supports Profs.
Michael R. Falvo, Richard Superfine and Gail Jones to develop nanoscience
curricular materials at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Part of
this project is the development of a new freshman level nanoscale science and
technology course called "Handcrafting in the Nanoworld: Building Models and
Manipulating Molecules". The participants also develop nanoscience modules for
an existing physics course called "How Things Work" which is attended by over
150 students a semester. The modules cover the subject of biological and human
made nanomachines. Active Learning activities are central to the course design
and materials development, which include model building, journal composition,
and actual nanomanipulation experiments. The course activities are designed with
several pedagogical goals that fall into two basic categories: (a) learning the
science of the nanoscale, and (b) developing positive attitudes toward science.
The second component of this project is evaluation. The project includes an
evaluation component that will assess the effectiveness of the learning
activities and inform the course development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;