* 0303651
* ADVANCE Leadership Award
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2005
* USD 139,141.00

The primary goal of this proposal is to create a self-sustaining mentoring
program for women in the Department of Biology at Arizona State University.

SWIS will be based on a vertical integration scheme where faculty, postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students and undergraduates work together in a mentoring
network to foster the advancement of women in biological research careers. The
project is based upon two key observations. First, in the Biology Department,
they have numerous unconnected resources that have not been used to the full
advantage of mentoring women, particularly at the graduate and undergraduate
level. With this proposal, they plan to consolidate resources in the Department
and connect pre-existing resources in such a way that new opportunities for
growth and mentoring will be created. Second, although the ASU Biology women
faculty are leaders in their field and have been extremely successful at
mentoring individual students, no one faculty member has sufficient time and
energy to create a self-sustaining organization such as the proposed SWIS
program.

The SWIS program has 2 components: the development of a mentoring network
through a seminar series and invited seminar speakers, and the development of a
mentoring workshop focused on issues pertaining to the successful recruiting and
retaining of women in science careers. The former is seen as a mechanism to
concentrate the efforts of individual women in the Biology Department, and the
later as a mechanism to promote permanent cultural change.

This project is supported by the National Institutes of Health through the NSF
ADVANCE Program. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the
participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the
increased representation and advancement of women in academic science and
engineering careers.