* 0303689
* Hypercompact HII Regions: A New Stage of O-star Evolution?
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Edward Churchwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 09/30/2008
* USD 258,272.00

AST 0303689 PI Churchwell

Recent radio observations of massive star formation regions have discovered
what appears to be a new class of very compact regions of ionized hydrogen (HII)
gas that have been dubbed "hypercompact HII" regions. They have several common
properties that distinguish them from ultracompact HII regions and other thermal
radio sources. For example they have electron densities ~100 times larger and
diameters ~10 times smaller than typical ultracompact HII regions. In addition,
they appear to occur in pairs or multiple systems and are located in massive
star formation regions. The Principle Investigator speculates that hypercompact
regions may represent the transition from the rapid accretion phase of massive
protostars in hot molecular cores to the stage where accretion has terminated
and an easily detectable ionized hydrogen region has been formed. In this
project the PI is characterizing the properties of these hypercompact regions to
determine their niche in the early evolution of massive protostars by increasing
the sample size, measuring their properties, and also determining the apparent
binary frequency and projected separations from high resolution Very Large Array
radio continuum images. From new data plus models, the PI is obtaining the
structure (morphology, range of diameters), physical properties (velocity
structure and distributions of electron density and temperature), and state of
evolution of hypercompact regions and hence developing a deeper understanding of
massive star formation.

Broader Impacts: This project is the PhD thesis topic of a member of an under-
represented group in science. Some undergraduates receive their first experience
with basic research from first-hand observing experience and data reduction and
analysis methods by working on this project. Numerous popular talks are given
each year to school groups and service groups. Benefits to society are a
generally better understanding of how science works and specifically how stars
are made.

