* 0303279
* NSF-Europe: Multiple Length Scale Experimentation and Modeling of Grain Boundary Segregation in Ionic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Susan Sinnott, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 09/30/2009
* USD 760,000.00

Grain boundary and interfacial segregation have far-reaching ramifications for
functional ceramics, affecting both microstructural evolution and electrical
transport properties. The proposed research program aims to elucidate atomic- to
meso-scale aspects of interfacial segregation in metal-oxides by complementary
experimental and theoretical studies. The methodology is to employ several
experimental and theoretical tools to provide a self-consistent understanding of
grain boundary segregation phenomena in a model metal-oxide, TiO2. The
experimental studies will employ scanning transmission electron microscopy
(STEM) imaging and spectroscopy techniques for quantifying local chemistry and
grain boundary structure at the near-atomic length scale. Using experimentally
derived grain boundary models, density functional theory (DFT) calculations will
be used to calculate defect formation energies in the bulk material and at
various sites in the grain boundary. These data will be used as input parameters
in thermodynamic segregation calculations. Part of the outcomes of this effort
will be an increased understanding of point defect energetics at grain
boundaries, and we anticipate gleaning new information that will allow us to
improve existing mesoscopic segregation models. The ultimate goal of the
research program is to develop quantitative, predictive models for ionic space
charge segregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional metal-oxide ceramics play a
critical role in technological applications ranging from chemical sensors to
capacitors. The physical properties of these materials (e.g. electrical,
mechanical, etc.) are strongly influenced by impurity and dopant atom
segregation to internal defects in the material. This research program aims to
develop a fundamental, predictive understanding of dopant segregation to
internal grain boundaries through complementary experimental and theoretical
studies of a model metal-oxide, namely titanium dioxide. The broader impacts of
this research include the development of fundamental science that will enable
the development of next-generation functional ceramics. Furthermore, the program
will have a major impact on the education of future scientists, as both graduate
and undergraduate students will be actively involved in all levels of the
research program.&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the Division of Materials Research (Ceramics and
Solid-State Chemistry) and the International Office (Western Europe) as a
Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF
02-135). This project with PA State University and the University of Florida is
being carried out in collaboration with Queen's University in
Belfast.&lt;br/&gt;