* 0303830
* NUE:    Development of Vertically Integrated Undergraduate Nanoscience Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Kevin Kittredge, Miami University Middletown
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Kevin
Kittredge supports the design of a set of experiments in sequential courses that
incorporate nanotechnology into the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at Miami
University at Middletown. Students benefit from these vertically integrated
experiments will be involved in multiple aspects of a project in a manner that
mimics a research project under a mentor's supervision. Initially, the student
synthesizes a target molecule in an organic chemistry course, and learns
molecular characterization techniques, such as NMR and IR. In their next course,
either quantitative analytical chemistry and/or chemical technology, the student
prepares colloidal nanoparticles and studies selective ion-binding of metal
cations by titration. In a second analytical chemistry course the student
prepares a 2-dimensional self-assembled monolayer and studies ion selectivity by
cyclic voltammetry. Lastly, in their physical chemistry course, the student
studies the origins of the strong plasmon emissions that appear in the UV and
fluorescence spectra for these nanoparticles. Students write a report for a
particular class then rewrite it for each subsequent course, which is expected
to lead to better student learning. Experiments will be evaluated at each stage
and a final assessment conducted. Dissemination of experimental details will be
made by both a web site and private publishing.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering program announcement, NSF 02-148, category NUE. The focus is on
developing laboratories that will introduce nanoscience to undergraduate
students at two different locations, Miami University Middletown (a two-year
regional campus) and Miami University Oxford (a traditional four-year
university). The vertically integrated nanotechnology curriculum is designed to
prepare students to answer the challenges of society and the scientific
community.