* 0304508
* NIRT:  Nanostructured Carbons from Self-Assembled Block Copolymer Precursors: From Synthesis and Characterization to Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,400,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Team (NIRT), co-funded by the Divisions of
Materials Research (DMR) and Electrical and Communications Systems (ECS) will
use a combination of macromolecular engineering, self-assembly and solid state
chemistry to develop a new generation of well-defined nanostructured carbons for
electronics. This approach is based on controlled pyrolysis of self-organizing
condensed phase precursors, such as well-defined block copolymers containing
polyacrylonitrile, prepared using controlled radical polymerization techniques.
The carbon materials, as a consequence of the self-organized nanoscale
morphology of the block copolymer precursors, will exhibit a wide range of well-
defined nanostructures of different dimensionalities (dots, filaments, lamellae,
and complex three-dimensional architectures). The team will undertake a
concentrated, systematic, interdisciplinary effort to map the phase diagrams of
the block copolymer precursors and resulting nanostructured carbons, and
determine the relationship between the molecular compositions and processing
conditions and the resulting nanostructure and electronic properties. Particular
emphasis will be given on the establishment of the relationship between the
pyrolysis conditions and the resulting carbon nanostructures, and their
electronic properties. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Novel nanostructured carbon
materials obtained through this effort could potentially find a wide range of
electronic device applications ranging from field emission flat panel displays
to sensors and actuators, as well as, environmentally friendly devices for
energy conversion (photovoltaic cells) and energy storage (supercapacitors). The
team will develop prototypes for some of the most promising of these
applications and will identify the nanostructures/properties most desirable for
each.. The proposed synthetic methods are potentially scalable for use in
commodity, engineering carbons. Thus it is anticipated that the research results
may provide a basis for practical large-scale technologies. The team has ties to
industry, through the Atom Transfer Polymerization/Controlled Radical
Polymerization Consortium housed at Carnegie Mellon. Strong industrial
participation in this consortium will facilitate transfer of information and
technology generated by the proposed activities and will provide a starting
point for industrial partnerships. The broader educational impacts of the team's
efforts will include training graduate and undergraduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in a highly interdisciplinary environment. The members of
the team will also participate in Carnegie Mellon's Science-Van K-12 outreach
program, developing units aimed at acquainting students with nanoscience and
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;