* 0304925
* NSF-Europe:  Materials for Electrochemical Luminescent Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Allen Bard, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 21,000.00

This is a collaborative project between researchers at the University of Texas,
Austin and at Dipartimento Di Chimica G. Ciamician, Universita Degli Studi Di
Bologna, Italy. This project and its Italian counterpart are focused on the
synthesis and (spectro-) electrochemical characterization of new classes of
compounds that display electrochemically induced luminescence. The primary
compounds that are the object of study are Ru(bipyridine)(terpyridine) complex
derivatives. An added value of the collaboration with the research group in
Italy is the possibility of extending the study to other Ru-complex derivatives,
e.g., using substituted bipyridines and phenanthrolines, which could provide
materials with increased quantum efficiencies and improved operating lifetimes.
It could also be useful to utilize various counterions ranging from OH- that has
higher mobility, compared to ClO4 - and BF4 -, to very big ions whose size will
effectively hinder ion transport (e.g., p-dodecylbenzenesulphonate). The use of
latter ions could assist in elucidating the role of ion mobility and the
possibility of other charge injection mechanisms for the light-emitting devices.
Molecular characterization in solution will be done by two different
electrochemical luminescence detector instruments (one mounting a PMT camera,
the other a CCD camera) and a dry box to prepare the solutions under controlled
conditions. After an evaluation of the characteristic properties of the system
(quantum efficiency, durability) these will be compared to a 'standard' light
emitting system to judge the relative quality and the quantitative efficiency of
these new molecules. The preparation of solid-state light emitting devices
(OLEDs) based on these molecular systems is a prime target of the project.
Therefore, effort will be placed on the search for suitable conditions under
which these substances can be attached to a surface, mainly indium tin oxide
(ITO), to form useful thin layers. Techniques such as spin coating, vapor
deposition, and electrochemical deposition will be used. A study on the effect
of material purity and structure on the properties of the products will be also
carried out. Additionally, scanning probe microscopy will be employed to
investigate these films. Preliminary experiments with a tuning fork-based
scanning tunneling microscope have demonstrated the ability to produce
simultaneous light emission, current, and topographic images of molecular thin
films. This new and information-rich technique can be readily employed in the
study of these new materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues associated with electronic/photonic materials having
technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong
emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of research and education,
and an international collaboration providing both scientific and educational
benefits. An important component of this interaction will be exchange of
students for extended periods of time. This NSF project is co-funded by the
Division of Materials Research, and the International Office (Western Europe) as
a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF
02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with the Universita
Degli Studi Di Bologna, Italy.&lt;br/&gt;