* 0304308
* NUE: Nanotechnology: Principles, Applications, Ethics and Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Paul Petersen, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

In response to the challenges of successful development of new nanotechnologies,
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will develop a sequence of three
sophomore-level interdisciplinary courses that integrate four aspects of
nanotechnology: (1) an overview of the developing technologies and potential
applications; (2) a "hands-on" laboratory experience in seven nano-related
areas; (3) an in-depth analysis of ethical issues related to nanotechnology; and
(4) an assessment of societal issues involving economic impact, public policy,
and social change. This sequence of courses, offered as a pilot to twenty-five
students during this project year, will provide undergraduates an early exposure
to the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sequence integrates four vital
components of nanotechnology in one interdisciplinary setting. In its overview
of technological innovation, the sequence addresses issues in the history of
science and ways in which ethical issues emerge. The courses will consider how
nanotechnology could affect the well-being of individuals and communities,
inequities of wealth and opportunity, and issues and impacts related to gender.
The courses will also examine questions about nanotechnology and the natural
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed courses will have considerable
impact. Following the pilot year, RIT will offer the courses to all sophomores,
typically more than 2,000 students. The investigators estimate that 125 students
will enroll in the next year, of which 10-15% will be minority. Additionally,
seventeen faculty members will be involved in either developing or teaching the
courses in the pilot year. With faculty interaction and through promotion on
campus via curriculum meetings and Institute-sponsored seminars, this project
will reach most of RIT's 800 faculty. University-wide presentations will reach a
broad audience. In a substantive way, this project will encourage and strengthen
interdisciplinary research and education in nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing students with this background will help them to
consider further course work and career paths and prepare them for co-op
positions or internships directly or indirectly related to nanotechnology.
Students who complete their bachelors' degrees with the course sequence will be
prepared more thoroughly for graduate study or entrance into the professional
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course sequence will be a national model.
The investigators will disseminate the curriculum widely to other universities
both during the project year and beyond. As RIT plans to attract minority
students and hearing-impaired students from its National Technical Institute for
the Deaf into the courses, the project will create materials for admissions
offices specifically targeted to both groups. The program is well positioned to
have a positive impact on diversity and attract more students into considering
careers in science, engineering, and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Nanotechnology Undergraduate Research (NUE) proposal was submitted in response
to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). It is
being supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE) and the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;