* 0304299
* NIRT: Reduced Degree of Freedom Predictive Methods for Control and Design of Interfaces in Nanofeatured Systems: Nanocrystalline Materials, Sensors and Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Ronald Scattergood, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,980,275.00

This is a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award in response to
a proposal submitted to the Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE) initiative. The
research involves multiscale theory and modeling of nanoscale materials. An
interdisciplinary limited degrees of freedom (LDF) hierarchy of materials
modeling methods that spans multiple length and time scales will be developed
for accurately modeling interfaces in nanofeatured materials. The modeling
hierarchy, which couples quantum mechanics at the atomic scale, analytic models
at the submicron scale and continuum defect modeling above the micron scale,
will allow for the accurate control and prediction of processing-structure-
property relations from both the atomic up to the macroscale, and from the
macroscale down to the atomic scale. The methodology goes beyond embedding
subsystems with quantum forces into a continuum environment, and will accurately
predict the dominant atomic-level physical mechanisms that lead to macroscale
mechanical properties of nanofeatured solids, as well as predictions for
macroscale processing conditions that lead to specific target nanostructures and
associated properties. Two specific nanofeatured materials will be modeled, with
results validated against experiments carried out by NIRT collaborators. The
first is nanocrystalline solids, where predicted processing-structure-property
relations will be compared to experimental measurements made by Professor Carl
Koch at NCSU. The second material is nanodiamond cermet composites, where
modeling will be used to predict interface energies, defect propagation rates,
and associated macroscale properties, e.g., toughness. Quantum mechanics enters
in two ways: (1) to accurately calculate interface properties that are needed in
the next level of the hierarchy, and (2) as a framework from which quantum and
classical degrees of freedom can be weighted in a localized region of a solid
surrounding an embedded nanocomponent, thereby providing a LDF model for quantum
systems embedded in a solid environment. The latter role for quantum mechanics
is to understand from a fundamental level how the quantum degrees of freedom,
and hence the functionality of a quantum-confined structure, like a quantum dot
embedded in a solid, may depend on the features of the local environment, and
through our mechanics modeling how this local environment in turn depends on
macroscale variables such as processing conditions, applied stress, etc. This
unique capability, which takes synergistic advantage of the experience of our
team in applying quantum theory to engineering systems and in solid mechanics,
will facilitate the integrated design of mechanical sensors and related
functional structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of the research team come
from two colleges and four departments and have complementary expertise that
spans state-of-the-art density functional calculations and quantum formalisms to
continuum mechanics-of-materials methodologies. Four partners will provide
experimental validation of proposed methods, bring new modeling efforts into the
NIRT, and help transition results to industrial and government laboratories.
These partners are the International Technology Center in Research Triangle
Park, the NASA-Ames Center for Nanotechnology, the Institute for Metals
Superplasticity Problems, Ufa, Russia, and Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an interdisciplinary training effort in the form
of collaborative research, cross-listed courses, seminars, and interactions with
international scholars, a new generation of scientists and engineers will be
produced with expertise that is not limited to a single modeling technique, but
rather who are trained to attack complicated problems with a broad outlook using
methods that transcend traditional barriers between science and engineering
disciplines. Outreach will include live and web-based tutorials on
nanotechnology, working with high school students and their teachers in summer
programs, and participation in national committees on public implications of
nanotechnology. Summer students from two local universities, St. Augustine's
University and Meredith College, will intern with NIRT research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; This is a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary
Research Team (NIRT) award in response to a proposal submitted to the
Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE) initiative. The research involves multiscale
theory and modeling of nanoscale materials. An interdisciplinary limited degrees
of freedom (LDF) hierarchy of materials modeling methods that spans multiple
length and time scales will be developed for accurately modeling interfaces in
nanofeatured materials. Members of the research team come from two colleges and
four departments and have complementary expertise that spans state-of-the-art
density functional calculations and quantum formalisms to continuum mechanics-
of-materials methodologies. Four partners will provide experimental validation
of proposed methods, bring new modeling efforts into the NIRT, and help
transition results to industrial and government laboratories. These partners are
the International Technology Center in Research Triangle Park, the NASA-Ames
Center for Nanotechnology, the Institute for Metals Superplasticity Problems,
Ufa, Russia, and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Through an interdisciplinary
training effort in the form of collaborative research, cross-listed courses,
seminars, and interactions with international scholars, a new generation of
scientists and engineers will be produced with expertise that is not limited to
a single modeling technique, but rather who are trained to attack complicated
problems with a broad outlook using methods that transcend traditional barriers
between science and engineering disciplines. Outreach will include live and web-
based tutorials on nanotechnology, working with high school students and their
teachers in summer programs, and participation in national committees on public
implications of nanotechnology. Summer students from two local universities, St.
Augustine's University and Meredith College, will intern with NIRT research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;