* 0304649
* NIRT: Synthesis and Application of Magnetic Nano- and Nano-Composite Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Pratim Biswas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 08/31/2007
* USD 750,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT CTS-0304649

Magnetic nanoparticles/nano-composites (ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic and
antiferromagnetic materials) have many promising industrial and biomedical
applications such as catalysis, magnetocooling, optical and recording devices,
purification of enzymes and other biological materials, and water purification
devices; however, there are key issues that need to be carefully researched for
their wider scale applicability. The first is the ability to synthesize desired
magnetic nanostructures for specific applications with tailored sizes,
compositions and morphologies; the second is to scale up processes for
production of larger volumes of these nanomaterials; and the third is the
understanding of the size dependent magnetic properties, the interaction of
nanoparticles in high gradient magnetic fields, and incorporation of these
dynamic interactions in predicting the transport characteristics in different
media. The overall objectives of this project are: (1) the laboratory scale
synthesis of magnetic particles and nano-composites with tailored size,
composition and morphologies; (2) the development of systems for on-line
measurement of high concentration nanoparticles in high temperature
environments; (3) the demonstration of synthesized particles for novel
applications, in data storage, recording, and biomedical applications such as in
embolics; (4) addressing issues of scale up for processing large volumes of such
nanoparticles. This NIRT team consists of researchers from the Departments of
Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Electrical Engineering in
Washington University in St. Louis, with expertise in nanoparticle/nano-
composite synthesis processes, nanoparticle measurement and characterization,
and testing for industrial and biomedical applications.