* 0304031
* NIRT: Nanoscale Manufacturing - Nonlinear Nanocomposites for Magnetostrictive Actuators and Photonic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* John Keto, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 899,999.00

The goal of this project is to develop manufacturing techniques for
nanocomposite and nano-heterogeneous materials and devices that combine the
functional advantages obtained from the "size-tunable" properties of
nanocomposite materials with the fabrication and direct-write advantages
available from nanoparticles (NPs) manufactured and delivered in aerosol form.
It will focus on developing manufacturing techniques utilizing NPs generated by
Laser Ablation of Microparticles (LAM) from an aerosol source, and on two
important application areas that benefit from compositional variations on the
nanoscale: a) nanostructured giant magnetostrictive films with high
magnetization that can be driven at low fields due to a spin reorientation
transition, and b) nonlinear photonic materials and structures that have
increased optical conversion efficiency due to both the enhancement of the
nonlinear effects by nano-heterogeneity and the ability to phase match the
interacting optical waves by coherently mixing active and inactive regions in a
nano-composite optical media. Both applications require three-dimensional
nanocomposite structures consisting of an active phase embedded in an inactive
phase. These nanocomposite structures are difficult or impossible to produce in
size scales that are practical for many devices using existing manufacturing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader benefits of this research will be
felt in many applications that require manufacturing methods for fabricating
millimeter-scale devices made from nanocomposites. Effort will be focused in the
areas of magnetostrictive micro-valves and transducers and in effective, low-
cost nonlinear optical photonic devices. Magnetostrictive devices that provide
large actuation strains at low driving fields can be used to control aerodynamic
bodies (aircraft, etc.) and will result in improved directional ultrasonic
transducer arrays for medical applications and for non-destructive testing. Low-
cost nonlinear optical photonic devices will add wavelength agility not now
available in current photonic systems for telecommunication. Such improvements
will increase overall network capacity that will enable the low-cost extension
of wide-band optical communications to nearly every home. The proposed research
will be performed by a team composed of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and faculty from Physics, Electrical Engineering, and Materials
Science that have a proven track record in conducting multidisciplinary research
and education. A strong collaboration on magnetostrictive devices exists with a
research team at Ecole Centrale de Lille, France. In addition, a new effort will
be undertaken aimed at training and recruiting highly qualified summer
internship students from a university (Prairie View A&amp;M) historically
attended by minorities and at initiating a research collaboration with their
Center for Materials, Microdesign, and Microfabrication.&lt;br/&gt;