* 0304745
* Research to Produce Pressures of 600 GPa or Higher on Hydrogen and to Produce Metallic Hydrogen
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Arthur Ruoff, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2007
* USD 401,779.00

This condensed matter physics project deals with molecular hydrogen subjected to
ultrahigh pressures. The physical properties of hydrogen, one of the simplest
elements or materials, are still not understood as a function of pressure. One
fundamental question is whether it retains its insulating state or undergoes
phase transitions to other, perhaps conducting or metallic states. One theory
predicts a metallic transition near 450 GPa. Another theory suggests a
transition to a near zero band gap semiconductor, near 400 GPa, subsequently
converting to a cubic metal near 600 GPa. In previous work, the principal
investigator has reached pressures of 560 GPa in other materials, but has been
limited to 342 GPa in hydrogen, because hydrogen reacts with the diamond anvil
cells required to reach ultrahigh pressures. A new hydrogen diffusion barrier
has been developed that should reduce or eliminate this problem. Other technical
advances, including reduction in the anvil tip diameter, suggest that the
maximum attainable pressures may be increased by a factor of 1.4. Optical
reflectivity measurements can be used to detect any transition to a
semiconducting or metallic state. In addition, Meissner effect measurements will
be made at pressure to detect a superconducting state. The research involves the
training of post-doctoral associates in unique and cutting edge research
techniques that will prepare the for careers in academe, industry and
government. Hydrogen at ordinary pressures exists as a molecular gas, the
molecule being formed by two hydrogen atoms held together by the prototypical
chemical bond. However, this simple system contains much physics and is still
not completely understood. One famous physicist, Victor Weiskopf, was quoted as
saying, "we will not understand solid state physics until we understand solid
hydrogen". Hydrogen can be cooled and compressed, first forming a liquid, and
then a solid. It is these phases, particularly the solid phase that present
considerable challenges to both theory and experiment to understand. The goal of
this research is to use the latest diamond anvil techniques to achieve ultrahigh
pressures to convert initially insulating solid hydrogen to a metallic,
conducting state, and possibly even to a superconducting state. This will
require reaching the unheard of static pressure of 600 GPa, which is far above
the pressure at the center of the earth. It has been calculated that metallic
hydrogen will be a superconductor with a very high Tc, possibly room
temperature. This calculation has been given added credence by the recent
findings of high Tc's in the low atomic number materials MgB2 at ambient
pressure, and Li at high pressure. A discovery of superconductivity near room
temperature in hydrogen would be a great stimulus to search for
superconductivity in other low-Z materials. The research involves the training
of post-doctoral associates in unique and cutting edge research techniques that
will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and government.