* 0304171
* NER:  Fabrication of TIO2 Nanoparticles and Films for Environmental Applications Using Ionic Liquid-Based Self Assessing Sol-Gel Methods
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Dionysios Dionysiou, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 05/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 0304171&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dionysiou, Dionysios
D.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Cincinnati Main
Campus&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: NER: Fabrication of TIO2 Nanoparticles and
Films for Environmental Applications Using Ionic Liquid-Based Self Assessing
Sol-Gel Methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF
02-148, category NER. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at investigating an
innovative method to prepare nanostructured TiO2 photocatalytic powders and
immobilized films with enhanced surface area, tailor-designed pore structure,
and increased catalyst activity. The method concerns an alternative sol-gel
procedure that employs a New Generation of "Green" Designer Solvents, known as
Room Temperature Ionic Liquids (RTILs). The method will also include the use a
combination of RTIL-based sol-gel methods and self-assembling templates for
controlling the pore characteristics of the nanoparticles and
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both nanoparticles and immobilized films will be
characterized using state-of-the-art instrumentation and will be evaluated for
their photocatalytic activity. The intellectual merit of the proposal is its
high novelty of using a new generation of green solvents to engineer the
properties of advanced materials. The PI will explore the role of ionic liquid
structure on these reactions and how such properties affect the size and
porosity of the final layer film. The study will examine the influence of
process conditions (solvent removal, heat treatment) during the calcination and
crystallization of the final film. The proposal is novel and has high risk.
However, based on known properties of some of these WIRTILs (water immiscible
room temperature ionic liquids) and the deep understanding of the sol-gel/heat
treatment procedures for the preparation of TiO2 photocatalyst, there is
adequate rationale for the success of this project. New concepts in material
processing will be introduced. If such project proves successful, it will
pioneer the processing of advanced materials using sol-gel methods and will
"leap-frog" the application of a new class of Green Solvents in Nanotechnology,
materials processing, and environmental applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this proposal are tremendous. This idea can be applied for
the synthesis of other types of oxides and oxide-oxide or metal-oxide composites
in powder or as immobilized films. It is expected that this study will propel
the use of ionic liquids in the processing of other advanced nanoporous
materials. Potential markets will include chemical, pharmaceutical, and
environmental industries (catalysis, chemical synthesis, electrochemistry,
separations, oxidation). The societal impact can be high since it will create
new synthetic routes for the manufacture of nanomaterials with novel properties
and will extent the application of a new class of environmentally friendly
solvents. The project will also include a strong educational component, which
will integrate innovative concepts in materials science, chemistry, chemical
engineering, and environmental engineering for the processing of advanced
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;Students in all these disciplines will have the
opportunity to get involved in new courses dealing with the application of Green
Chemistry and Green Engineering in chemical synthesis and Environmental
Nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;