* 0304900
* Regression and Deconvolution with Heteroscedastic Measurement Error
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Leonard Stefanski, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 217,652.00

In the first component of the research, "Unbiased Estimation and Corrected-Score
Methods for Heteroscedastic Measurement Error with Replicate Measurements," the
investigator develops a general approach to statistical inference when data are
measured with error. Starting with the assumptions that a valid statistical
estimation method is known for error-free data, and that replicate measurements
are made of the error-prone variate, the investigator shows how to modify the
usual estimation method to eliminate bias induced by measurement error. The key
technical advances include the accommodation of heteroscedastic measurement
errors and replicate measurements, as well as development of a new Monte Carlo
method of unbiased estimation of a normal mean. The author applies the general
approach to m-estimation and density estimation, thereby incorporating a broad
scope of statistical inference problems. In the second component of the
research, "Deconvolution with Auxiliary Data," the investigator explores
approaches to the deconvolution problem that exploit auxiliary variables
correlated to the variable measured with error. The auxiliary variables play a
roll akin to that of instrumental variables and are used to reduce variability
in the deconvolution estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astronomer's
measurements of distances to galaxies, the epidemiologist's measurements of
subjects' blood pressures, the environmental scientist's measurements of daily
air pollution levels, and the sociologist's measurements of subjects' behaviors
and attitudes share in common the fact that all are less than perfectly
accurate. Measurement error is a pervasive problem in the analysis and
interpretation of data that crosses disciplinary boundaries. It is a source of
uncertainty that can bias estimates derived from data and lead to erroneous
inferences. In this project the investigator develops theory and methods for
statistical inference when data are measured with error. The research provides a
new solution to a long-standing problem in statistical inference, and uses that
solution to provide a comprehensive approach to the analysis of data measured
with error. The primary benefit is improved statistical inference in the form of
less biased and more accurate estimates calculated from scientific data. Because
the prevalence of data measured with error is widespread, the impact of the
research will be similarly widespread, finding immediate applications not only
to the scientific fields mentioned above, but numerous others as
well.&lt;br/&gt;