* 0304713
* NUE: Freshman Laboratory for Nanoscience
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Axel Scherer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

NUE Award: Freshman Laboratory for Nanoscience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is part of Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148, and is
supported by the ENG/EEC division (program director Dr. Mary Poats) and the
Design Automation for Micro and Nano Systems Program in the CCR division
(program director Dr. Sankar Basu) of the CISE directorate. The NUE award
supports new facilities for a freshman course to motivate students to pursue
careers in nanotechnology. In this two-term course, undergraduate students
obtain hands-on experience in the fabrication and characterization of
semiconductor, microfluidic and microelectromechanical devices. Students will
learn how to fabricate, measure, and understand the operation and integration of
basic solid state semiconductor circuit elements such as diodes and transistors
in the first term. In the second term, students build and test their own
microfluidic and micro-electromechanical devices such as micro-electromechanical
microphones, micro-fluorescently activated cell sorters, and other micro-
sensors. These tasks require high resolution lithography equipment as well as
imaging techniques which will be acquired through this NSF award. This course
will allow undergraduate students, and in particular freshmen interested in
nanotechnology, to train on state of the art lithography equipment during the
class, and later pursue diversified interdisciplinary research topics during the
summer. Much of the instructional material developed under this program will be
made available on the internet for use by other colleges and universities and by
incorporation into the NSDL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;