* 0304448
* NIRT: From Laboratory to Society: Developing an Informed Approach to Nanoscale Science and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* David Berube, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,350,000.00

Nanoscale science and engineering presents new challenges and opportunities not
only to the scientific research community but also to all those who shape its
public understanding. This interdisciplinary research team has two objectives:
to create a variety of opportunities for a broadly inclusive interdisciplinary
dialog on nanoscale science and technology and, within this model, to pursue a
collection of four research projects each aimed at establishing an informed
understanding of nanoscale science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Literary and artistic speculation has typically run ahead
of scientific developments, while philosophical interpretation has lagged
behind, awaiting theoretically mature science. Also, while popular perception
has been influenced by the rhetoric of promise and fear, the quantitative
science of risk assessment has brought its specialized tools only to specific
and well- understood technologies. In contrast, in this project public
understanding will co-evolve alongside the emerging field of nanoscale science
and technology. Here lies both the intellectual merit of this project, and its
promise for broad social impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's first
objective is to establish an integrated and participatory model for the
facilitation of public understanding of nanoscale science and technology. It
starts by engaging the faculty members of USC's recently established NanoCenter.
As the investigators explore the properties of the nanoscale, a larger academic
and non-academic public will participate in their discussions. Through
workshops, colloquia, conferences, publications, courses, etc. this
interdisciplinary research team will join in dialog bench scientists, humanities
and legal scholars, students, and citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pursuit of
the first objective allows for the achievement of the second objective. This
research team focuses on the concepts of understanding and control. The
investigators examine these concepts in four research areas that bring
understanding and control of nanotechnology out from the laboratory, first to a
wider audience within the university, and then to its ultimate integration into
society. The first area of research is concerned with understanding and control
in the experimental and theoretical grasp of nanoscale phenomena. The second is
concerned with one of the primary means by which understanding and control is
expressed and maintained: the visualization and conceptualization of the
nanoscale. The team examines how visualization and control are accomplished in
science and engineering and in the imaginative contributions of art and science
fiction, through which understanding and control is carried to nanotechnology's
wider public. The third research area focuses on the particular issue of risks
tied to cascading effects, exploring analogies with genetic engineering. Failing
to address such risks represents a degradation of our understanding and control,
and this loss will ramify in societal perception and potential rejection of
these technologies. The fourth research area focuses on communication about
nanoscale science and technology as it engages the public at large, but also our
legal and political systems. Informed and engaged communication between
scientists and engineers and the wider public sphere is imperative if a broad-
based informed understanding is to guide democratic deliberation over the
control of nanoscale research and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148).
It is being supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE), the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;