* 0304342
* NER:  Interaction Between Light and Nanoengineered Surfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Rodolfo Diaz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

NER: Interaction Between Light and Nanoengineered Surfaces&lt;br/&gt;Arizona
State University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fact that the energetic transactions
between atoms and molecules, objects with characteristic dimensions ranging from
a fraction of a nanometer to a few nanometers, take place in the currency of
light, hundreds of nanometers in wavelength, presents us with one of the great
challenges of Physics today. It is a challenge of scale. The wavelength most
appropriate to study nanoscale molecular processes is too large to resolve the
details of their operation. Smaller wavelengths quickly become either
insensitive or damaging, while Scanning Microscope approaches are limited by
their inherently low throughput. This project will lay down the foundation for a
next-generation infrastructure instrumentation technology for sensing,
measuring, characterizing, and testing nanostructures down to the 20nm scale and
beyond, in the visible spectrum. The technology is based on the manipulation and
localization of light in the nanoscale through the use of photonic antennas.
&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary theoretical analysis of these engineered structures,
hundreds of nanometers across but possessing detailed features in the
10-nanometer range, has shown that they concentrate visible light into sub 20nm
regions and amplify the reradiation by the illuminated objects in those regions
by at least 3 orders of magnitude. Therefore they will allow the observation of
functioning nanodevices in real time. Furthermore this degree of amplification
would make it possible to observe weakly fluorescent molecules directly,
enabling new, faster, and more sensitive molecular assay methods for DNA
sequencing and detection of bio-hazards.&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of this
exploratory research project are: (1) Development of a robust theoretical
analysis method for modeling the interaction between photonic antennas and
molecular objects. (2) Application of this model to demonstrate the capability
to observe and inspect a nanodevice (a carbon nanotube transistor). (3)
Experimental demonstration of the 3000-fold amplification of molecular
fluorescence signals. Success in these three areas will open the way for full
development of instrumentation based on this technology&lt;br/&gt;