* 0304224
* NIRT: Nano-Arrays of Large Bandgap Semiconductors for Light Emitting and Spintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Latika Menon, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,212,000.00

This NIRT proposal focuses on the preparation of ordered arrays of nanodots and
nanowires and incorporating them into device structures. This is a critical
problem in nanometer-scale science of semiconductors. The NIRT research will
build on our ability to grow quantum heterostructures with layer thickness down
to a few atomic layers and to prepare ordered nanostructured templates. The two
approaches will be combined to form structures and devices ordered on the
nanometer scale in three dimensions. The research will include self-assembly of
alumina masks, with pore sizes as small as 10 nm, on semiconductor substrates
and deposition of semiconductor dots and nanowires into these pores using
selective epitaxy. By either removing the alumina template or leaving it in
place, we will have produced an array of identical semiconductor quantum dots.
These will be compared with dots produced by epitaxial self-assembly. We will
apply knowledge gained from these experiments to prepare ultraviolet light
emitting devices based on the AlN/AlGaN heterostructures. These techniques will
also be applied to the formation of nanowires of dilute magnetic semiconductors
and to investigate spin transport and device applications of the (Ga, Mn)N and
(In,Mn)N systems. Equally important, results of this research will be used to
inject nanoscience into current courses, producing new laboratory based courses,
and to educate science and engineering graduate students in this important area.
&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: This proposal addresses fundamental problems
that need to be solved in order to produce useful ultraviolet optoelectronic and
spin-based devices. Advanced growth methods will be developed to produce
nanoarrays of technologically important semiconductors. Devices will be
fabricated out of these nanoarrays and their properties explored. There are
several reasons to study three-dimensional quantum structures based on GaN and
related compounds: 1. Quantum dots have higher radiative efficiency than two-
dimensional layers, thus providing better device performance. Superior spin
transport is expected in nanowires of dilute semiconductors. 2. Ordered
nanostructures - devices grown with vertical (heterostructure) and lateral
(nanodot) control will allow us to engineer properties on a quantum level,
resulting in new device functionalities. 3. Further miniaturization of device
structures requires better understanding of the self-assembly processes and
finer control over nanodot and nanowire quality. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: The
assembly of nanostructured semiconductors into nanoscale devices will enable new
applications in electronics, spintronics, and photonics. At the same time,
preparation of such devices challenges our understanding of fundamental limits
of size and scalability that determine electrical and optical properties of
nanostructures. New approaches to research and education are needed to meet this
challenge. Under this NIRT proposal the research plan will be closely integrated
with educational activities. Specific steps that will be taken towards this goal
include involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
interdisciplinary research. Their participation will develop critical technical,
team, and leadership abilities. New components of classroom and laboratory
courses will be produced based on nanofabrication, attracting students from
diverse backgrounds into research. &lt;br/&gt;