* 0304432
* NER:     Development of an Ultrafast Scanning Probe Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Robert Bartynski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was received in response to
NSE, NSF 02-148. The one-year project involves developing a novel femtosecond
apertureless scanning near-field optical microscope (FANSOM), which will provide
moving images with the unprecedented combination of nanometer spatial resolution
and femtosecond time resolution. The instrument will be used to probe the
electronic excitation, dephasing, and population decay dynamics of individual
artificial nanostructures such as quantum dots, as well as the photoinduced
electronic and conformational dynamics of individual organic macromolecules. The
microscope will be based on a proven apertureless near-field imaging technique,
in which light scattering from a sharp metallic tip scanned across the substrate
provides images with nanometer spatial resolution. Fast temporal resolution will
be obtained using optical pump-probe techniques with femtosecond laser pulses.
Multiple images corresponding to increasing delay time between pump and probe
pulses will then be assembled as actual movies of nanometer-scale dynamical
processes with femtosecond time resolution. Successful completion of this
project will give rise to a powerful new tool to probe the nanoworld, with
potential applications in virtually every field (physics, chemistry, materials
science, life sciences, quantum computing, etc.) in which interesting dynamics
occurs at the nanoscale and is obscured by inhomogeneous effects. The graphical
nature of the moving images obtained, coupled with the fundamental and practical
interest in the dynamics of nanostructures, make this instrument an ideal
educational tool for both scientific students and the general public. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved with the development of the
instrument, as well as its use scientific studies. The project is jointly
supported by the Divisions of Materials Research and
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal
was received in response to NSE, NSF 02-148. The one-year project involves
developing a novel microscope that will provide moving images with the
unprecedented combination of near-atomic spatial resolution and ultrafast time
resolution. In particular, the instrument will be used to probe the excitation
and decay of individual artificial nanostructures, as well as light-induced
changes of individual organic macromolecules. The microscope will be based on a
proven technique, in which light scattering from a sharp metallic tip scanned
across a surface provides images with nanometer spatial resolution. Fast time
resolution will be obtained with ultrashort laser pulses. A series of pump
pulses excites the nanostructure, and time-delayed probe pulses are used for
imaging. Multiple images corresponding to increasing time delay between pump and
probe pulses will then be assembled as actual movies of the processes of
interest. Successful completion of this project will give rise to a powerful new
tool to probe the nanoworld, with potential applications in virtually every
field (physics, chemistry, materials science, life sciences, etc.) in which
interesting processes occur at the nanoscale. The graphical nature of the moving
images obtained, coupled with the fundamental and practical interest in
nanostructures, make this instrument an ideal educational tool for both
scientific students and the general public. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be involved with the development of the instrument, as well as its use
scientific studies. The project is jointly supported by the Divisions of
Materials Research and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;