* 0304112
* NIRT: Robust Manufacturing Protocol for Particulate-like Nanoporous Micro-devices (NMDs) for Biomedical and Biochemical Applications (Manufacturing Processes at the Nanoscale)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Liang-Shih Fan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2008
* USD 860,000.00

This project proposes to develop a robust and versatile manufacturing protocol
based on the selective integration of distinct micro- and nano-scale fabrication
modules. These modules include polymer micro-imprinting and nano-imprinting (the
'top down' approach), and surface self-assembly of nanoporous silica and
biomolecular attachment (the 'bottom up' approach) for the mass-production of
polymer or polymer/silica nanoporous micro-devices (NMDs) that have particulate-
like structures with well-defined non-spherical 3D geometry, nano-scale
diffusion pore/channels, and molecular targeting function. In comparison with
conventional spherical micro- and nano-particles, these particulate-like NMDs
will provide larger and multi-face surface area for increased functionality,
well-defined particle shape for better control of flow dynamics, and highly
specific targeting and release capability. Fundamental studies on critical
issues such as the science of processing biodegradable and biocompatible
polymers at micro- and nano-scale; modeling of polymer micro-/nano-imprinting;
and nanofluidics of controlled drug release through nanopores/channels will also
be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by an
interdisciplinary team that includes five researchers from biomedical
engineering, chemical engineering, and mechanical engineering departments with
expertise on micro-/nano-fabrication, nano-scale machining and measurements,
interfacial phenomena and molecular self-assembly, biomolecules and surfactants,
and multi-phase fluidization. Although the research will focus on the
fabrication of drug delivery devices, the same methodology can be easily applied
to a variety of BioMEMS (biosensors, bioreactors, tissue scaffolds) or other
MEMs/NEMS devices. &lt;br/&gt;