* 0304036
* NUE: From Clusters to Nanoparticles: Introducing Nanoscience to Education and Student Research at Jackson State University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award, funded by the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Physics, supports a
collaborative interdisciplinary effort to integrate nanoscale science research
and education in Jackson State University. The research component of the project
includes computational and theoretical studies of clusters and nanoparticles:
(a) Semiconductor clusters with metal atom impurities as nanoelectronic
elements, interaction between clusters and surfaces, fullerenes encapsulating
metal atom clusters with high magnetic moments as novel contrast agents in
biomedical imaging. (b) Size-dependent electronic and optical properties of
metal nanoparticles, modification of electron-electron interactions
and&lt;br/&gt;screening due to confinement and surface effects, and size-
dependent relaxation processes and their manifestation in the optical
spectroscopy experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component will
introduce basic notions and methods of nanoscale science into the undergraduate
curriculum. The design of a general education course and another more advanced
course is planned. The general education course will be descriptive in nature
and will be offered to first and second year students throughout the university.
The more advanced course will target third or forth year physics, chemistry and
engineering majors, and will include a basic description of some experimental
and theoretical methods used in nanoscience research. Jackson State University
is the premier educational institution in the largest urban area of Mississippi.
Being a historically black university, JSU primarily serves the educational
needs of the local community. The project will expose a large number of students
from underrepresented groups to the basic notions of nanoscale
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;