* 0304803
* Control of the Wetting Behavior of Thin Polymeric Films on Inorganic Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Robert Weiss, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2007
* USD 391,375.00

This research examines the effect of ionomers on the dewetting of thin film
coatings on inorganic substrates. Sulfonated and carboxylated polystyrene and
carboxylated polysiloxane ionomers will be synthesized and spin-coated onto
silicon disks. The thin films will be annealed at various temperatures above the
glass transition temperature of the polymer and the dewetting kinetics will be
measured by x-ray reflectivity, atomic force microscopy and optical microscopy.
The interactions of the polymer films and model compounds with a silica surface
will be measured using mid- and far-infrared reflectance-absorption
spectroscopy. The dynamic viscoelastic properties of the polymers will be
determined by rheology measurements. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The stability of
polymeric coatings is critical for a wide variety of technologies, including
electronics, biomaterials, smart materials, adhesives, tribology, lithography,
and high performance composites. This research investigates the thermodynamic
and dynamic origins of dewetting of polymer liquids from solid substrates and
the information obtained may enable the use of thinner coatings, as well as
coatings with tailored surface chemistry. The research will also train
undergraduate and graduate students in polymer chemistry and engineering and
surface and interfacial science.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;