* 0304639
* NER:     An Acoustic Tweezer for Nanoparticle Manipulation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ryszard Lec, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Title: An Acoustic Tweezer for Nanoparticle
Manipulation&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
demonstrate the feasibility of using of acoustic fields for three-dimensional
manipulation (3-D) of a nanoparticle in the air. An acoustic field generated by
solid state acoustic transducers will provide a non-contact means of delivering
a mechanical force to the particle, and by controlling the distribution of the
force in space one will control the 3-D position of the particle. Features such
as levitation and horizontal and rotational motions will be studied under
different operating conditions. Experimental and theoretical efforts leading to
understanding the physical mechanisms of operation of an Acoustic Tweezer for
Nanoparticle Manipulator (ATNM) will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed
falls into three broad activities: device development, theoretical modeling and
the concept validation. These three areas are not mutually exclusive and will
proceed simultaneously. Device development includes design, fabrication and
testing of acoustic transducers and accompanying electronics for efficient
generation of interfacial forces. Theoretical models describing the interaction
of a particle with the surface of a transducer will incorporate the nanoscale
complexity of the system and the multiple length scales of the systems to be
studied. These developments will be validated using dedicated measurement
techniques in which various aspects created by particle size and interfacial
forces will be examined in carefully controlled or simulated experimental
conditions. Finally, the measured ATNM characteristics will be correlated with
standard optical (micron-size particles), Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) and Near
Field Optical Microscope (NSOM) (nanoparticles) techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The
acoustic manipulation technique, once developed, will be complementary to
current micro- and nano-particle manipulation techniques, such as laser
tweezers, magnetic tweezers and scanning probe microscopes. In particular, this
technique will provide an efficient method for separating nanoparticles
according to their size, shape or interaction properties. The acoustic
manipulation technique will be effective on nanoparticles regardless of their
optical, electrical and magnetic properties, and thus can be used in various
environments and in different media. These unique features of the acoustic
manipulation technique will significantly impact the fields of characterization
and application of nanoparticles. The long-term objective of this research is to
develop an ATNM chip capable of autonomous and programmable manipulation of
nanoparticles in gases and liquids. ATNM chip will provide an experimental
platform for designing and monitoring various bio-chemical and bio-physical
processes involving inorganic nanoparticles as well biological objects such as
proteins or cells.&lt;br/&gt;