* 0304325
* NER:     DNA Sequence Detection Using Novel Solid-State and Soft Nanopores
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Xinsheng Ling, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was received in response to
NSE, NSF 02-148. The one-year project will develop novel solid-state and soft
nanopore devices for rapid DNA sequencing. It has been suggested that one may be
able to detect genetic sequences in individual DNA molecules by measuring the
change in the ionic conductance of a nanometer-scaled pore embedded in an
insulating membrane as a single-stranded ssDNA molecule is driven through by an
electric field. The use of two types of new synthetic nanopores will be
explored: (1) a nanopore with 1 nm in length or depth fabricated by molding soft
materials using a novel "cutting-edges" concept; (2) an integrated nanopore
circuit consisting of three nanopores in series using silicon technology. Novel
experiments will be performed to study the microscopic processes by which a long
ssDNA molecule "translocates" through a nanopore, and to explore a new sensing
mechanism exploiting the hydrogen-bonding effects between two ssDNA molecules.
The proposed projects, if successful, could lead to a great advance in the
development of a nanopore DNA sequencing technology. The projects will provide
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in an exciting
emerging field of single molecule biophysics. The students will receive advanced
training in the state-of-the-art nanofabrication technology and single-molecule
biophysics. This project is jointly supported by the Divisions of Materials
Research and Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
as well as the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was received in response to
NSE, NSF 02-148. The one-year project will explore a new generation of
nanometer-scaled sensors, solid-state nanopores, for detecting and
characterization of biological molecules. Nanopore biosensors have shown great
promise in basic studies of single-molecule biophysics. These novel devices may
also be useful in disease control and in anti-bioterrorism. Two types of new
synthetic nanopores will be explored: one based on the state-of-the-art silicon
technology, and the other based on polymeric materials. The proposed projects,
if successful, could lead to a great advance in the development of a nanopore
DNA sequencing technology. The project will provide research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in an exciting emerging field of single
molecule biophysics. The students will receive advanced training in the state-
of-the-art nanofabrication technology and single-molecule biophysics. This
project is jointly supported by the Divisions of Materials Research and Physics
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, as well as the
Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological Sciences