* 0304429
* NER:  Real Space approach to Electronic Structure Calculation: Applications to Nanotubes and Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Jeffrey Rufinus, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2004
* USD 21,000.00

This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award made on a proposal received in
response to NSE, NSF-02-148. This award supports exploratory interdisciplinary
research on nanostructures and developing new real-space algorithms for
electronic structure calculations. The PI is in the Computer Science Department
in an undergraduate institution. Theoretical and computational research will
focus on the structural and electronic properties of nanotubes, nanowires, and
other nanomaterials that are of fundamental interest and may have impact on
future electronic device technologies. The PI will perform exploratory research
to determine the feasibility of a new linear scaling real-space finite-element-
based electronic-structure algorithm. This exploratory research activity helps
to position the PI to involve undergraduate students in research activities and
to plan a future computational physics curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award made on a proposal received in
response to NSE, NSF-02-148. This award that supports exploratory
interdisciplinary research on nanostructures and developing new real-space
algorithms for electronic structure calculations. The PI is in the Computer
Science Department in an undergraduate institution. Theoretical and
computational research will focus on the structural and electronic properties of
nanotubes, nanowires, and other nanomaterials that are of fundamental interest
and may have impact on future electronic device technologies. The PI will
perform exploratory research to determine the feasibility of a new algorithm for
computing the electronic properties of materials and nanostructures. This
exploratory research activity helps to position the PI to involve undergraduate
students in research activities and to plan a future computational physics curri
culum.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;