* 0304046
* NIRT: Nanofabricated All-Optical Computing, Switching, and Signal Processing Devices Based on Single Photon Tunneling
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

A new and important phenomenon involving single photon tunneling has been
discovered recently by a multidisciplinary team of researchers at the University
of Maryland. Transmission of light through nanometer-scale pinholes in a gold
film covered by a nonlinear dielectric saturates at a few thousand photons per
second. The transmittance of such a nanometer-scale hole is nonlinear with light
intensity, and at the single photon level corresponds to each photon in the
process of being transmitted through the hole controlling the transmittance of
successive photons. This result is analogous to the Coulomb blockade observed in
single electron tunneling experiments. The phenomenon was initially observed
only for random nanoscale pinholes that occur naturally in thin evaporated gold
films. Further work has shown that the transmittance of both individual
nanofabricated holes (nanopores), and arrays of nanopores, both made by focused
ion-beam nanaofabrication techniques, has shown not only the simple iiphoton-
blockadel effects, but also controlled photon transmission. For example, the
transmittance of a nanopore or nanopore array at one wavelength can be
controlled by illumination with a second, different,
wavelength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a multidisciplinary team of
optical scientists, theorists and nanofabricators&lt;br/&gt;will study of this
new phenomenon and explore potential applications based on fabricated nanopores
or arrays of nanopores in metal films. They expect that a detailed study of
optical properties of such well-controlled nanopore and other nanostructures
will reveal novel quantum phenomena in nonlinear optical transmission. For
example, electrons in a Coulomb blockade tunnel one at a time, at more or less
fixed time intervals. If photons tunneling through nonlinear optical nanopores
show similar behavior (as an initial experiments suggest), the fabricated
nanopores will become very unusual and useful light sources emitting individual
photon periodically, one at a time. Such controlled light sources are being
actively pursued by researchers in the areas of quantum communication and
quantum cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, novel and potentially
important applications of nonlinear nanopore materials may also be expected in
the areas of optical communications and all-optical signal processing. Optical
signal processing relies on nonlinear interactions of light, which usually
happen at very high optical intensities. Preliminary results indicate that the
local optical field in a nanopore is enhanced by at least six or eight orders of
magnitude, enabling nonlinear optical interactions to occur at much lower
illuminating light intensities. This opens the door to devices where light is
used to gate light, which they have already demonstrated at a fundamental level.
Thus, a great number of optical communication and optical signal processing
devices, such as all-optical switches, and signal and image processing devices,
may be realized on a microscopic scale, and at much smaller operating optical
powers than macro-devices.&lt;br/&gt;