* 0305793
* International Research Fellowship Program: Applications of the Regularity Method
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Jozef Skokan, Skokan                  Jozef
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 08/31/2005
* USD 75,983.00

0305793 Skokan

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve month research fellowship(within a duration of
17 months) by Dr. Jozef Skokan to work with Dr. Yoshiharu Kohayakawa at the
University of Sao Paulo's Instituto de Matematica de Estatistica in Sao Paulo,
Brazil. Co-support for this project is provided by the Directorate of Math and
Physical Sciences (MPS)'s Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA).

In his dissertation research, the PI took part in a larger project aiming to
develop a methodology for better understanding discrete structures called the
Regularity Method. This method first decomposes a given discrete structure into
substructures that are "Typical" (quasi-random) by a tool named the "Regularity
Lemma" and then, in this sub-structure finds and enumerates objects of interest
using a tool named "the Counting Lemma." The PI developed these two components
of the Regularity Method for some special instances, more precisely the
Regularity Lemma for k-uniform hypergraphs and the Counting Lemma for 4-uniform
hypergraphs. The PI and host started in a related project that examined quasi-
random properties of discrete structures and yielded several interesting
results. They plan to focus on further developments of the Regularity Method.
They are working toward a method applicable to a wider class of problems for
uniform hypergraphs. They also seek a deeper understanding of the Regularity
Method by exploring its applicability and limitations on several open problems.

Professor Kohayakawa is a well-established member of the mathematical community,
as a member of the combinatorics group at the Instituto de Matematica e
Estatistica of the University of Sao Paulo.