* 0305805
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Dana Peer, Peer, Donna
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary
Informatics for fiscal year 2003. The fellowship supports research and training
at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. These fellowships provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
research and educational activities in biology and informatics to a wide range
of recent doctoral recipients. There is an increasing need for training in
biological informatics at all occupational levels, and it is expected that
Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training
the future workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training plan is
entitled "Probabilistic models for reconstructing molecular pathways using an
integration of genomic data." Various methods probe different attributes of
complex biological systems at a genome-wide scale, providing the bioinformatics
community with massive amounts of data. This research project develops models
and algorithms suited for computational reconstruction of molecular pathways
through the integration of diverse data types and multiple species using
probabilistic graphical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;