* 0305202
* Collaborative Research: Structure-Property Relationships of Novel Rare Earth-Ultraphosphate Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2011
* Richard Brow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2011
* USD 540,057.00

This project is a multi-disciplinary collaboration between materials researchers
at the University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) and physicists at the University of
North Dakota (UND) to process and characterize novel rare earth (RE) containing
ultraphosphate glasses that possess interesting optical and magnetic properties.
The properties of these glasses have an unusual dependence on composition that
involves the coordination environment of the RE3+ ions that modify the phosphate
glass network. The research team affiliated with the Ceramic Engineering
Department and Graduate Center for Materials Research at UMR will prepare
optically active glasses (including Nd- and Er-phosphate compositions) and
glasses with potentially large magnetic susceptibilities (e.g., Dy-phosphate
compositions) using techniques to minimize contamination by water and transition
metals. Optical characteristics will be determined at UMR by several techniques,
including absorption and emission spectroscopies and fluorescence lifetime
measurements, and magnetic properties will be characterized by the research team
affiliated with the Physics Department at the UND. Detailed information about
the coordination environments of the RE ions will be collected using x-ray
absorption spectroscopy and x-ray and neutron diffraction techniques. These
experiments will be performed by members of the UND team in collaboration with
students and researchers from UMR. The goal of these structural studies is to
provide a detailed explanation for the compositional-dependence of the
macroscopic properties of these glasses, and then to use this information to
design other technologically significant glass
compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary project will provide
a detailed understanding of how the molecular-level structure of rare earth-
containing glasses affect macroscopic optical and magnetic properties. This
information will guide scientists and engineers who use such glasses for new
sensors, amplifiers and other devices that have both civilian and defense
applications. The collaboration among students and researchers at both
institutions will promote the concept that progress in materials research can be
best accomplished by diverse, multi-disciplinary teams. &lt;br/&gt;