* 0305577
* Modeling and Analysis of an Electrochemical Nanocell
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Gerald Young, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0305577&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gerald W. Young
[gwyoung@uakron.edu]&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;Title:
MODELING AND ANALYSIS OF AN ELECTROCHEMICAL
NANOCELL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to develop mathematical models for the electrochemical nanocell that
forms during scanned probe oxidation. Scanned probe oxidation is a lithographic
technique for producing nanoscale patterns on a substrate. These patterns have
been employed successfully as an etch mask for wet and dry processes, and as
chemical and biological templates. The increased demand for such high quality
nanodevices requires better understanding of the growth processes involved in
their fabrication. Although data on nanodeposition techniques have been
collected over the past decade, investigators are only beginning to develop a
qualitative picture of these processes, and are far from a complete quantitative
understanding. The proposed research addresses both of these timely needs.
Because of the varied and coupled physical phenomena involved (electromagnetic,
chemical, thermal, etc.), the development of mathematical models for
nanodeposition requires a team of individuals with complementary areas of
expertise, and must proceed hand-in-hand with experimental validations. Such a
team, consisting of interdisciplinary applied mathematicians, scientists and
engineers is already active at The University of Akron and working in the area
of nanomechanics and nanostructures. This team proposes to develop models for
scanned probe oxidation that will, 1) explain experimental observations that are
not well understood, and 2) suggest the range of parameters that is optimal for
nanoscale growth. The team intends to develop appropriate solution and analysis
procedures for these complex models, and test the validity of the models through
comparison with experiments. The models will focus attention on the need to
develop efficient solution strategies to solve complicated systems in the
presence of noise. Further, the models developed in this work will lead to a
significant number of problems in analysis. Questions on well-posedness, the use
of similarity solutions, and bounds on solutions for the class of problems
represented by the models will arise from the proposed
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to develop mathematical
models for the electrochemical nanocell that forms during scanned probe
oxidation. Scanned probe oxidation is a critical technology for writing
nanometer-size oxide patterns on the surface of a substrate. These oxide
patterns can be used to prototype nanoscale masks, templates and devices. The
proposed combination of modeling and experimental efforts will help to address
the fundamental unanswered questions concerning the physics and chemistry of
nanoscale structure formation and properties. In particular this project will
provide the understanding necessary to control the height and width of oxide
lines to produce precise nanoscale patterns. In addition to its impact on
scientific research, this project will enhance graduate and undergraduate
studies in the disciplines of mathematics, physics, chemistry, and engineering.
Students participating in the program will, 1) be exposed tointerdisciplinary
research involving sophisticated mathematical modeling and experiments, and 2)
be trained to work within a multi-disciplinary environment. The educational
training at both the graduate and undergraduate level will have a long-term
impact on the mathematical sciences, providing students with exposure to a
unique interdisciplinary environment and inspiring them to pursue careers in
this cutting-edge area of national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;