* 0305876
* AMPATH Workshop: Fostering Collaborations and Next Generation Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 12/31/2003
* USD 44,575.00

The main objective of the workshop is to create an environment for AMPATH
participants, potential participants and those with a regional, hemispheric or
international interest in the project to exchange ideas, form new and solidify
existing collaborations and articulate specific Network Infrastructure needs.

The conference will continue the work of identifying the universities and
research centers in the AMPATH service area who require, or would take advantage
of, high-performance connectivity to research institutions in the U.S. and
worldwide if it were available. Proposed speakers at the conference include
researchers that participate in projects between collaborators in the U.S.,
Canada, the AMPATH service area, Europe and Asia/Pacific.

Building on last year's success with the "Workshop to Identify Areas of
Scientific Collaboration between the US and the AMPATH Service Area (2002)," the
First AMPATH International Conference, this "Fostering Collaborations and Next
Generation Infrastructure" will further delve into the benefits of utilizing the
AMPATH advanced networking infrastructure for scientific research and education.
The main objective of the conference is to create an environment for AMPATH
participants, potential participants and those with a regional, hemispheric or
international interest in the project to exchange ideas, form new and solidify
existing collaborations. The conference will continue the work of identifying
the universities and research centers in the AMPATH service area who require, or
would take advantage of high-performance connectivity to research institutions
in the US and worldwide if it were available. Proposed speakers at the
conference include researchers that participate in projects between
collaborators in the U.S., Canada, the AMPATH service area, Europe and
Asia/Pacific.

AMPATH is a project of Florida International University in collaboration with
Global Crossing, in support of scientific research applications that either
involve collaboration between U.S. and multi-national researchers or wholly run
U.S. projects in the AMPATH service area. Research and Education networks to the
UCAID Abilene network and the Central America, Mexico, and the Caribbean and the
rest of the world to further advance U.S. science and education.

This workshop will produce a report summarizing the discussions.

