* 0305219
* Long-Time Dynamics and Regularity Properties of Strongly Coupled Parabolic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Dung Le, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2006
* USD 74,177.00

Reaction diffusion systems have been a great source for active research in
applied mathematics. The distribution of species/particles among different
locations affects their interaction with other species/particles as well as
their movement. Thus, cross diffusion should be taken into account. However,
cross diffusion systems have only been studied, and few results were discovered,
no more than two decades ago; and very little that we know about the qualitative
properties of their solutions. The presence of the cross diffusion terms makes
these systems strongly coupled parabolic systems since the couplings are also
present in higher order terms (diffusion terms). This strong coupling has
introduced not only enormous difficulties in analytical treatments but also
reopened many fundamental questions as well as unveiled many interesting
phenomena in the theory of parabolic systems. Our proposed research focuses on
two problems: regularity and long time dynamics of solutions. The study of
regularity properties of solutions of strongly coupled parabolic systems, as we
shall explain in details, plays an essential and fundamental role in global
existence theory. Instead of considering these systems in their most general
settings, where it is known that only partial answers could be expected, our
focus will be on systems that arise in applications, and satisfy certain
structure conditions, which can guarantee a complete answer to the regularity
question. The second goal is to investigate long time dynamics and coexistence
for certain parabolic systems where strong couplings are assumed to be not in
their full force. In particular, we will consider a class of triangular cross
diffusion systems that describe many important processes in ecology, biology,
particle physics, etc. We propose to study this issue by extending our findings
in our previous research on reaction diffusion counterparts.

People, species and particles move, or diffuse, and interact with each other in
their habitats. In order to understand these phenomena, mathematical models of
reaction-diffusion systems have been introduced in many areas in applicable
sciences. A good understanding of the dynamics of their solutions can help to
answer important life questions. In ordinary diffusion, motility of the species
(or particles) is determined solely by its own characteristics but not on the
presence of other species in question. That is, the interaction among the
unknown components is present only in the reaction terms. Cross diffusion
studies the motion of species/particles using the information gathered from
others present in the environment. While it is naturally believed that the
distribution of organisms among different locations within a habitat affects
their interaction with others as well as their movement or dispersal, cross
diffusion does occur. The introduction of cross-diffusion terms into the systems
makes the problem much more mathematically challenging and extends the
application range of reaction-diffusion equations. Cross diffusion systems have
recently drawn special interests and received heightened scientific attention,
but few are results concerning the long time dynamics of solutions. Broadly
speaking, the aim of this proposal is to study a class of cross diffusion
systems arising in certain chemical, ecological and biological applications with
chemotactic response. Our main focus is on the global existence, regularity
property and the asymptotic behavior of solutions for large times, after
transient effects have disappeared. Progress in this area can force the
development of new mathematical tools, and also help to understand life
questions such as whether and how a community of interacting populations can
persist (survive and avoid extinction). Recent and partial results for similar
systems with chemotactic response introduced have encouraged us to go further in
this new direction. We propose to continue and extend our results on models with
chemotaxis, which simulate the interaction of diffused microbial organisms, and
investigate the role of chemotactic effects on the dynamics of organisms. The
successful completion of this project will represent a significant step forward
in the understanding of the roles of dispersal strategies (cell motilities,
chemotaxis, etc.) and competitive abilities in many ecology and biology
applications.