* 0305443
* NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Nonlinear Homogenization and Applications to Composites, Polycrystals and Smart Materials; June 23-26, 2003; Kazimierz Dolny, Poland
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,600.00

Proposal: DMS-0305443 PI: Pedro Ponte Castaneda Institution: University of
Pennsylvania Title: Group Travel: NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Nonlinear
Homogenization and Applications to Composites, Polycrystals and Smart Materials

ABSTRACT

This grant provides complementary support for several US young participants to
attend a NATO Advanced Research Workshop on "Nonlinear Homogenization and
Applications to Composites, Polycrystals and Smart Materials" to be held in
Kazimierz Dolny, Poland, from 23 to 26 June, 2003. Additional funding from the
NATO ARW program will cover the travel expenses of the Key Speakers, as well as
those of junior participants from NATO Partner countries (mostly Eastern
European countries). The aim of the workshop is the evaluation of critical needs
in nonlinear homogenization and novel applications in modeling materials systems
exhibiting complex microstructures. The behavior of composites, polycrystals and
smart materials is often nonlinear. There have been important and significant
developments over the last two decades both in terms of nonlinear homogenization
methodology (deterministic and stochastic), as well as in terms of novel
applications to the above-mentioned classes of materials. Also, phase
transformations can be studied by using similar methods. Homogenization methods
offer promising new tools for constructing macroscopic models in biomechanics.
It is thus highly desirable to gather specialists in nonlinear homogenization,
composite materials and micromechanics to promote progress in each of these
fields keeping in mind the potential technological applications. The main topics
of workshop are: 1) Convex and non-convex homogenization methods and
applications to advanced composites, smart materials and structures like plates
and shells; 2) Homogenization estimates for polycrystalline aggregates in
elasticity, plasticity and shape memory alloys: the effect of texture and its
evolution; 3) Multi-scale modeling and discrete-to-continuum passage; 4) Recent
developments and new directions in shape optimization; 5) Functionally graded
structures for maximum strength and stiffness; 6) Structures of bi-stable
inertial elements: waves, averaging, control; and 7) Homogenization methods in
modeling bone and soft tissues.

The need for research in the field of nonlinear homogenization stems from the
ever-increasing role of composites, polycrystals and smart materials in high-
tech industries. Materials such as functionally graded materials, piezoelectric
composites, magnetic materials and ferroelectrics also belong to this class. It
has also become increasingly clear that living tissues exhibit very complex
hierarchical microstructures. Among the broader impacts of the proposed workshop
are the following. The conference is strongly multi- and inter-disciplinary in
character, involving mathematicians, engineers and material scientists with
various sub-fields of specialization. In addition, it is expected that the
workshop will provide opportunities for the transfer of information between
Western and Central/East European countries, between research centers and
universities, and among researchers from different scientific areas. The
workshop, whose proceedings will be disseminated through a NATO Science Series
publication, will seek to identify open problems and future trends in the above-
identified areas. Finally, the meeting will include several graduate students,
young investigators and faculty from underrepresented groups.



