* 0305103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Settlement and Subsistence in the Western Anasazi Core Area: Development and Assessment of a Risk Response Model
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 4,357.00

Under the supervision of James L. Boone and Bruce Huckell, Karl Benedict will
integrate archaeological, historic climate, paleoclimate, environmental, and
paleoenvironmental data in an assessment of human response to subsistence risk.
In particular, he will examine changing patterns in subsistence-related activity
locations within a variable environment as a part of the mixed farmer-forager
economy of Northeastern Arizona between A.D. 600 and 1150. The planned research
program utilizes existing data from several long-term science and research
programs including: 1) archaeological data from the Black Mesa and Long House
Valley Archaeological Projects; 2) modern and historic climate data made
available through the NOAAis United States Historic Climatology Network; 3)
prehistoric climate data available from the Laboratory of Tree Ring Research
Southwest Paleoclimatology Program at the University of Arizona and the
International Tree Ring Database maintained by the NOAA Paleoclimatology
Program; 4) modern environmental data collected by the Arizona GAP Project with
support from the USGS Biological Resources Division; and 5) additional
physiographic datasets made available through the USGS. These modern, historic
and prehistoric environmental data will be integrated within a Geographic
Information System employing recently developed and extensively tested
meteorological interpolation methods to produce a high resolution (both
spatially and temporally) model of localized climate conditions for northern
Black Mesa and the adjacent Long House Valley study areas. This model of
localized climate will then be integrated with vegetation distribution
information to identify areas within the study area that represent high- or low-
variability conditions within the range of variation for the region. The
distribution of archaeological subsistence activity locations will then be
compared to the distribution of high- and low-variability locations on the
landscape to test hypotheses related to human response to subsistence
uncertainty through the positioning of subsistence activities at locations that
minimize uncertainty in productivity while also not significantly reducing long-
term mean productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, the planned research
program provides an explicit means for developing and testing hypotheses
developed from models of decision-making derived from behavioral ecology. These
models have potential applicability not only to prehistoric decision-making but
also to general models of human response to risk and uncertainty in economic
decision-making. Overall, this project will build upon the extensive
archaeological and environmental research that has proceeded it through the
integration of multiple recent datasets into a detailed picture of localized
environmental variability within an area for which there is a well- and
consistently-documented assemblage of archaeological data with which hypotheses
relating human response to environmental conditions may be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;