* 0305508
* Collaborative Research:     A Systematic Approach to the Derivation, Representation, Analysis, and Correctness of Dense and Banded Linear Algebra Algorithms for HPC Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2003
* Anthony Skjellum, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 10/31/2003
* USD 47,182.00

&lt;br/&gt;Despite the general belief that research in dense linear algebra
libraries has been exhausted, history shows that as new architectural features
appear in high-performance computers used for scientific applications, the need
for the renewed investigation of widely used dense linear algebra packages
resurfaces. This has been the case when vector supercomputers first appeared in
the 1970s, when microprocessor based workstations appeared in the 1980s, and
when distributed memory parallel architectures appeared in the 1990s. Now, with
the emergence of multi-level memories in both sequential and parallel
architectures, a redesign is once again warranted, as the performance attained
by the current generation of dense linear algebra packages does not match that
of the best optimizations of algorithms for individual operations. A closely
related concern is that the existing libraries do not always have the
functionality nor the performance required by the scientific computing
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental problem with the traditional
approach to developing a new dense linear algebra library from a previous
library is that it has been inherently evolutionary. There has been a heavy
emphasis on maximal code-reuse in the belief that the ``correctness''
(established largely through exhaustive testing) of the previous library is then
inherited by the new library, thus reducing the effort required to produce that
new library. Unfortunately, there are identifiable reasons why the evolutionary
approach has failed in the past and is doomed to failure in the future. The
fundamental premise behind this proposed project is that a revolutionary
approach must be developed if the repeated investment of effort is to be
avoided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has uncovered a systematic
approach to the derivation of provably correct dense linear algebra algorithms
via the application of classic derivation techniques from computer science. The
practical solutions that may now be within reach include the (partially)
automatic development (derivation, implementation, and cost and stability
analysis) of high-performance dense and banded linear algebra libraries. This is
in contrast to the traditional&lt;br/&gt;approaches for implementation of such
libraries for which the development, debugging, and maintenance are tedious and
error-prone processes because of their complexity. The proposed work promises to
deliver libraries that require little or no maintenance through the systematic
and direct translation of systematically derived, provably correct algorithms to
an imperative programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
lay the foundation for such automated systems by concentrating on developing the
systematic approaches mentioned above, without yet venturing into automation. In
addition, prototype libraries, coded using the latest software engineering
techniques, will be developed to demonstrate the potential of the approaches. In
particular, the ability to overcome the apparent cost of the abstractions that
drive the systematic approaches by using C++ techniques like template meta-
programming and expression templates will be central to the study. Success will
be measured by the degree to which the systematic approaches will enable
automation, by the new algorithms that will be uncovered using the methodology,
and by the&lt;br/&gt;performance that can be demonstrated (on sequential and
parallel architectures) by the resulting prototype libraries. Automated methods
currently used by other projects are not deemed to be competitive, in terms of
performance and flexibility, with the proposed libraries.&lt;br/&gt;