* 0305479
* Mechanisms for the Formation of Coherent Structures from Small-Scale Turbulence in Anisotropic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Leslie Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 180,000.00

Geophysical turbulence may be modeled by a hierarchy of partial differential
equations including both waves and turbulence. In each model, the vortical, non-
wave motions correspond to observed, long-lived structures such as the jet
stream of the tropopause, the persistent horizontal layers of the stratosphere,
and hurricanes. Despite decoupling of vortical modes and waves at first order in
weak turbulence expansions, numerical simulations have demonstrated the
generation of the anisotropic, vortical modes from fast waves. These simulations
suggest major modifications to current models designed to capture only the
large-scale dynamics. For example, they show the dominance of vertically
sheared, horizontal flow modes in strongly stratified flows, presently not
included in large-scale models. Our work focuses on (1) stability analyses to
understand the mechanisms responsible for the formation of slow, large-scale
coherent motions from fast, small-scale turbulence, and (2) the development of
improved ordinary and partial differential equations describing the slowly
varying, large-scale dynamics, reflecting the physics observed in the numerical
simulations.

Most current models of turbulence are based on isotropic theory, and assume
that small-scale turbulence acts as a sink of energy for larger-scale flows.
Such turbulence models are used in numerical prediction, for example, of weather
and climate change. However, turbulence in nature and in engineering flows is
anisotropic more often than not, for example, due to the presence of boundaries.
In this study, we focus on anisotropy induced by strong rotation and
stratification, both of which give rise to wave motions. In anisotropic wave-
turbulence systems, turbulence may act as a source of energy for larger-scale
flows. Furthermore, coherent structures often emerge spontaneously from small-
scale, random fluctuations. One example in nature is the generation of
hurricanes from smaller-scale motions in the atmosphere. This study aims to
understand large-scale, coherent-structure generation from small-scale
turbulence in the atmosphere and oceans. In addition, new models will be
developed to capture these physical phenomena, absent in current models. The
results should impact our ability to predict long-term variability in ocean-
circulation, weather and climate.