* 0305314
* Fast Bit Complexity in Symbolic Computation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 12/31/2006
* USD 310,604.00

Erich Kaltofen is studying the connection of the bit cost of arithmetic on the
numeric coefficients to the overall efficiency of symbolic computation
algorithms. He designs and implements new algorithms for fundamental problems in
exact polynomial and linear algebra and such polynomial resultants that achieve
speedup through controlling the lengths of the intermediately computed rational
numbers. Faster arithmetic cost is also achieved by fixed or variable precision
floating point operations, and such approximate input and output data is the
subject of our investigations into hybrid symbolic/numeric algorithms for
polynomial factorization and structured system solving. Randomized algorithms
for sparse interpolation problems are being executed as good heuristics with a
limited number of coin flips in order to keep intermediate coefficients small.
The algorithms in the LinBox program library for sparse, structured and black
box matrices through its generic, reusable design are compiled with arithmetic
that is specialized, for example, for particularly efficient finite field
operations.

The overarching goal of the field of symbolic computation is doing mathematics
with the aid of a computer. Programs such as Mathematica by Wolfram Research
Inc. and Maple by Maplesoft have already reached millions of users, who use them
to automatically and error-free perform the mechanics of mathematical
manipulation. Thus, the users can concentrate on the interpretation of the
mathematical results and, equally important, manipulate large mathematical
models that are closer to reality. Kaltofen's research contributes to the
infrastructure of the underlying mathematics engine on the computer. The
investigated speedups make the execution significantly faster, thus allowing
even better models and providing mathematics servers to even more users ranging
from practicing scientists to high school students. Kaltofen under the umbrella
of the LinBox group (www.linalg.org) is making the developed software freely
available. Users can download and run the algorithms and experts in the
discipline can scrutinize the fine points.