* 0305155
* UMEB:  Student Travel Awards to the Ecological Society of America Annual Meeting
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Jason Taylor, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 58,800.00

NSF funding will allow the Ecological Society of America (ESA) to increase the
participation of underrepresented minority undergraduates its annual scientific
meeting. As part of its Strategies for Ecology Education, Development and
Sustainability (SEEDS) program, ESA routinely brings 20 students from
underrepresented groups to its meeting; the NSF UMEB award will allow 13
additional students to attend. Of the greater than 7800 members of the ESA, less
than 8% have identified themselves as a member of an under-represented minority
group. In order to increase the numbers of minorities pursuing ecology, the
SEEDS program seeks to address key barriers to recruitment, one of which is a
lack of student awareness of ecology as a viable course of study and career
opportunity. Over 3500 ecologists and environmental professionals attend the ESA
meeting sharing research results with their peers. This provides the perfect
venue to engage students in one of the most important facets of doing science -
communicating intellectual merit and new knowledge with the scientific
community. Students are encouraged to present their research results and special
events and activities are planned for student participants, including scientific
field trips and workshops, welcome and orientation sessions, roundtable
discussions on environmental justice, traditional ecological knowledge, and a
career workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this activity
include: 1) the increase in participation of underrepresented (African American,
Latino, American Indian) undergraduate students at a scientific meeting, 2) the
enhancement of networks and partnerships between traditional ESA members and
underrepresented groups and 3) the establishment of mentor/student
relationships. A key aspect of the travel to meetings program is the
establishment of student-mentor relationships. The matching of students with
both peer and scientific mentors will assist in developing links and
infrastructure within the communities (student and faculty) that will cultivate
future leadership. The meeting is a perfect venue to facilitate representatives
of underrepresented groups to view the broad possibilities within the
environmental sciences since many aspects of ecology, such as environmental
justice issues and traditional ecological knowledge, are highlighted along with
scientific ecological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity is funded by
the National Science Foundation Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology
(UMEB) Program.&lt;br/&gt;