* 0305193
* Zero-Dissipation and Zero-Dispersion Limits Arising in Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Jerry Bona, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2003
* USD 6,109.00

The Principal Investigators will study several related&lt;br/&gt; asymptotic
limits of nonlinear partial differential&lt;br/&gt; equations arising in fluid
mechanics. Interest is focused&lt;br/&gt; on how solutions behave in limits
where certain terms in&lt;br/&gt; the equations become increasingly negligible.
For the &lt;br/&gt; situations in view here, these terms correspond to
the&lt;br/&gt; physical effects of dissipation and dispersion. It is&lt;br/&gt;
planned to work at two levels of complexity. The first,&lt;br/&gt; and easier
level is that of model equations for wave&lt;br/&gt; propagation where
nonlinear, dispersive and dissipative&lt;br/&gt; effects are all present. Both
qualitative and quantitative&lt;br/&gt; information will be sought. The
information obtained&lt;br/&gt; will yield information helpful to modelling
near-shore&lt;br/&gt; zone processes. At a more complex level, it is
planned&lt;br/&gt; to investigate various limits of the Navier-Stokes&lt;br/&gt;
equations including the inviscid limit for the &lt;br/&gt; Navier-Stokes
equations in bounded domains with fixed &lt;br/&gt; boundaries, and for
statistical solutions with periodic &lt;br/&gt; boundary conditions (or in all
of space). It is also&lt;br/&gt; intended to investigate how well the Navier-
Stokes&lt;br/&gt; equations posed in a channel are modelled by
dissipative&lt;br/&gt; nonlinear wave equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
present award will support research on several interesting &lt;br/&gt; and
important asymptotic limits for mathematical models. The&lt;br/&gt; kind of
limits under consideration here arise in various&lt;br/&gt; areas of physics,
mechanics, oceanography, materials science,&lt;br/&gt; biology, and elsewhere
when partial differential equations&lt;br/&gt; are used as models. The problems
considered here derive&lt;br/&gt; principally from fluid mechanics, but in so
far as we are&lt;br/&gt; successful in our program, there is a broader implied
scope.&lt;br/&gt; The zero-limits under study are those associated with
&lt;br/&gt; dissipation and dispersion in fluid motion. In various&lt;br/&gt;
modeling situations, one or the other of these effects may&lt;br/&gt; be
ignored. The question then arises whether or not such &lt;br/&gt; approximations
are justified and, if so, under what flow conditions &lt;br/&gt; and over what
time scales. These questions are of &lt;br/&gt; theoretical and practical
importance since the approximating &lt;br/&gt; equations are often easier to
use. This award will support work that&lt;br/&gt; aims to address issues
including fundamental points and aspects&lt;br/&gt; that arise in the use of
these equations as descriptions of&lt;br/&gt; real phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;