* 0305151
* Spatio-Temporal Chaos in Systems of Broken Symmetry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Eberhard Bodenschatz, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

This experimental project will continue investigations of non-linear, non-
equilibrium pattern-forming phenomena in extended dynamical systems. The system
of interest is thermal convection found in pressurized gases confined between
two parallel plates. This system, and many others, exhibits non-transient states
in which spatial and temporal correlations fall off quickly. These complex
states are termed "Spatio-Temporal Chaos"(STC), and have received much attention
in recent years. An open question addressed in this project, is how to interact
with or even control STC. The research will address how thermal convection
responds to spatial and spatio-temporal forcing. Two types of forcing schemes
will be applied. The first uses micro-machined surfaces that are manufactured at
Cornell's Nano Fabrication Facility, the second a thermal imprinting technique.
Better knowledge of STC may potentially impact fundamental science areas such as
physics, biology, and medicine, but also applied areas, like heating technology,
materials processing, etc. The experimental results will also provide a
benchmark for numerical codes developed for solving hydrodynamical problems on
supercomputers. The investigation includes an international collaboration with
Prof. W. Pesch (Germany) and Steve Lipson (Israel). In addition, a collaboration
with Richard Wiener from Pacific University will be continued. Graduate students
involved in the project and in this research group receive training in cutting
edge experimental techniques ranging from microfabrication, design of mechanical
and electronic systems, to digital image processing. This experience provides
graduate students with training and preparation for careers in academe,
industry, and government.

This experimental research program continues an investigation into the pattern
formation that occurs in thermally driven flows in pressurized gases confined
between two parallel plates. The patterns are visible optically as spontaneous
density fluctuations in the gas. The project will examine situations where the
flow shows highly disordered convection patterns. Such situations also occur in
everyday life; an example is striped cloud-streaks in the sky or in the somewhat
repetitive patterns of windblown sand. The dynamics of these complex patterns is
significant current scientific interest. An important question that will be
addressed in this research program is how to interact with or even control these
states that are chaotic both in space and time. This research program will
address this question by using micro-machined surfaces that are manufactured at
Cornell's Nano Fabrication Facility and by using thermal imprinting techniques.
A better knowledge of these spatio-temporal chaotic states and their control can
have an impact in both fundamental science, like physics, biology, and medicine
(as in cardiac fibrillation, epilepsy), as well as in technology, like heating
technology, materials processing, etc. The investigation includes an
international collaboration with Prof. W. Pesch (Germany) and Steve Lipson
(Israel). In addition, a collaboration with Richard Wiener from Pacific
University will be continued. Graduate students involved in the project and in
this research group receive training in cutting edge experimental techniques
ranging from microfabrication, design of mechanical and electronic systems, to
digital image processing. This experience provides graduate students with
training and preparation for careers in academe, industry, and government.

