* 0305076
* Electron-LO-Phonon Quantum Kinetics in Wide-Gap II-VI Nanostructures with Strong Confinement
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Hans-Peter Wagner, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This research investigates coherent coupling between excitons and longitudinal
optical (LO)-phonons in II-VI quantum wells and quantum wires. Using ultrashort
sub-20-femtosecond pulses, the coupling can be probed under conditions where the
excitation time is shorter than the LO-phonon oscillation period. In addition to
studying intrinsic properties and interference phenomena between strong Coulomb-
interaction and large electron-LO-phonon coupling, the proposed wide-gap II-VI
nanostructures with strong confinement also may allow unique tuning of the
exciton binding energy above the LO-phonon energy. As a result novel quantum
kinetic effects may be observed. The investigations will serve as crucial tests
of extended quantum kinetic models and will contribute to an improved
understanding and interpretation of the coherent electron-LO-phonon scattering
in polar quasi-two and quasi-one dimensional nanostructures. Graduate students
will gain experience in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting edge
technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers in academe,
industry and government. %%% This work is directed at the study of coherent
coupling between electronic excitations and lattice vibrations in wide-band-gap
II-VI semiconductor nanostructures utilizing ultrashort femtosecond light
pulses. In these experiments the optical excitation time is shorter than the
lattice oscillation period so that at early times after excitation electron
scattering processes can be treated as interference phenomena. The proposed
research will uncover novel coherent effects and contribute to an improved
understanding and interpretation of optically excited semiconductors at the
interface between reversible and irreversible electron scattering. It will serve
as a crucial test of extended theoretical models appropriate for these
nanostructures. The experimental results will have a strong impact on
theoretical research and will also have importance for information technologies.
Students in this program receive rigorous training in ultrafast coherent optics
and semiconductor physics, which prepares them for careers in academia or
industry. ***