* 0305173
* Optical Excitations in Aggregates, Films and Crystals of Conjugated Oligomers and Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2006
* USD 246,000.00

This grant is funded jointly by the Materials Theory Program in the Division of
Materials Research and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Porgram in
the Chemistry Division. The theoretical research focuses on thin films of pi-
conjugated polymers and their associated oligomers. These materials are
receiving widespread attention as the active components for organic-based field
effect transistors and organic light emitting diodes (OLED's). Despite the many
experiments designed to reveal the mechanism(s) by which oligomer/polymer films
produce light, a fundamental understanding of light emission (and absorption) is
far from complete. In this grant a strategy is implemented to theoretically
investigate light absorption and emission in oligomer and polymernanoaggregates,
films and crystals. The focus will be primarily on oligo-phenylenevinylene
(OPVn) and oligo-thiophene (Otn) and their parent polymers. The anaylsis will be
based on herringbone aggregates with molecular packing derived from known
crystal structures. The Hamiltonian includes intermolecular (excitonic)
interactions, linear excition-vibrational coupling with multiple intramolecular
modes, and the influence of point and structural defects. The two-particle
approximation will be employed to reduce the basis set to a tractable size for
numerical analysis without sacrificing accuracy. %%% This grant is funded
jointly by the Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research
and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
Division. This fundamental research on the electronic and optical properties of
organic materials may lead to a new understanding of polymeric (plastic)
optoelectronics and their possible applications as devices. ***