* 0305950
* Collaborative Research:  Compositional Verification of Software Product Lines as Open Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 161,649.00

0305950&lt;br/&gt;Krishnamurthi, Shriram, -&lt;br/&gt;Brown
University&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Compositional Verification of
Software Product&lt;br/&gt;Lines as Open
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0305834&lt;br/&gt;Fisler, Kathryn,
-&lt;br/&gt;Worcester Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
Compositional Verification of Software Product&lt;br/&gt;Lines as Open
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A product line is a family of related software
products built from a common set of components, where each component typically
implements a distinguishable feature. While product lines have many
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;software engineering benefits, they pose a nontrivial
challenge for traditional methods of testing and validation. Prior work,
including case studies, has developed compositional techniques for
automated&lt;br/&gt;verification of temporal logic formulae over product lines.
The case studies have revealed the need for techniques that handle open system
verification sensitive to (a) propositions that evolve over time
and&lt;br/&gt;across features, and (b) propositions that behave differently
depending on whether they model control or data. This project, a collaboration
between Brown University and Worcester Polytechnic Institute, extends prior work
to handle these issues using a particular combination of propositional,
temporal, and 3-valued logic constraints. The combined representations lead to
lightweight preservation checks, a crucial part of keeping product-line
verification tractable. The work includes both theoretical work
and&lt;br/&gt;experimental validation. The project both contributes to advancing
an important software development methodology and narrows the gap between the
areas of software engineering and computer-aided&lt;br/&gt;verification. The
work involves undergraduate students and will have impact through classroom
contact at several levels.