* 0305223
* Collaborative Research: Coherent Spin Dynamics of Electrons, Ions and Nuclei in Confined Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* David Awschalom, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 650,000.00

This proposal is a collaborative experimental effort that explores the coherent
spin dynamics of electrons, ions and nuclear spins in low dimensional systems
that confine electrons and/or photons. The proposed experiments focus on model
nanostructures fabricated from both conventional and magnetic II-VI and III-V
semiconductors and exploit the unique opportunities offered by such systems to
systematically tailor spin interactions between confined electronic states,
magnetic ions, and nuclei. The project combines state-of-the-art spin dynamical
probes having high temporal (~100 fs) and spatial (~100 nm) resolution with
sophisticated materials engineering of a variety of semiconductor-based
structures whose dimensions span the nano- to the mesoscale. The overall thrust
of this research program is to develop a fundamental understanding of the
control, transport and storage of coherent spin phenomena in semiconductors via
optical experiments that probe spatio-temporal spin transport in
heterostructures, coherent spin control in optical microcavities, coherent
nuclear spin dynamics in isotopically-engineered nanostructures, and coherent
spin excitations in mesoscopically patterned ferromagnets. These experiments
potentially have a broad and long range impact on future technologies that
explicitly use quantum phenomena for new functionality. The research provides
students with advanced technical training in leading edge materials engineering
and condensed matter techniques. The principal investigators will disseminate
the results of their scientific activity to the general public, and continue to
attract a diverse and talented student base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
understanding of the transport, storage and manipulation of coherent spin states
in semiconductors is important for the future development of quantum information
science and technology. Contemporary materials fabrication techniques offer
access to important model systems in this context by enabling the systematic
tailoring of spin interactions between confined electronic/photonic states and
magnetic ions/nuclei. This collaborative proposal is aimed at using ultrafast
and high-spatial resolution optical techniques to probe coherent electronic,
ionic and nuclear spin dynamics in a variety of semiconductor-based
architectures with dimensions spanning from the nano- to the mesoscale. The
project will address basic issues such as coherent spin transport in complex
heterostructures, coherent spin control in optical microcavities, coherent
nuclear spin dynamics in isotopically-engineered nanostructures, and coherent
spin excitations in ferromagnetic semiconductor nanostructures. It is
anticipated that this project will result in important fundamental insights into
questions that are at the very forefront of condensed matter physics and
simultaneously have a broad and long range impact on future technologies that
explicitly use spintronics or quantum phenomena for new functionality. The
research provides students with technically sophisticated training in the
synthesis of semiconductor and magnetic nanostructures, ultrafast optical
spectroscopy, low temperature transport, and micromagnetometry, and is hence an
ideal training ground for both academic and industrial environments. The
principal investigators will disseminate the results of their scientific
activity to the general public, and continue to attract a diverse and talented
student base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;