* 0305818
* Topics in Smooth and Symplectic 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Ronald Fintushel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 279,486.00

DMS-0305818&lt;br/&gt;Ronald Fintushel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the central
problems of low-dimensional topology is the &lt;br/&gt;classification of smooth
simply connected 4-manifolds. New &lt;br/&gt;constructions have confused the
issue of&lt;br/&gt;classification, but also have invigorated the theory and
reinforced &lt;br/&gt;its richness and diversity. Still further examples are
needed to &lt;br/&gt;identify a suitable classification scheme, and the proposer
intends &lt;br/&gt;to work on such constructions. The ultimate goal of the
proposer is &lt;br/&gt;to develop enough techniques for new constructions of
smooth and &lt;br/&gt;symplectic 4-manifolds that a general picture for
classification will &lt;br/&gt;begin to emerge.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this proposal will address the relationship &lt;br/&gt;between mathematics and
theoretical physics, opportunities for &lt;br/&gt;graduate and undergraduate
students in topology, and career &lt;br/&gt;development of postdoctoral fellows.
The proposer will study &lt;br/&gt;geography problems for symplectic manifolds
which have been shown to &lt;br/&gt;impact physics via the notion of
'superconformal simple type'. &lt;br/&gt;Another basic goal of this proposal is
the development of problems &lt;br/&gt;which are accessible to graduate and
advanced undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents problems
which will be suitable thesis &lt;br/&gt;problems for the proposer's future
students. It also discusses &lt;br/&gt;computational problems which the proposer
plans to give to advanced &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students. The proposer will
also support graduate and &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students during summers and
encourage their &lt;br/&gt;participation in conferences. Problems posed in this
proposal will &lt;br/&gt;also be useful for postdoctoral fellows at Michigan
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of 4-dimensional manifolds is important
for both &lt;br/&gt;mathematical and physical reasons. In mathematics, topology
of 4 &lt;br/&gt;dimensions lies at a crossroad, where one can try to apply
&lt;br/&gt;well-developed techniques of low-dimensional (3 and fewer dimensions)
&lt;br/&gt;topology, and also one might hope to utilize powerful techniques of
&lt;br/&gt;high dimensional topology, such as surgery theory. In many ways, the
&lt;br/&gt;most interesting techniques come from neither of these approaches,
&lt;br/&gt;but rather from analogies with complex surface theory and input from
&lt;br/&gt;high energy physics, where for obvious reasons 4-dimensional theory
&lt;br/&gt;is central. This proposal, takes this latter view.&lt;br/&gt;Its key
techniques revolve around the Seiberg-Witten equations &lt;br/&gt;arising in
quantum field theory.&lt;br/&gt;--