* 0305971
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informations for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Peter Adler, Adler, Peter B
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan is entitled "Combining 20th century data and 21st century
statistical tools to explain the long-term coexistence of plant species." While
theory states that the dominant competitor should drive all other species
extinct, natural plant communities contain many species. This research
constructs mathematical models of community dynamics by combining long-term,
spatially explicit data collected in the last century with novel statistical
techniques to identify strategies that allow species to coexist.&lt;br/&gt;