* 0305927
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Camille Barr, Barr, Camille M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Genomic traces of the evolutionary
effects of a selfish gene." Selfish genes transmit copies of themselves to
future generations at the expense of other genes within the same genome. This
research compares nuclear and cytoplasmic gene diversity among several Silene
species that have different evolutionary histories of cytoplasmic male sterility
to determine the genomic effects of this selfish gene. A broad survey of known
plant sequences for this genomic 'footprint' is providing evidence of past
occurrences of selfish genes in angiosperms.