* 0305228
* Carrier Doping in Epitaxial (Zn,Mg)O Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* David Norton, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 349,989.00

This project addresses controlled n-type and p-type doping of (Zn,Mg)O for wide
bandgap elec-tronics. The approach includes the synthesis and properties of
carrier-doped (Zn,Mg)O crystalline thin films with a focus on understanding the
formation of acceptor and donor states in epitaxial (Zn,Mg)O thin films. The
alloy compositions of interest include the Zn-rich region for which the phase-
pure wurtzite structure can be realized, as well as the Mg-rich region where the
rock-salt structure is obtained. The objective is to understand the role of
dopant species, complex forma-tion, and growth conditions on the incorporation
of activated dopants. Activities will include the study of doping using two
complementary epitaxial film-growth techniques. First, anion doping with group V
acceptors (primarily N) will be investigated using molecular beam epitaxy.
Specific theoretical predictions have been made regarding the effectiveness of
single nitrogen versus multi-nitrogen bearing molecules as the delivery species
for nitrogen doping. The role of Zn in-terstitials, oxygen vacancies, and/or
hydrogen complexes in forming compensating shallow donor levels imposes the need
to simultaneously consider the role of in situ and post-growth processing
conditions. Second, pulsed-laser deposition will be used to investigate both
acceptor doping and donor doping of (Zn,Mg)O. The donor dopant will be a group
III element (Ga) substituted on the cation site. For acceptor doping using
pulsed laser deposition, the primary focus will be on phos-phorus doping, as
recent results suggest p-type behavior in heavily P-doped ZnO surfaces. It has
also been predicted that co-doping with certain donor impurities may lead to a
lowering of the acceptor levels due to the formation of acceptor-donor-acceptor
complexes. As a secondary op-tion to p-type doping, co-doping approaches will be
considered, with the focus on determining whether deep acceptor levels can be
shifted to lower energies via the formation of acceptor-donor-acceptor
complexes. Temperature-dependent Hall, Seebeck, C-V, and resistivity meas-
urements will be used to determine conduction mechanisms, carrier type, and
doping. Low tem-perature photoluminescence and admittance spectroscopy will be
used to determine the location of the acceptor level for a given dopant. X-ray
diffraction will used to characterize film crystal-linity. .%%% This project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
significant technological relevance, and places emphasis on the integration of
research and education. Pro-ject activities will include developing a tutorial
on Electronic Oxide Physics and Materials to be delivered as part of the
Graduate Student Seminar Series in both Materials Science and Physics. It will
be presented on an annual basis either by the PI or the graduate students
involved in the re-search. The presentation materials will be posted on a
designated website, thus providing access for researchers and students outside
the University of Florida. In order to enhance the exposure of undergraduate
students to oxide electronics, and research in general, the research project
will in-corporate undergraduates through an existing Senior Research Thesis
program. Each year, a fourth-year Materials Science and Engineering
undergraduate student will be recruited to select an oxide electronics-related
project as his or her Senior Thesis research topic. Persons from un-der-
represented groups (women, minorities) will be particularly encouraged to
participate. ***