* 0305588
* Studies on Self Assembled Nano-Ordered Relaxor Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Ram Katiyar, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 343,409.00

This project aims for greater understanding of a special class of complex oxide
materials, known as relaxors, which though ferroelectric in nature, differ
enormously from the normal ferroelectrics in terms of phase transition behavior
and dielectric properties. Because these materials possess very high dielectric,
piezoelectric, and electro-optic property coefficients, they are advantageous
for electronic and micro-eletromechanical (MEM) devices. Nano-scale ordering and
its effect on properties are not well established, however. The approach
involves a systematic study of ordered nano-regions of high strain relaxor
ferroelectrics. On a fine structural scale, the above relaxor materials contain
self-assembled nanoscale ordered regions dispersed in a three-dimensional
disordered matrix. Since the typical sizes of these regions, as studied by
transmission electron microscopy, are of the order of 2-5 nm, any variation in
their structure and size affects associated phonon frequencies and half widths.
Raman scattering is, therefore selected as a primary tool to probe their
nanoscale structural and dynamic features. Relaxor materials with various sizes
of ordered nano-regions will be prepared using different annealing conditions,
doping, and composition. Sol-gel processing will be used to grow the above
relaxor materials in both ceramic and thin film forms. Thin films will also be
prepared using a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique. Micro-Raman scattering
(in visible and ultraviolet regions) will be utilized to assess basic features
of the nano-ordered regions. These studies are expected to assist in
establishing the applicability of recently proposed models, namely, space charge
and charge balance random layer models, for explaining the occurrence of 1:1
nano ordered regions in 1:2 B-site compounds. The material figure of merit,
which includes polarization hysteresis and electric field effects on the
optical, piezoelectric, and dielectric properties, will be evaluated and
correlated to microstructure and nano-scale ordering. These studies are also
expected to help understand how substrate and growth conditions alter film
structure (strain, grain size, nano-ordering, and inhomogeneity) and thereby
affect piezoelectric, dielectric and ferroelectric properties. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with significant technological relevance. Beyond gaining
greater fundamental understanding, useful outputs expected from the project are
basic information which will provide guidelines for the design of efficient
ferroelectric thin films with desirable microstructures for device applications.
An important feature of the project is the integration of research and
education, and the training of students as researchers with skills in
fundamental materials synthesis, processing, and characterization techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;