* 0305436
* Multi-State Catalysis for Control of Polymer Sequence Distribution
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2006
* USD 555,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Robert Waymouth of Stanford University will develop a new kinetic
strategy for the synthesis of olefin polymers of defined sequence distribution.
A specific objective is to prepare and study new coordination compounds that can
present multiple coordination sites or kinetic states for olefin insertion.
Professor Waymouth's approach for these studies is to design coordination
complexes that can interconvert between two or more kinetic states during the
course of the polymerization reaction, with each state having a different
stereoselectivity or kinetic selectivity toward the comonomers. The
interconversion of the coordination complexes will be examined for the
preparation of strereoblock polymers, block copolymers, copolymers and
alternating copolymers. The current state of understanding does not allow the
prediction, a priori, of how the structure of a given coordination compound will
influence its kinetic selectivity towards two different monomers; thus an
important objective of the proposed studies is to develop a better understanding
of the relationship of catalyst structure to copolymerization
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports Professor Robert Waymouth whose research effort will engage students in
a highly interdisciplinary research area that combines organic and
organometallic synthesis, catalytic olefin polymerization, and analysis of
polymer structure and properties. The focus is on fundamental patterns of
catalytic reactivity, but this research program is in an important area of
technology and many students are highly sought by companies working in the areas
spanning catalysis, polyolefin manufacturing, materials chemistry and
nanotechnology. Professor Waymouth has been successful in licensing technologies
to interested industrial partners that were initiated with NSF funding, leading,
in one case, to a major NIST award to BP Amoco. Additional objectives include
continuing to recruit outstanding female students and mentoring both graduate
and undergraduate women students, many of whom have gone on to successful
careers in industry.&lt;br/&gt;