* 0306239
* FRG-Quantum Engineering of Metallic and Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Zhenyu Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 866,519.00

This Focused Research Group (FRG) project the topic of length scales and
dimensionality cross-over in nanoscience and technology. The project aims to
bridge the gap between the nanoscopic world of atoms and the mesoscopic world of
materials and devices, by integrating quantum growth with more traditional
growth concepts, addressing a spectrum of fundamental issues in condensed
matter- and materials sciences. The project addresses the size effect on (i)
Cooper pair formation and order parameter in superconductivity; (ii) magnetic
anisotropy and ordering tem-peratures in magnetic quantum dots; and (iii) the
interplay between free carriers and magnetic moments in artificially-structured
dilute magnetic semiconductors. The FRG involves researchers with complementary
expertise and capabilities in quantum growth and manipulation schemes for
metallic nanostructures, interface engineering, transport measurements on
surface systems and ultrathin films, and theory of nucleation and growth,
mesoscopic physics, transport, and magnet-ism. The project includes
collaborative partnerships between the university investigators and the Center
for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of materials science with significant technological relevance, and
places emphasis on the integration of research and education. The proposed
program embodies development for a new partnership between the Center for Nano-
phase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and the
academic institutions represented in this proposal. The proposed science and
supporting infrastructure pro-vide an excellent setting for the education and
training of internationally competitive students and postdocs. They can access
some of the world's most advanced facilities for nanoscale sci-ence and
ultrafast computing at UT-Austin, UT-Knoxville, and ORNL. The educational
outreach effort will focus on the development of a new curriculum for nanoscale
science and technology, in partnership with the Center of Nano- and Molecular
Science and Technology at the University of Texas. The curriculum will be aimed
at bridging the departmental boundaries and traditional research disciplines,
which is expected to foster a collaborative atmosphere of excitement and
discovery. The research integrates materials synthesis and characterization, and
shows how the-ory and experiment can work hand-in-hand to push the frontier of
nanoscale science and technol-ogy. The project will enlarge the pool of young
scientists who have collaborative research ex-perience and who will be ready to
take their place in the highly-skilled workforce that continues to drive today's
high-tech society. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;