* 0306940
* Dynamic Correlations in Strongly Fluctuating Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Collin Broholm, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 473,572.00

Strongly fluctuating solids are interesting because their properties are
anomalous, potentially useful, and difficult to predict. Based on inelastic
neutron scattering, this experimental project will provide&lt;br/&gt;detailed
information about dynamic correlations in such materials leading to progress in
understanding and predicting their cooperative behavior. The materials to be
studied are (i) Well-defined model systems&lt;br/&gt;linked to recent
developments in condensed matter theory. Examples include spin ladders with a
field induced quantum phase transition and an extended high field quantum
critical phase. (ii) Magnetic materials&lt;br/&gt;displaying unusual phenomena
that cannot be described satisfactorily with existing theories. Examples include
oxides and organic materials where exchange interactions do not favor static
long range spin order.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Materials where fluctuations affect
possibilities for future technological applications. Examples include assemblies
of ferro-magnetic nano-wires where transverse standing spin waves and inter-wire
correlations will be probed. The scientific projects will be the basis for an
educational program for students and post doctoral fellows. They will learn to
apply innovative neutron scattering technique to modern problems in condensed
matter physics thus preparing them to be major scientific contributors to the
spallation neutron&lt;br/&gt;source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many applications of
materials rely on or are severely affected by random atomic scale motion called
fluctuations. This is increasingly true in nano-technology where device
dimensions are reduced towards the&lt;br/&gt;atomic spacing. Materials
properties linked to fluctuations are at present difficult to predict. Therefore
experiments such as those proposed here are the key to progress. To probe motion
on the atomic scale the project will use the powerful inelastic neutron
scattering technique. Careful analysis of the pattern of neutron scattering from
a sample reveals detailed information about spatial and temporal correlations
between the atoms that make up the solid. Prototypical magnetic materials that
are strongly affected by fluctuations will be the focus of the experiments.
These include so-called spin-ladders where quantum fluctuations can be tuned
through the application of a strong magnetic field, frustrated magnetic systems
that fail to order due to competing interactions, and ferro-magnetic nano-wires
with anomalous spin wave propagation. Education will be an integral part of the
project where students and post doctoral fellows will carry out experiments
using cutting edge instrumentation and analysis under the guidance of the
principal investigator. The goal is to educate creative experimental physicists
with expertise in the application of neutron scattering to materials science.
This is crucial as the nation invests $1.4B in the worlds most advanced neutron
scattering facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;