* 0306360
* Clustering - Visualization, Validation and Response Oriented Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Rebecka Jornsten, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 73,499.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Clustering - Visualization, Validation and Response
Oriented Methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rebecka Jornsten,
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two new universally applicable
methods for clustering. A method is proposed for the clustering of explanatory
variables in a response oriented fashion, ROVAC (Response Oriented Variable
Clustering). The method uses a response model to generate the variable
clustering, via a novel application of bagging. The clustering does not rely on
a distribution assumption for the explanatory variables. The method is flexible,
allowing for the use of different model selection criteria. It generalizes to a
wide variety of response models. The PI is also investigating extensions of a
clustering visualization and validation tool recently developed, the Relative
Data Depth (ReD). Building on the concept of the depth relative to regression
the PI develops methods for selecting the number of clusters in a data set and
selecting the features that are related to a specific
clustering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is largely motivated by
interdisciplinary research. The goal is to provide scientists in related fields
with new and flexible clustering tools for analyzing high-dimensional data.
Standard methods for clustering or grouping of features require the definition
of a measure of similarity. This is often a non-trivial and highly subjective
task. In this project the PI focuses on the development of two clustering
techniques based on intuitively simple concepts. The first method uses the
knowledge of another measured quantity, a response. The method groups features
together that are similarly related to the response. The second method uses a
concept of depth, a measure of how representative a feature is with respect to
its group. Prototype algorithms are being implemented on real data with examples
from, but not limited to, gene expression data. Preliminary results are
competitive with current leading methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;