* 0306404
* Feedback Techniques for Integrating Power Management and Quality of Service in Servers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2007
* USD 266,000.00

Increased awareness of power concerns and recent approaches to
improve&lt;br/&gt;energy efficiency and heat dissipation in computer systems
have not&lt;br/&gt;immediately translated into rich, adaptable, power-aware
applications.&lt;br/&gt;This lack of effectiveness is particularly evident in
power-aware&lt;br/&gt;real-time computing, where efforts to bridge the gap
between hardware&lt;br/&gt;and software have generally been limited to
developing new schedulers&lt;br/&gt;that operate by modulating a relatively
high-level hardware control&lt;br/&gt;such as voltage scaling and frequency
scaling. The problem with this&lt;br/&gt;approach is that the hardware controls
operate at too gross a level to&lt;br/&gt;be effective in dynamic, poorly-
modeled application scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a
feedback-based, control-theoretic approach to&lt;br/&gt;optimize and balance, at
runtime, power consumption and real-time&lt;br/&gt;performance. This approach
not only integrates hardware-level&lt;br/&gt;power-management techniques with
real-time and quality-of-service&lt;br/&gt;(QoS) constraints, but also
integrates a range of hardware&lt;br/&gt;power-management techniques at
different granularities into a unified&lt;br/&gt;framework that allows better
task-level control of power management.&lt;br/&gt;This enables finer control of
power/performance tradeoffs by the&lt;br/&gt;operating system, and permits
applications to dynamically adjust the&lt;br/&gt;system's and chip's power-
saving configuration on a per-task basis to&lt;br/&gt;meet specific performance
requirements while reducing power&lt;br/&gt;consumption. With the new
functionality provided by this project, a&lt;br/&gt;richer class of power-aware
applications can be developed to provide&lt;br/&gt;valuable user experiences in
next-generation, real-time environments.&lt;br/&gt;The project specifically
focuses the requirements of web server&lt;br/&gt;farms where energy and cooling
costs are substantial and where the web&lt;br/&gt;services provide
differentiated levels of QoS, thus motivating a&lt;br/&gt;power-aware framework
that balances performance, QoS requirements, and&lt;br/&gt;energy costs.