* 0306616
* Problems in Differential and Algebraic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Lowell Jones, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 119,964.00

DMS-0306616&lt;br/&gt;Lowell E. Jones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems in
"higher dimensional" topology have been reformulated &lt;br/&gt;in terms of one
or more of the following theories: homotopy theory; &lt;br/&gt;algebraic
K-theory; surgery L-theory; stable pseudoisotopy theory.&lt;br/&gt;In an effort
to better understand the latter three theories, Jones &lt;br/&gt;(in
collaboration with F.T. Farrell) has formulated an "Isomorphism
&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture" for each of these three theories. For example, the
&lt;br/&gt;Isomorphism Conjecture for algebraic K-theory gives a simple recipe
&lt;br/&gt;for computing the algebraic K-groups for the integral group ring of
&lt;br/&gt;a group G in terms of the algebraic K-groups for the integral group
&lt;br/&gt;rings of all the infracyclic subgroups of G. (A group is
"infracyclic" &lt;br/&gt;if it is a finite extension of a cyclic group.) Quite a
bit is know &lt;br/&gt;about the algebraic K-groups for integral group rings of
infracyclic &lt;br/&gt;groups; so the truth of the preceeding conjecture would
help considerably &lt;br/&gt;in understanding the algebraic K-theory of all
integral group rings. &lt;br/&gt;As part of this proposal, Jones intends to
continue working towards &lt;br/&gt;verifying the Isomorphism Conjecture for
algebraic K-theory of the integral &lt;br/&gt;group ring of G, under the
condition that the group G acts properly, &lt;br/&gt;discontinuously by
isometries on a complete, Riemannian manifold which &lt;br/&gt;has non-positive
sectional curvature values everywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematicians study
the structure of spaces by trying to find the &lt;br/&gt;"genetic code" for each
space. The "genetic code" for a space usually &lt;br/&gt;comes in the form of an
algebraic gadget associated to the space; &lt;br/&gt;typically there is a simple
recipe for constructing the algebraic gadget &lt;br/&gt;from the space. The hope
is that two spaces having equal or congruent &lt;br/&gt;"genetic codes" should
be equal or congruent as spaces. One of the first &lt;br/&gt;algebraic gadgets
to be associated to a space is called the "fundamental &lt;br/&gt;group" of the
space. The French mathematician Henri Poincare introduced &lt;br/&gt;this idea
about a 100 years ago. The fundamental group of a space is &lt;br/&gt;certainly
an important ingredient in its "genetic code", but there are &lt;br/&gt;examples
of many different spaces which have the same fundamental group; &lt;br/&gt;in
these cases the fundamental group is not a complete "genetic code" for
&lt;br/&gt;the space. About 50 years ago the mathematician Armand Borel (of the
&lt;br/&gt;Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J.) conjectured that for
an &lt;br/&gt;important class of spaces (called "aspherical spaces") the
fundamental group &lt;br/&gt;does give the complete "genetic code" for the
space; that is, two aspherical &lt;br/&gt;spaces with the same fundamental group
are forced to be the same space. Jones &lt;br/&gt;has made some progress towards
proving Borel's Conjecture, and will continue his &lt;br/&gt;work in that
direction.&lt;br/&gt;