* 0306938
* Arithmetical geometry and number theory - A conference in honor of N. Katz
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2005
* J. Brian Conrey, American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Principal Investigator: Brian Conrey&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS
-0306938&lt;br/&gt;Institution: American Institute of
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Arithmetical geometry and number
theory, a conference in honor of N. M.
Katz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After the works of
Weil, Grothendieck, and Deligne, the theory of zeta functions of varieties over
finite fields has been a very powerful tool in number theory and geometry. Katz
has been and continues to be a leading researcher in these areas&lt;br/&gt;and
has championed their applications. His contributions range from exponential
sums, monodromy groups and their representations, number theory, modular forms
classical and p-adic, to arithmetic moduli problems. All of these areas are
still very much at the center of current research. The PIs will conduct a 4 day
conference on these connected areas. The timing will coincide with Katz' 60 th
birthday. The conference will bring together many of the leading researchers in
these fields to lecture on the latest developments. In addition to these
advanced lectures the conference will also feature survey lectures and
discussion sessions aimed for&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of the mathematical fields of
number theory and arithmetical geometry is concerned in part with the study of
counting solutions to algebraic equations (such as Fermat's equation) where the
solutions are to be whole numbers. The study of such problems requires some of
the most sophisticated modern mathematical theories. The payoff for mastering
and developing these theories is great. For instance, there are far-reaching
applications to other areas of pure mathematics as well as to areas of applied
discrete mathematics such as computer science, to the design of optimally
efficient networks and to cryptography. This 4-day conference will feature this
important mathematics, especially those aspects closest to the interests of N.
M. Katz who is a world leader in these areas. Particular attention will be
devoted to including graduate students and postdoctoral associates in all
aspects of the conference. Survey lectures and formal discussion sessions which
will be particularly useful to younger mathematicians will be a highlight of the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;