* 0306117
* High Quantum Efficiency Coordination Polymers and Networks for OLED Application
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Pavel Anzenbacher, Bowling Green State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 297,333.00

The objective of this project is the synthesis and study of photophysical
properties of self-organized electroluminescent coordination polymers that can
be potentially used in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The multi-
component materials are designed to utilize triplet-triplet energy transfer for
harvesting the energy of both emissive singlet and nonradiative triplet states
of electrolumophores to an emissive acceptor. Two types of emissive coordination
polymers will be synthesized. The target materials will be prepared using the
methods of organometallic syn-thesis; steady-state and time-correlated
fluorescence and transient spectroscopy will be used to study the energy
transfer processes in the proposed materials. The electroluminescence of the
synthesized compounds and materials will be also investigated using simple OLED
devices. Co-ordination polymers utilizing quinolinolate complexes are rare, and
their potential for OLEDs has not been investigated. The metallocomplexes
directly connected to the conjugated polymer or oligomer may be viewed as the
missing link between the two main groups of electroluminescent materials-low-
molecular metallocomplexes and conjugated oligomers. It is expected that the at-
tachment of conjugated oligomers to the quinolinolate ligand (donor) will
provide a means for ef-fective exciton stabilization and facilitate triplet-
triplet energy transfer to porphyrin acceptors via the Dexter mechanism. It is
predicted that the tuning of energy levels of the components will in-duce
molecular wire behavior in the conjugated spacer, and increase energy transfer
and quantum performance of the resulting materials. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with
electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance. The project
advances general knowledge as well as yielding novel materials displaying unique
photonic properties arising from synergy in the photophysical behavior of
donor/acceptor metallocomplexes and polymers. The proposed coordination poly-
mers may yield new types of device (OLEDs) materials, contributing to the
advancement of flat panel display technologies. This PI's research group will be
active in an interdisciplinary discus-sion focused on various aspects of science
and OLED engineering through publication and active participation in meetings.
Societal benefits occur through the advancement of education contrib-uting to
professional training of a highly qualified future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;