* 0306050
* Introduction to Media Computation:     A New CS1 Approach Aimed at Non-Majors and Under-Represented Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 256,623.00

0306050 Mark Guzdial Georgia Technology Research Corp - Georgia Institute of
Technology Introduction to Media Computation: A new CS1 approach aimed at non-
majors and under-represented populations $250,998 This proposal focuses on
creating a new kind of CS1 course centered on media computation. The project is
founded on the hypothesis that, for many students, computation is about
communication and introducing computation in a communications context engages
students and leads to increased motivation. Media computation is the use of
computation to create, modify, and transform media. Multimedia, having passed
the stage of requiring complex activities to create video effects or to generate
novel sounds, enjoys a state of the art that makes it feasible to move its
concepts from late-undergraduate/early-graduate courses to introductory courses.
This project challenges traditional CS1/CS2 content which may not reflect the
most common kinds of activities that software developers engage in today in the
workforce. More commonly, what contemporary IT professionals do involves solving
new kinds of problems in new kinds of ways. A large number of IT professionals
construct multimedia as part of their careers, and that number may be
increasing. While the project goal is not to prepare students for such jobs
only, the point is that multimedia manipulation is an activity that can engage
students. Once engaged, the students' potential for learning how to implement
those "computer-based solutions to non-computing problems" is enhanced. The PI
for this project hypothesizes that introducing multimedia early has the
potential to improve enrollment and success rates in introductory courses. The
proposal plan has three components: To build an integrated development
environment for students that supports media computation; To develop a set of
Java-based materials to improve dissemination of the proposed approach; To
evaluate the impact of these developments -- that is, the ease of integration of
a media computation approach into traditional CS courses.

