* 0306951
* Mesoscopic Charge Transport Physics: Charge Shuttling and Superconducting-Ferromagnetic Nanodevices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Mark Tuominen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 374,200.00

This individual investigator award supports an experimental research project
involving the fabrication of novel electronic devices to investigate new
phenomena in mesoscopic charge transport physics. The experiments will focus on
three major thrusts: (1) Charge Shuttle Transport; (2) Crossed Andreev
Reflection; and (3) Nanoscale Superconducting Array Devices. The first objective
is to extend ongoing experimental investigations of charge shuttle transport.
The recently identified phenomenon of electromechanical charge shuttling is
expected to impact a variety of applications, including: nanodevices,
microelectromechanical (MEMS) devices, and biomolecular sensors. To further
understand this phenomenon, experiments will be carried out on devices made
using chemical molecular recognition at the nanometer scale and micromachining
techniques at the micrometer scale. To experimentally investigate crossed
Andreev reflection, multiprobe superconducting-ferromagnetic interface devices
will be fabricated using electron-beam lithography. These experiments will
directly probe the non-local entangled wavefunctions involved in Andreev
reflection charge transport. Using ferromagnetic electrodes, the crossed Andreev
reflection current can be switched on and off via spin-polarization effects
resulting in extraordinarily large magnetoresistive changes. The experiments
will contribute to the fundamental understanding of spintronics and devices
using quantum coherence. Lastly, a new generation of nanoscale superconducting
arrays will be investigated. This work exploits the use of self-assembled
nanoporous polymer templates combined with electrodeposition for integrated
nanolithography. The electrical properties of arrays of 10 nm scale
superconducting nanowires will be investigated as a coupled superconducting
array system. Educational contributions will be made in the form of digital-
video-based research training tutorials, advanced courses in the research area,
interdisciplinary research meetings, and research opportunities to
undergraduates.

This individual investigator award supports an experimental research project
exploring the properties of new electronic devices that advance the development
nanotechnology and sensor technology. The experiments will focus on three major
thrusts: (1) Charge Shuttle Transport; (2) Crossed Andreev Reflection; and (3)
Nanoscale Superconducting Array Devices. The project takes unique advantage of
new nanofabrication research techniques developed at UMass Amherst and
facilitated through prior NSF support. The first experimental objective involves
charge shuttle transport in which electrical charge is transported between two
electrodes by a moving "shuttle" particle. The recently identified phenomenon of
electromechanical charge shuttling is expected to impact a variety of electronic
and sensor applications. The second topic involves devices fabricated using
electron-beam lithography for experimental investigations of crossed Andreev
reflection. These experiments will contribute to the fundamental understanding
of spin-electronics and devices with quantum coherence. Lastly, a new generation
of nanoscale superconducting array devices will be fabricated using self-
assembled nanoporous polymer templates combined with electrodeposition.
Educational contributions will be made in the form of digital-video-based
research training tutorials, advanced courses in the research area,
interdisciplinary research meetings, and research opportunities to
undergraduates. Students will gain knowledge and skills that will be of use to
future research and/or technological careers.