* 0306296
* Fault Diagnosis for Yield Improvement and Silicon Debug
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Tracy Larrabee, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Manufacturing semiconductors is hard, making them work right is even harder, and
making them work right the first time you turn them on is damn near impossible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This difficult situation is caused by two strongly
competing trends: the astounding and ever-increasing complexity of modern chips,
and the ever-greater time-to-market demands of the modern technology product
cycle. You can take some time and make a highly complex product, or you can make
a simple product quickly, but it is extremely hard to make a highly-complex
product very quickly. Unfortunately, this is exactly the dilemma faced by
today's semiconductor companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We can't do anything about
these market trends, and profitable products will always be complex and hard to
build. But, we can do something about the daunting task of figuring out what is
wrong with a many-million-transistor circuit that simply refuses to operate
properly. This is where our work on fault diagnosis and silicon debug comes
in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are working on ways of quickly but accurately
determining the root cause of failure on a defective chip, even when many
independent errors contribute to a single bad result. We have developed
algorithms that analyze the way a circuit fails, and then use information about
the circuit itself to infer the most likely cause of failure. We consider many
types of circuit failure, from logic errors to intermittent or timing failures,
and are targeting a range of defect mechanisms from common fabrication errors to
complex and exotic defect scenarios. We are building tools that will be
compatible with industry-standard data formats and toolflows so that our work
can have immediate industrial benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our
research is to develop sophisticated but efficient algorithms that can deal with
the enormous variety of ways that a modern chip can fail. Good diagnosis and
debug tools are necessary if the semiconductor industry is to pursue its
(nearly) impossible task of producing of higher-quality products at less expense
and an ever-shorter time-to-market.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;