* 0306366
* New Problems in Multiple Hypotheses Testing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Sanat Sarkar, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 233,967.00

A sudden upsurge of research in the area of multiple hypotheses testing has been
taking place in the recent years resulting in newer ideas and raising a number
of important statistical questions. The present proposal intends to address a
number of those questions. A major thrust of the research will be to provide
further development of the theory of false discovery rate (FDR), a new and
powerful concept of error rate in multiple testing, which has been receiving
increasing attention in a wide variety of statistical applications. While it has
been established by the investigator and other researchers recently that there
exist multiple testing procedures which can control the FDR in situations
involving independent as well as some types of positively dependent test
statistics, no theory has yet been developed toward a statistically meaningful
comparisons of these procedures. This proposal considers developing this theory
in terms of some new criteria involving false negatives rate (FNR). A second
major thrust of the proposed research will be the investigation of some
important open problems related to directional error control in stepwise
multiple testing procedures. The theory of directional error control in multiple
testing has so far been concentrated mostly within the framework of independent
test statistics, limiting its scope in real applications where the test
statistics are rarely independent. The investigator has recently revisited this
theory with independent test statistics and improved it for a step-down
procedure. This project aims at developing this theory further accommodating
other stepwise procedures and test statistics that are not necessarily
independent.

Recent published research and some preliminary investigations by the
investigator provide strong motivation and lay the foundation for the proposed
research. The results from this research will be of importance to several areas
of statistical applications, including microarray experiments where the concept
of false discovery rate has been receiving acceptance as a statistical measure
of error in detecting differentially expressed genes, and pharmaceutical studies
where multiple testing techniques are routinely used in evaluating a drug's
efficacy over standard drug or placebo. This research has the potential to
generate collaborations with researchers in biopharmaceutical statistics. It
would also benefit education through training of graduate as well as
undergraduate students and incorporation of the developed methodologies in
statistics courses.