* 0306558
* Optimization over Positive Polynomials and Moment Cones:  an Algorithmic Study with Applications in Approximation Theory, Regression and Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Farid Alizadeh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 258,592.00

In this project the problem of approximating unknown functions with some shape
constraints is being investigated. As a central tool properties of a class of
functions known as positive polynomials are being investigated and utilized. The
problem of approximation of unknown functions with shape constraints has many
potential applications some of which is being developed and formulated in the
context of this project. A sample of problems being investigated includes: shape
constrained regression in statistics with applications in economics and finance
(for instance estimating demand curve which is necessarily a decreasing
function, or utility curves which are convex and decreasing); estimation of
probabilities or odds of events based on some knowledge of their moments or
frequency samples; visualization of data in the form of space curves and
surfaces with shape constraints such as direction of curvatures or convexity.
The study is related to an important and relatively new area called semidefinite
programming, a field of mathematical optimization theory. While the problem of
finding best positive polynomials can be cast as a semidefinite programming
problem, the process may not be the most efficient way. In this project tailor
made techniques are being developed to deal directly with positive polynomials
leading to more efficient methods than using semidefinite programming methods
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project two mathematical objects are
being investigated. One is called "positive polynomials" and the other "moment
cones". These objects have applications in several areas including statistics,
economics, finance, various areas of engineering and two and three dimensional
computer visualization of data. The main application of the objects of this
study is in approximation and computer representation of behavior of unknown
objects. The new problem that is being investigated is the imposition of "shape
constraints" on the unknown phenomena and requiring that the computed
approximation conforms to these constraints. For instance, in econometrics
estimating the demand curve in some market from a scatter of sample data may
yield an approximate demand curve that does not uniformly move down as price
goes up. The properties of "positive polynomials" and "moment cones" are
investigated to assist in computer shape constrained approximation of unknown
objects that arise in fields such as economics, engineering and data
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;