* 0306064
* Integrating Bioinformatics Concepts in Computer Science Curricula: A Cognitive Assessment Driven Strategy
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Christine Hansen, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2008
* USD 404,000.00

0306064 Gautam Singh Oakland University Integrating Bioinformatics Concepts in
Computer Science Curricula: A Cognitive Assessment Driven Strategy $404,000 This
project introduces the concepts of a new multidisciplinary field
(bioinformatics) within the existing computing curriculum by incorporating
research-oriented, self-contained learning modules. Prospects for majors in the
field of bioinformatics are expanding, including opportunities for graduate
study and employment. This project fulfills this demand by introducing the
notion of self-contained modules that encapsulate not only the core biological
principles necessary to fully appreciate the computational aspect of the
subject, but they also provide theoretical and practical exposure to the related
computational biology algorithms and research areas. Graduates who know how to
identify and work on solving leading research problems gain the significant
benefit of being able to apply bioinformatics to a broad range of problems. In
addition to being immersed in a burgeoning research sector, graduates of this
program, who have free access to the newest knowledge and skills in the field as
it evolves, may enjoy a competitive advantage in the workforce. Specifically,
this project involves developing five lecture series. Each lecture series is
comprised of 2-3 lectures and 1-2 laboratory modules devised for integration
within the existing courses. The modules are designed with the objective of
serving as academic examples of some of the computer science concepts covered in
courses such as databases, analysis of algorithms, networking, data structures,
etc. Thus, the main goal is to have a CS major cognizant of the computational
challenges in bioinformatics. These modules all have some common
characteristics. They are self contained, designed to be delivered with 3 to 4
hours of student contact, present the bioinformatics research concepts within a
computer science context, incorporate a hands-on laboratory component, and
integrate cognitive assessment with the objective of helping students appreciate
the depth of their understanding of new concepts taught. The modules include:
BINF 01 - The Biological Database Lectures Module (Biological Databases, GenBank
Schema, Biological Database Federation, Biological Databases and Federation
Architecture); BINF 02 - The Information Retrieval Lectures Module (Sequence
Similarity Algorithms in Bioinformatics, Bio-Database Indexing Strategies,
Genome Database Search Algorithms, Searching Genomic and Protein Databases with
BLAST); BINF 03 - The Intelligent Models for Mining Biological Data Lectures
Module (Computational Models of Biological Sequence, Hidden Markov Models for
Biological Patterns, Machine Learning Paradigms applied to Bioinformatics,
Applying Hidden Markov Models for Sequence Analysis, Information Theoretical
Measure of Surprise); BINF 04 - The Adaptive Middleware Lectures Module (The
Bioinformatics Open Source Project, CORBA and BioCORBA, Java Servlets and
Distributed Annotation Systems, Internet Sequence Analysis with BioJava and
BioPerl, Dazzle Servlet and DAS); and, BINF 05 - The Evolutionary Tree
Computation Lectures Module (Computational Complexity of Constructing
Evolutionary Trees, Cluster Based Methods for Evolutionary Tree, Hamming
Distance and Parsimonious Trees, PHYLIP - The Phylogenetics Analysis Program).