* 0306851
* U.S. - Slovenia Research on Nano- and Micro-Scale Templating of Liquid Crystalline Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Gregory Crawford, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 121,118.00

This U.S.-Slovene research project between Gregory Crawford of Brown University,
Daniele Finotello of Kent State University, and Slobodan Zumer of the University
of Ljubljana examines the structure and ordering of nematic liquid crystals
confined to templates ranging from nano- to micro-sized dimensions. Postdoctoral
fellows as well as graduate and undergraduate students from each institution
will also participate on this international team. The multidisciplinary research
plan involves three complementary areas: 1) nanoscale confinement utilizing
prefabricated templates, 2) photo-self diffusion mediated templating, and 3)
back-flow mediated templating. These latter two areas are a new thrust in
synthesis and characterization of innovative structures created by photo-self-
diffusion using multiple beam holography and the capturing of unusual structures
created from back flow with photopolymerization. Several experimental techniques
will be applied to understand the underpinning physics of these novel
structures, including nuclear magnetic resonance techniques, light scattering,
electro-optics, as well as theory and simulation. Results should improve our
fundamental understanding of liquid crystals and their potential applications in
emerging nano- and micro-scale technologies using soft condensed
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in nanoscale materials fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the
United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader
impacts include the introduction of U.S. and Slovenian students to the
international research community through work at partner institutions and direct
involvement in the project's advanced characterization, modeling and fabrication
techniques.