* 0306464
* A Unified Simulation and Fault Environment for Mixed Signal Systems including MEMS Components
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Karen Panetta, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 280,000.00

Embedded microchip design is becoming prevalent in our daily lives and continues
to play an important role in the security and health of our nation. An embedded
design by definition is an electronic system that contains a computer processor
(microprocessor), yet we do not think of them as computers because the computer
is hidden or "embedded" in the product. Homes in the United States have an
average of 30 to 40 microprocessors, yet only 45% of these homes have a desktop
computer. The rest of these microprocessors are embedded in appliances. Examples
of embedded systems include the computer controlled fuel injectors in
automobiles, control mechanisms in toasters and washing machines, a remote
control for an unmanned spacecraft, or liquid sensing devices such as those used
to monitor biological fluids for illicit drugs or hazardous chemicals in the
human body. The tiny size of these devices makes them very attractive because
they are light and portable. In health applications, these devices can be
injected into the human body and used to diagnose and monitor patients in remote
areas that do not have a nearby hospital. They can even reduce expensive
hospital stays by dispensing the correct amount of a drug in a patient on a time
schedule without any human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;Applications of embedded
systems can be designed using many different scientific principles such as
chemical, biological, optical, electronic and mechanical engineering theory all
in one product. A single microchip that uses this multiple discipline design
technique is called a "MEMS", micro-electromechanical device. Thus, the
multidisciplinary nature of MEMS requires that many specialists work together
and understand how his or her portion of the design will interact and
interconnect with all the other parts of the design. This presents a host of
problems with respect to producing low-cost, reliable and safe products.
&lt;br/&gt;Consider the MEMS device for monitoring illicit drugs or hazardous
chemicals in the human body. This presents a very harsh environment for the
device to operate in since these devices are subject to corrosion and
contamination. The device could cause harm if its shelf-life and lifetime use
properties were not tested. In defense systems, MEMS chips aboard missiles allow
the missile to communicate with the command center and report the exact speed
and position coordinates of the missile. Having this type of functionality
allows the trajectory of the missile to be modified in flight to provide exact
precision on a target and minimizes civilian casualties. If the device fails, it
could cause erratic behavior that could result in catastrophic results. From the
manufacturing perspective the prevalent issues for developing MEMS are the
technology risk and cost of production. If good repeatability and reliability
testing for life testing are not developed, the production cost of MEMS devices
could be prohibitive and not practical for consumer products.&lt;br/&gt;In
summary, the major problems with developing this technology include: (a) The
interdisciplinary nature of the design requiring many different skill sets of
designers that understand how his or her portion of the design will interact and
interconnect with all the other portions of the design. (b) Developing testing
methods for reliability and safety and (c) Developing low-cost manufacturing
methods that are repeatable and reliable so that the final product is
affordable. &lt;br/&gt;The research work will focus on developing a simulation
methodology to help designers develop and perform robust testing on MEMS designs
across multiple scientific and engineering disciplines. Consider an electronic
control and communication system to control and correct the flight path of a
missile in flight. An electrical engineer implements the electronic design,
while the sensors that track the position of the missile and actuators that move
the wings on the missile are developed by mechanical engineers. The boundary
where these two designs connect is a known source of errors due to the lack of
understanding between the design disciplines. Using simulation allows low cost
experimentation on the design before any expenditure is made on real physical
hardware; however, the simulation CAD tools must work across many scientific and
engineering disciplines to be effective. This presents a persistent problem for
today's MEMs chip designers.&lt;br/&gt;The simulator software being developed by
the Investigators will be able to perform thousands of experiments on software
models of a MEMS device. The Investigators will develop a simulation environment
that allows different engineering disciplines to use the same simulator. The
simulations will find catastrophic conditions over all the operating regions and
achieve this without requiring days of computer time or special supercomputers.
This allows an engineer to observe the cause and effect relationships of the
system parameters that interacted to create an undesirable condition. By
understanding the type of errors that can occur, the designer can then correct
the design before it goes into production. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, many outstanding
engineers have been displaced by our country's recent economic situation. The
research team will be complemented with unemployed engineers and offer them an
opportunity to retrain and re-tool so they can become contributors to this
crucial emerging technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;