* 0306416
* Bayesian Analysis of Competing Risks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Sanjib Basu, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2009
* USD 76,726.00

DMS-0306416&lt;br/&gt;Sanjib Basu&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian analysis of competing
risks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
develops new statistical methodology and significantly advances currently
available methodology for analyzing censored survival data with competing risks
where several potential "risks" or causes of failure are operating on a subject
or a unit. The failure time data arising in such contexts are often masked where
the cause of failure is not exactly known, but can only be narrowed down to a
subset of all potential causes. The investigator (a) develops a Bayesian
framework for masked competing risks data using the cause-specific model and
compares it to the latent approach, (b) develops flexible semiparametric models
for such data and compares them to the parametric models, and (c) develops
Bayesian model selection methodology for both parametric and semiparametric
models and uses it to compare both model fit and predictive power. The
investigator studies inferential methods for estimation of overall and cause-
specific survival probabilities from the partially masked data; for estimation
of the diagnostic probability of failure from a specific cause, given a masked
subset of causes; and for incorporating covariate information through regressors
in the setting of masked survival data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Masked competing
risks data arise frequently in biomedical settings, clinical trials, and
engineering applications. For example, the competing risks acting on a patient
diagnosed with prostate cancer could be prostate cancer; other diseases like
hypertension cardiovascular disease, and diabetes; or simply old age (since
prostate cancer is a slow-growing disease). In an engineering setting, the
failure of a system (such as a computer) could be due to failure of a specific
component which may not be exactly identified. The goal of this research is to
develop new statistical methodology and significantly advance currently
available methodology for analyzing such data. The developed computational
methods will be made publicly available so that anyone interested in the
analysis of such competing risks data can use these methods.&lt;br/&gt;