* 0306695
* Semiclassical theory and simulation of vibrational energy relaxation and spectroscopic response functions in liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Eitan Geva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 05/31/2006
* USD 294,000.00

Professor Eitan Geva is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
Program to understand the quantum dynamics of liquid solutions. This requires
one to focus on quantities that are used to probe the structure and dynamics of
liquid solutions and leads to consideration of two primary problems. The first
problem requires a new approach for calculating the vibrational energy
relaxation rate constants in liquids. These rate constants are very sensitive to
quantum dynamics and are important for understanding solute-solvent
interactions. The second major component of the research deals with the
calculation of optical response functions, which provide a means for probing
solvation dynamics. To computationally determine vibrational energy relaxation
rates a new method, based on linear response theory, is being developed and
applied. The advantage of this method is it bypasses the need for calculating
the high-frequency part of the Fourier transform of the force-force correlation
function. The research employs an idealized model consisting of two-level
chromophores, an anharmonic nonpolar solvent, solute-solvent interactions that
vary with the chromophore electronic state and a dipolar interaction between the
field and matter. A complementary senior-level undergraduate training program in
modern computational chemistry is included that aims to bring together
computational scientists from disparate disciplines and foster cross-
departmental collaborations. Applications of this method are applied to
successively more complex dimer/solvent systems and progress from neutral
homonuclear diatomics to neutral heteronuclear diatomics and finally to charged
homonuclear diatomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of ultrafast lasers has
led to a multitude of novel techniques that enable the direct interrogation of
solvation dynamics. Such experiments effectively allow one to experimentally
unlock mechanisms occurring at the femtosecond time scale and should provide a
new means for understanding biologically relevant processes. However, access to
this information comes in the form of photon echoes, nature's analogy to the
Morse code, and necessitates new theoretical techniques for correctly
determining what the encoded echoes are telling us. The goal of this research is
to develop and apply a new theoretical approach that decodes the information
contained in the outgoing light. Initial applications are on a class of
dimer/solvent systems for which there is a good amount of experimental data and
which systematically contain all the electrostatic complications that are
present in nonpolar solutions containing larger molecules. A senior level
undergraduate course is being developed which will provide future graduate
students with tools required for theoretical physical chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;