* 0306408
* Run-time and Design-time Exploration of Field-level Energy, Space, Time and Fidelity Trade-offs in Distributed Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Mani Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 05/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

Cheap and tiny processors, radios, sensors, and actuators resulting from
progress in microelectronics are leading to a new class of embedded systems,
often called Wireless Sensor Networks, that consist of a large number of
individual nodes that are physically-coupled, energy-constrained, spatially-
distributed (often in an ad hoc fashion), and wirelessly-networked. Such systems
provide information about the physical environment at an unprecedented level of
detail, and to manipulate the physical environment based on this information, in
diverse applications such as security and surveillance, monitoring of wildlife
habitats, smart sensor-instrumented environments, and condition-based
maintenance of complex systems. This research involves the study of techniques
to systematically design, optimize, and manage Wireless Sensor Networks so as to
meet applications requirements such as how long the system should last, what
space should it cover, and how accurately and how rapidly should it sense the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless Sensor Networks are autonomous,
self-configuring, and adaptive distributed systems that perform collaborative
computation among energy-constrained nodes to produce the desired information
about the physical world. The study is developing design-time resource
allocation and run-time resource management methods for such systems while
exploiting the inter-play of energy, space, time, and accuracy dimensions that
underlies the notion of quality of service in these systems. The focus is on
trade-offs that manifest themselves at the level of the entire "sensor field' as
opposed to the individual sensor nodes. This study is important both for
understanding the fundamental performance limits of wireless sensor networks, as
well as for developing practical methods to systematically deploy and operate
sensor networks for specific applications.&lt;br/&gt;