* 0306600
* Differential Equations in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Weiyang Qiu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 834,804.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0306600&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Shing-Tung Yau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to bring together
ideas from the subject of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations,
differential geometry and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry to study questions raised
in general&lt;br/&gt;relativity and string theory. Not only many questions
in&lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics should be answered, but also a
coherent&lt;br/&gt;picture in the previous unrelated subjects in mathematics
should&lt;br/&gt;be constructed. The motivation to understand black
hole&lt;br/&gt;formation has already led active research in minimal
surfaces,&lt;br/&gt;inverse mean flow and various global nonlinear
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations. They should also guide numerical relativities
to do&lt;br/&gt;precise calculations. Our recent work on quasilocal
energy&lt;br/&gt;should provide a way to understand the structure of
Einstein&lt;br/&gt;equation when the gravity field is strong. The Einstein
equation&lt;br/&gt;is much related to the Ricci flow which was pioneered
by&lt;br/&gt;Hamilton. Some new ideas were obtained by Perelman by looking
at&lt;br/&gt;the entropy that come from physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By deeper
understanding the underlining equation, we should&lt;br/&gt;understand topology
of three dimensional manifolds. The desire&lt;br/&gt;to understand mirror
symmetrics and calculation of instantons has&lt;br/&gt;led to important
discovery in algebraic geometry. We expect that&lt;br/&gt;analytic aspects of
mirror symmetry will bring geometers to study&lt;br/&gt;special Lagrangian
surfaces in Calabi-Yau manifolds. It will be&lt;br/&gt;an important contribution
to both differential geometry and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical physics. Both existence
theorems for special&lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian and the detail structure of family of
such manifolds&lt;br/&gt;will head to deeper understanding of geometric
structures on&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. The ultimate grand unification of mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;physic led by geometry is
exciting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;