* 0306215
* Aspects of Discrete Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Gabor Herman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 229,631.00

Herman&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops new theoretical
results&lt;br/&gt;(uniqueness, existence, and complexity theories) in
discrete&lt;br/&gt;tomography), new reconstruction methods (for the case
of&lt;br/&gt;absorption and for label distributions), and
applications&lt;br/&gt;(neutron tomography). To obtain these results, methods
of&lt;br/&gt;discrete mathematics, probability theory, and computer
science&lt;br/&gt;are applied, including modeling and simulation studies
by&lt;br/&gt;computers. The new problems that the investigator studies
are:&lt;br/&gt;(a) discrete tomography with absorption; (b) estimation of
the&lt;br/&gt;parameters of Gibbs priors to be used in binary tomography;
(c)&lt;br/&gt;direct recovery of label distributions from projection data;
and&lt;br/&gt;(d) mathematical problems of reconstruction in
neutron&lt;br/&gt;tomography.&lt;br/&gt; Roughly speaking, tomography deals with
the problems of&lt;br/&gt;recognizing an object from a limited number of views
of it, and&lt;br/&gt;of discriminating between objects from a limited number of
views&lt;br/&gt;of them. Mathematically, the idea is to reconstruct
a&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional function that describes, having only a
few&lt;br/&gt;lower-dimensional samples -- projections -- of the
function.&lt;br/&gt;Discrete tomography deals with a special type of
tomographic&lt;br/&gt;inverse problem in which the function to be reconstructed
from&lt;br/&gt;its projections is discrete (i.e., has only a few elements in
its&lt;br/&gt;range of values). In the special case when the function is
binary&lt;br/&gt;(only two possible values), prior information can be used
to&lt;br/&gt;recover it from very few (e.g., only 2 or 3)
projections.&lt;br/&gt;Discrete tomography has some fascinating applications,
for&lt;br/&gt;example, in medicine, molecular biology, electron
microscopy,&lt;br/&gt;security, and nondestructive testing. In this project
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator studies problems in discrete tomography,
develops&lt;br/&gt;new methods to reconstruct functions, and considers
applications&lt;br/&gt;in neutron tomography. Other broad impacts include
the&lt;br/&gt;involvement of students in the work of the project,
an&lt;br/&gt;international collaboration with a faculty associate in
Hungary&lt;br/&gt;and jointly run research seminar at CUNY, and a workshop on
the&lt;br/&gt;applications of discrete tomography.&lt;br/&gt;