* 0306055
* Surface Initiated Polymerization from Nanoparticles: Polymer Brushes on Nanoparticles as Polymeric Building Blocks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Timothy Patten, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Intellectual Merit. With increased interest in nanoscale phenomena has arisen a
need to understand how to synthesize and assemble the building blocks of
nanoscale materials. There is much information on the synthesis of inorganic
nanomaterials, such as semiconductor or magnetic nanoparticles, and there is
much information on the synthesis of organic macromolecules that exhibit
nanoscale features, such as block copolymer microphase separation domains. A
significant challenge now is to create new nanosized building blocks that merge
the useful optical and magnetic properties of inorganic nanomaterials with the
versatile functionality, reactivity, self-assembly, and mechanical properties of
organic nanomaterials. The objective of the proposed research is the synthesis
of polymer / nanoparticle building blocks that could be used to assemble more
complex materials. The specific aims of this proposal are (1) to develop
initiator attachment strategies that are applicable to nanoparticles with
photoluminescent and magnetic properties, such as CdSe and g-Fe2O3; (2) to
further the science of brush synthesis including an in depth look at the
polymerization of acrylates from nanoparticle initiators and the grafting of
block copolymers from nanoparticle surfaces; and (3) to develop methods to graft
reactive monomers from nanoparticle surfaces which can then be used to assemble
patterns of nanoparticles on complementary functionalized surfaces or to build
complex assemblies of nanoparticles.

Broader Impact. This research will contribute to knowledge about how to prepare
and assemble matter on the nanometer scale. Polymer layers will be grown from
the exterior of nanoparticles that exhibit interesting magnetic and optical
properties, and then the chemical functionality of the polymer will be used to
interact the nanoparticles selectively with patterned surfaces and with other
nanoparticles. Such syntheses and assembly processes could be used as tools to
construct devices with sizes ranging from tens of nanometers to microns. The
resulting materials could also be used as components of biological and chemical
sensors, materials for flexible and energy efficient displays, or magnetic
resonance and optical imaging agents.

This research project will provide training and career advancement for graduate
and undergraduate students in the important areas of polymer science and
nanoscience, and the students will gain important research skills. The PI and
student participants in this project will also work to promote learning about
polymer / materials science at the high school level through involvement in the
COSMOS Program at UC Davis. During one of the summers of the project period, the
PI will design and teach a short course entitled "Polymers and Everyday Things"
to be offered to the participating high school students. Participating graduate
students will help out with some of the laboratory exercises and field trips. It
is hoped that an early, stimulating experience with polymer / materials science
will encourage more students to pursue studying science (and materials science)
when they attend college.