* 0306154
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Sanjay Sane, Sane, Sanjay P
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Investigating the mechanosensory
properties of insect antenna using neurophysiology and information theory."
Insect antennae detect mechanical stimuli from their environment via a suite of
mechanosensors spanning their basal antennal segments. Integrating techniques
from neurophysiology, information theory and behavior, this research is
characterizing the encoding properties of antennal mechanosensors and studying
how insects process this information to differentiate between the reafferent and
exafferent components of their stimulus environment.