* 0306243
* Modeling Recombination
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Elizabeth Housworth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,143.00

Proposal: DMS-0306243&lt;br/&gt;PI: Elizabeth A. Housworth&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Modeling recombination&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recombination plays a vital role in the proper disjunction
of chromosomes in meiosis and is essential to the production of viable gametes.
Many organisms use a strategy called interference to regulate the distribution
of crossovers among all recombination events that include simple gene
conversions (non-crossovers) as well as crossovers.&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence
suggests that the organisms that also use recombination to pair their
chromosomes early in meiosis have an additional set of crossovers that is not
subject to interference. The investigator develops the statistical theory to
test this two-pathway hypothesis by extending previous techniques used to model
the distribution of crossovers subject to interference. The investigator
analyzes data from a variety of organisms to determine if the two-pathway model
provides a better fit than previous models to recombination data from organisms
that use recombination to pair their chromosomes during meiosis. Multivariate
optimization techniques contribute to the development of tools for determining
the design of experiments to test this hypothesis and to obtain sharp estimates
of the model parameters. The investigator explores the advantages of using the
two-pathway hypothesis in gene mapping methods by comparing its performance with
simulated data to that of methods using no-interference and interference-only
models of recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A basic understanding of
recombination is important for understanding certain causes of infertility,
miscarriages, and birth defects in humans. For instance, trisomy is related to
certain exchange configurations on the chromosomes during meiosis being
susceptible to&lt;br/&gt;missegregation (for example, an egg receives an extra
copy of chromosome 21 and a child resulting from the fertilization of this egg
has 3 copies, two from its mother and one from its father, leading to Down
syndrome). Trisomy is involved in up to 25% of miscarriages in addition to birth
defects. Furthermore, mathematical models for the distribution of exchanges
between maternal and paternal chromosomes in meiosis provide the fundamental
basis for locating genes, including those that are linked to genetic diseases.
Including the most appropriate models for these exchanges in gene mapping
algorithms improves their efficiency without increasing the error rate they
claim. If the proposed model proves to fit data the best, its inclusion in gene
mapping algorithms will become increasingly important due to the use of Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms that provide a large number of markers for finding
genes associated with complex disease traits. Additionally, the proposed
research intimately connects the statistical methods to a current, empirically
testable, biological hypothesis about recombination. The results will be
disseminated to both the statistical and biological communities and the
activities supported by this grant will include training graduate students in
this interdisciplinary area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;