* 0306092
* ITWF:  Creating Pathways to IT Careers Through High School Career and Technical Education Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Paula Kohler, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 08/31/2008
* USD 749,520.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Information Technology Workforce (ITWF) -
FY03&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: EIA-0306092&lt;br/&gt;Investigator: Paula
Kohler and Edward Applegate&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Western Michigan
University&lt;br/&gt;(a) Title: Creating Pathways to IT Careers through High
School Career and Technical Education Programs &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Western
Michigan University has received an ITWF award in support of its collaborative
study, Creating Pathways to IT Careers. This research partnership between
Western Michigan University (WMU), the Illinois State Board of Education (ISBE),
and a Research-to-Practice Team of business and practitioner stakeholders
proposes to determine factors that influence enrollment, completion, and
employment experiences of high school females in Career and Technical Education-
Information Technology (CTE-IT) programs. Using population data collected by the
Illinois State Board of Education regarding enrollment in secondary and
postsecondary education and post-school employment, the project will investigate
preparation for IT careers in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a)
counselor and teacher support strategies provided in high schools to recruit and
retain students in CTE-IT programs;&lt;br/&gt;(b) student and school
characteristics that influence CTE-IT program enrollment, school-directed work
experience, and program completion; and&lt;br/&gt;(c) the influence of student
and environmental characteristics and support strategies on post-secondary
enrollment in IT education programs and employment. Data for nine school years,
1996 through 2004, will be analyzed through cross-sectional (year-by-year)
analyses and over-lapping four-year longitudinal panels. Across all studies,
experiences of females will be compared with those of males; experiences of
students from various ethnicities and with disabilities will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Research-to-Practice (RTP) Team consisting
of business and practitioner stakeholders will evaluate and interpret findings,
develop dissemination strategies, and disseminate project results. Dissemination
products will be designed to promote extensive use of practices that encourage
successful recruitment, preparation, and inclusion of women and under-
represented minorities in high-skill information technology jobs to enhance the
lives and opportunities of these individuals and to help resolve the serious
national shortage of workers in the IT field. &lt;br/&gt;