* 0307794
* Participant Funding: Applied Inverse Problems - Theoretical and Computational Aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Joyce McLaughlin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 12/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

Abstract: NSF Proposal DMS-0307794

Title: Participant Funding: Applied Inverse Problems - Theoretical and
Computational Aspects

PI: Joyce R McLaughlin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

This award is for funding, primarily for junior participants, for the
conference, Applied Inverse Problems: Theoretical and Computational Aspects,
that will be held at the UCLA Lake Arrowhead Conference Center from May 18-23,
2003. Inverse problems is a growing active research area. The conference will be
on all aspects of inverse problem solutions including theoretical, modeling and
computational aspects. A wide range of applications will be represented
including life science mathematical modeling, radar, inverse scattering,
wavelets, baysian statistical methods, time reversal problems, x-ray tomography,
optical tomography, geophysical imaging, astrophysical imaging and level set
methods.

A prevalent feature of inverse problems is that the measured data is indirectly
related to the sought after solution. Applications include medical diagnostics,
medical imaging, advanced materials, sensing of remote topographies, biological
modeling as in protein folding or molecular motor modeling, imaging in
astrophysics, geophysical modeling as in oil prospecting or fault zone
identification, etc. The response to this Lake Arrowhead conference as been very
enthusiastic. A large number of leaders in the field will be active participants
and the conference will also emphasize career development of junior researchers.
We expect 60-70 researchers in their early career out of an expected total of
160 attendees. All participants will be active researchers and will have an
opportunity to give a talk on their own work.

