* 0307933
* Planetary Collisions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Erik Asphaug, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 204,132.00

AST 0307933 Canup

The objective of this project is to develop a better understanding of the
behavior of large, gravity-dominated collisions in solar system formation and
evolution. During the final stages of planet formation, collisions between
objects 1000's of kilometers in radius were likely common. It was during this
late stage that the characteristics of the terrestrial planets (e.g. spin rate,
obliquity) were determined by the specifics of the last few large, stochastic
impacts a planet experienced. One such giant impact is believed responsible for
the origin of the Moon, whose well-known influence on the Earth's obliquity
stability continues to affect our planet's habitability even today. In the outer
solar system, Pluto and its massive satellite, Charon, are thought to have
resulted from a similar type of large impact. This project utilizes a powerful
numerical method known as smooth particle hydrodynamics, or SPH, to simulate
planet-scale impacts. Proposed work for the next cycle includes three main
tasks. In Task 1 a generalized survey of impact outcomes in planet-scale
collisions between rocky objects will be completed. A specific motivation is to
provide quantitative estimates on debris production during impacts believed
typical of late stage planet accretion, a process that may have influenced the
final spin and orbital state of the terrestrial planets. Task 2 involves
modeling the formation of the Pluto-Charon system. Although an impact origin of
this system has been favored for some time, quantitative simulations to
establish the viability of this mechanism have only very recently begun to be
performed. Determining the type of impact necessary to yield Pluto-Charon and
modeling the formation conditions for this system are of critical importance,
not only for the history and physical/chemical evolution of these objects, but
also for the constraints such studies may provide on the population of objects
that exist(ed) in this vicinity of the solar system. Task 3 examines two other
potentially impact-generated features: the recently discovered KBO binaries and
Mercury.

The overall importance of the Pluto-Charon system and the accompanying
population of Kuiper Belt Objects (KBO's) is highlighted by the National
Research Council's Decadal Survey for Planetary Science, which ranked the study
of these objects as a top priority for planetary exploration, in part because of
interest in giant impacts. Planet-scale impacts-in particular the impact
believed to have led to the formation of our planet and its Moon-are topics that
generate tremendous public and educational interest. Evidence of this includes
recent features on the research supported here in Time, Astronomy, Scientific
American, and CNN Live. The investigators will actively and frequently
participate in educational and outreach projects that allow for the concepts
studied here to be disseminated to the public. A past example is a website from
which animations of lunar forming impact simulations from could be downloaded by
the public (www.swri.org/press/impact.htm). Other examples of recent outreach
activities include Dr. Canup's participation in the Discover channel's "If there
were no Moon" (which is rebroadcast on a regular basis) and the series for
public television, "What's up in the Universe". Dr. Canup will be serving as a
scientific advisor to the American Museum of Natural History in New York in the
development of a new show, "Collisions in Cosmic Evolution", in which results of
our impact studies performed here will be directly utilized . Dr. Canup hopes
that by participating in such projects she can also provide a positive role
model for young women and girls interested in science. ***

