* 0307409
* A Complete Census of Seyferts and Obscured AGN from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Strauss, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2007
* USD 325,507.00

AST-0307409&lt;br/&gt;Strauss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will carry out
a complete census of low-luminosity and unusual Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN), in
order to quantify the full populations of these objects and to understand the
evolution of super-massive black holes as it relates to the evolution of the
galaxies in which they reside. Assembling various catalogs based on the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, the PI will determine the faint end of the AGN luminosity
function (which is absolutely crucial for understanding the dramatic change in
the observed number density of luminous quasars as a function of redshift),
explore the relationships between AGN and their host galaxies and their
environment, and quantify the physical nature of obscured and reddened AGN.
Astronomers believe that AGN are powered by accretion disks, and quasar emission
line profiles are an important probe of accretion physics: this research will
also address the puzzle of why only a small subset shows double-peaked emission
lines. Furthermore, the PI will study those objects with featureless spectra,
and thus test models for AGN unification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
continue his record of engaging students from high school to graduate school in
the research, which will also be incorporated into undergraduate and public
lectures. His exciting results will be shown at Princeton's student center on
their electronic wallpaper, and via the astro-bulletin, a large video display at
the Hall of the Universe in the Rose Center for Earth and Space Science
(American Museum of Natural History).&lt;br/&gt;