* 0307712
* Relational Shape Matching for Registration and Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Anand Rangarajan, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 221,711.00

Proposal #: 0307712 Title: Relational Shape Matching for Registration and
Recognition PI: Rangarajan, Anand University of Florida

Shape matching is an important subfield of computer vision and has a host of
applications in object recognition, non-rigid registration in medical imaging,
and indexing in image databases. In medical imaging for example, a fundamental
advance in shape matching will have important ramifications for the automated
segmentation and classification of anatomical structures. In object recognition,
advances in shape matching will be enormously useful in constructing new
distance measures that can be used for indexing and retrieval.

Shape matching involves establishing correspondences between homologous
structures in different objects. While the correspondence problem can be avoided
if intensity-based approaches are used, these methods often rely on the
brightness constancy assumption that is often invalid. Feature-based approaches
to shape matching have to solve the correspondence problem in situations where
there are significant global and local shape differences between the objects
being compared. In non-rigid registration, a shape matching approach is required
to objects into register. In this work, a relational shape matching approach for
simultaneously solving for correspondence and non-rigid deformations is
proposed. In contrast to most previous work, the shape matching objective
function is set up as a pairwise correspondence and deformation problem. The
template consists of a point-set and a known topology that can easily
accommodate curves and surfaces. In sharp contrast to previous graph matching
approaches, the data is represented as an unstructured point-set. While the
resulting optimization problem may appear formidable, efficient algorithms can
be designed based on recent and fundamental advances in Bayesian networks. The
Bayesian network approach recasts the pairwise correspondence as a joint
probability and this results in an alternating algorithm that iteratively
updates joint probabilities and deformations. Assuming that efficient algorithms
can be designed based on this approach, both non-rigid registration and object
recognition applications can be tackled using the same framework and algorithm.
Validation and evaluation of these algorithms will be done using medical imaging
datasets. Comparisons will also be undertaken against our own previous NSF-
funded non-rigid point matching (TPS-RPM) algorithms.

Despite mostly being confined to computer vision, shape matching has the
potential to reach a much broader audience with computer graphics and
theoretical physics being two concrete examples. In computer graphics, there is
burgeoning interest in matching point clouds and more structured representations
such as surfaces. While theoretical physics seems like an unlikely candidate at
first glance, there is a deep connection between the shape matching objective
functions proposed here and by many other vision researchers and general
relativity; evidence of this connection can be seen in the recent work of Julian
Barbour, The End of Time, Oxford Univ. Press, 2000 (Chapter 11). These
connections are just beginning to be noticed and come as a surprise to both
vision and theoretical physics researchers. As shape matching in computer vision
continues to make incremental (and hopefully inexorable) progress in both
frameworks and efficient algorithms, it is hoped that these deep connections
will result in unexpected and productive cross-fertilizations.

