* 0307466
* An Infrared Study of Comet Mineralogy and Temporal Activity
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Harker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 276,681.00

AST 0307466&lt;br/&gt;Woodward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest
challenges in modern astrophysics is to understand the conditions in
protoplanetary disks during the epoch of planetesimal formation and the
aggregation of planets. Comet nuclei are the frozen reservoirs of dust and ices
from the early solar nebula. During a perihelion passage, solar irradiation
enhances the production rate of volatile gases and creates a coma which
enshrouds the nucleus. Entrained within the coma gases are dust grains lifted
from the nucleus by the escaping gas. The dust grains may be released both from
the nuclear surface and from deeper layers of the nucleus via jets. Surface dust
grains may posses different properties from those particles dredged up from the
interior of the comet due to the long term exposure of surface material to
particle bombardment, irradiation, and to collisional evolution of the parent
body. The primary research objective for this project lead by Dr. Charles
Woodward, University of Minnesota, is to determine the grain properties of the
early solar nebula by exploring the differences in grain properties between a)
long period comets formed near Jupiter (and subsequently scattered into the Oort
cloud by Jupiter), and b) short period comets formed at greater heliocentric
distances (in the Kuiper Belt). In this project, appropriately bright comets
will be observed at multiple epochs to ascertain whether the silicate
mineralogy, relative mineral abundance, and particle size distribution of the
ablated dust varies as a function of heliocentric distance. Special attention
will be given to comets targeted for encounter with spacecraft. Comets selected
for study include 2P/Encke, 9P/Tempel 1, 81P/Wild 2, as well as newly discovered
comet C/2001 Q4 NEAT. The broad scientific objective is to advance the
understanding of general comet properties and the evolution of small icy bodies
in our solar system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy, in part because of its
stunning imagery, provides a natural gateway for engaging&lt;br/&gt;the public
in scientific discussions and debates. Results of this cometary research program
will be disseminated to the general public through a number of education and
public outreach (EPO) activities. In addition, the research program creates an
environment for student mentoring activities in experimental techniques and
observational astrophysics. This participation often contributes to senior
theses and helps to impart to aspiring astronomers (and/or students with
scientific/technical&lt;br/&gt;career objectives) observational and technical
expertise, computer programming skills, and&lt;br/&gt;analysis methodology.
Ph.D. dissertations should result from data analysis and modeling activities
associated with this program.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;