* 0307317
* Symposium on Supply Chain Management in Process Industries, Minneapolis, MN, Fall 2003
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Saif Benjaafar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

This grant is to organize a Symposium on Supply Chain Management in the Process
Industry. The symposium will be held over two days in Fall 2003 on the campus of
the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. The symposium is being co-sponsored
by the University Minnesota Center for Supply Chain Research and Honeywell
Corporation. The symposium will bring together academics with backgrounds in
Industrial Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Operations Management, and
Operations Research. It will also involve leading companies in the process
industry and leading supply chain solution providers. The objective of the
workshop is to expose researchers to problems specific to the process industry,
survey state of the art in research and practice, identify relevant research
problems, and formulate a possible research agenda. A second objective of the
symposium is to encourage greater collaboration among academics from different
backgrounds and between academics and industry. A third objective is to allow
knowledge sharing between various process industries, such as the chemical, food
processing, and pharmaceutical industries. The symposium will have a mixed
format of plenary speakers, invited and contributed talks, and panel
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A report based on presentations and panel
discussions will be submitted to NSF and posted on the symposium web site.
Selected papers from the symposium to are expected to form the basis of an
edited book on supply chain in the process industry.