* 0307416
* Molecular Hydrogen Emission from the Disks of T Tauri Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Joel Kastner, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 303,851.00

AST 0307416&lt;br/&gt;PI Weintraub&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to
conduct a survey of the young T Tauri-type stars to ascertain whether evidence
exists for the continued presence of their circumstellar disks at times beyond
the epoch when the signatures of those disks as seen in submillimeter thermal
emission and millimeter line emission have disappeared. Specifically, the
researchers are carrying out an infrared survey of molecular hydrogen using very
sensitive, high spectral resolution spectrometers primarily on the Gemini South
telescope and the United Kingdom Infrared Telescope. Results from several years
of preliminary work demonstrate the feasibility of detecting line emission from
unshocked hydrogen around T Tauri stars. Previous results are consistent with
the expected brightnesses of hydrogen emission and from the line shapes, it is
shown definitively for one star and as likely for other stars, that the line
emission is from gas in the middle layers of disks and from distances of 10 to
30 Astronomical Units (the earth-Sun distance) from the stars. A survey of
hydrogen line emission from most of the T Tauri stars in several star forming
regions will make an important contribution to developing a clearer
understanding as to whether disks around Sun-like pre-main-sequence stars
typically disperse prior to planet building or evolve toward planetesimals and
planets within the first 10 million years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
All data will be made available to the public in the form of an on-line,
searchable database of reduced, self-calibrated spectra. Also included on this
project internet site will be web pages devoted to education and public
outreach, including explanatory material concerning the role of spectroscopy in
understanding the processes of star and planet formation. The Principle
Investigator is actively engaged in bringing astronomy to teachers and students
in the metropolitan Nashville area. He is a partner in a new program, "Exploring
our Solar Neighborhood," which will bring astronomy content to teachers and
students through teacher training workshops and student instruction. As part of
these programs, which include a weeklong Summer Institute for 15 teachers and
follow-up activities during the summer and school year with their students, the
Principle Investigator will teach about the planets and about the processes by
which planets form, thus bringing cutting edge knowledge and research from this
program directly to teachers and potential future scientists. This regularly
includes undergraduate students, especially those in a unique undergraduate
major at Vanderbilt University called the Communication of Science and
Technology, in the research activities of this project.&lt;br/&gt;