* 0307894
* The Lick Observatory Supernova Search, and Detailed Studies of Nearby Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Alexei Filippenko, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2006
* USD 356,823.00



AST-0307894 Filippenko Supernovae (SN) represent the final, explosive stage in
the evolution of certain varieties of stars, and because they influence a wide
range of other phenomena from star formation to cosmic rays, they are clearly
among the most interesting and important constituents of the Universe. This
project will continue the efforts of a strong and productive team, working to
improve the understanding of SN progenitor stars, explosion mechanisms, and
nucleosynthetic products, mostly via observations, but with some theoretical
modeling via informal collaborations. The results will have broad implications
for topics as diverse as the chemical evolution of galaxies, the birthrate of
pulsars, the masses of black holes, the nature of gamma-ray bursts, and
cosmology. The world's most successful search for supernovae in nearby galaxies
will continue, using the robotic imaging telescope (KAIT) at Lick Observatory,
enabling special attention to be paid to the generally neglected, very early
stages of SN development. Spectropolarimetry will for the first time be applied
to a large number of SN, revealing shapes and internal structures.

The results will reach a broad and diverse audience through the PI's very
extensive popular articles and lectures. The PI will continue his exemplary
commitment to public outreach through radio, television, newspaper and magazine
interviews, and educational videos and TV documentaries. There will also be
updates of his introductory astronomy course, its video version (thorough The
Teaching Company), and his co-authored textbook. Expect to see continued heavy
involvement of graduate, undergraduate, and increasingly high school, students
in this exciting, forefront research, with significant participation by members
of generally under-represented groups.