* 0307642
* Measurements of Magnetic Field Strengths in the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Thomas Troland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 10/31/2008
* USD 175,318.00

AST 0307642&lt;br/&gt;Troland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Thomas Troland, at the
University of Kentucky, will carry out an observational program to determine
magnetic field strengths in our Galaxy and slightly beyond. Using the radio
frequency Zeeman effect, Dr. Troland and collaborators will measure field
strengths in the diffuse neutral hydrogen (HI) gas, in the interclump medium of
giant molecular clouds (GMCs), in molecular cores, and in very dense post-shock
regions associated with massive star formation. These measurements will cover a
wide density range, and they will help answer a number of important questions.
For example, what is the range of Alfvenic Mach numbers in the diffuse
interstellar medium (ISM)? How do field strengths scale with gas density among
the two main components of the diffuse gas? How strong is the magnetic field in
high velocity clouds (HVCs)? Are static fields strong enough to provide long
term support to GMCs given recent theoretical studies suggesting magneto-
hydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence is short-lived? Are static fields strong enough to
provide support for molecular cores, and how does the field strength scale with
gas density within them? What is the role of magnetic fields in the post-shock
outflow regions probed by H2O masers, and how coherent are these fields among
maser spots? In many cases, answers to these questions are emerging, but data
are still so sparse that it is impossible to draw well-founded
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this program, Dr. Troland will
make use of established radio astronomy instruments as well as new ones. The
most prominent new instrument is the Green Bank Telescope (GBT). Expressly
designed for ultra-low sidelobe response, this telescope should have a profound
effect upon Zeeman effect studies of the magnetic field. Dr. Troland will also
use the Arecibo telescope and possibly the IRAM 30m telescope as a part of this
program. New instrumental capabilities are complemented by growing theoretical
capabilities for numerical simulation of MHD. Advances on both the observational
and theoretical fronts in the next few years are likely to significantly
increase our understanding of interstellar magnetic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will involve graduate
education at the University of Kentucky. It will also involve collaboration with
a new regional colleague (and former graduate student) Dr. Anuj Sarma of Eastern
Kentucky University. EKU is an undergraduate institution with an interest in
bringing research experiences to its students. Sarma's participation in the
research program will not only be important for the science output, it will also
help him establish a research program at his own institution.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;