* 0307015
* Symposium: South Dakota Plant Physiology/Plant Biochemistry Symposium: From Plants to Genes and Back Again, Summer 2003, in Brookings, South Dakota
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Thomas Schumacher, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal requests partial financial support in the amount of $10,000 for
the symposium entitled "South Dakota Plant Physiology/Plant Biochemistry
Symposium: From Plants to Genes and Back Again" to be held at South Dakota State
University. The symposium is organized by the committee for the South Dakota
Robert H and Katherine Burris Distinguished Lecture Series in Plant
Biochemistry. The symposium will be held at South Dakota State University in
Brookings SD from the 6th to the 8th of August 2003. Topics for the
presentations will include metabolism, abiotic/biotic stress, development, and
signal transduction. The intellectual merit of this symposium is significant. At
other meetings, data and discussions are presented in concurrent sessions. This
symposium has been designed to allow for integration of knowledge generated in
all four areas. There will be no concurrent sessions. It is believed that the
ability to view the whole picture will greatly improve our chances of
understanding the biological issues involved in diseases, stress conditions and
developmental problems. In terms of a broader impact, we believe that a more
integrated plant biology approach will facilitate solutions that diminish crop
loss, enhance the quality of the food supply and create new markets. Another
intellectual merit to this symposium will be the analysis of the role of
genomics in understanding plant biology. Leaders in the various fields of plant
biology have been invited to discuss to the extent to which whole plant biology
questions have been resolved with the application of the various genomic and/or
proteomic approaches. It is our aim to determine the impact of results from the
various genome sequencing projects on advancement of plant physiology and
biochemistry. We believe that the limited symposium size will allow for vigorous
discussion among scientists in different fields of plant biology who are
utilizing the various genomic technologies. The interdisciplinary nature of the
symposium will also allow us to discuss future directions for plant biology in
the post-genomic era. One of the broader impacts of this symposium will be the
involvement of young scientists by providing them the opportunity to present
their research and, most importantly, including them in the critical discussions
that will determine the directions in which plant biology should proceed.