* 0307107
* US-Spain Cooperative Research:  Polymers Processed with Cyclodextrin Inclusion Compounds: Application to Isotactic Polypropylene Blends and Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* C. Maurice Balik, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 30,380.00

0307107 Tonelli

This three-year award for US-Spanish collaboration in polymer processing
involves Alan Tonelli and C. Maurice Balik of North Carolina State University
and Marian Gomez of the Institute of Science and Technology of Polymers in
Madrid, Spain. The objectives of the project are to explore systematically the
use of inclusion compounds as a way of enhancing the properties of isotactic
polypropylene(i-PP). They will determine the conditions under which cyclodextrin
inclusion compounds (CD-ICs) can be formed with i-PP and the elastomers used in
its blends, study the morphology and properties of i-PP after its coalescence
from its CD-IC, study the properties and morphology of intimate i-PP/elastomer
blends formed via coalescence from their common CD-IC crystals, and compare the
properties of i-PP/elastomer blends processed via the CD-IC route with materials
of identical composition but processed via traditional methods. The US
researchers bring to the collaboration expertise in the preparation of polymer
CD-ICs and characterizing them with NMR, FTIR, x-ray diffraction and thermal
analysis techniques. Their expertise also includes polymer morphology, sorption,
and diffusion of small molecules through polymers, and structure-property
relationships. This is complemented by the Spanish researcher's extensive
experience in the preparation and characterization of i-PP/elastomer blends and
composites. The results of the collaboration are expected to an improved
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the unique morphologies and
properties polymers might obtain after coalescence from their CD-ICs. The
broader impact of this research lie in the opportunity to produce new and
improved materials based on i-PP.