* 0307290
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  On Some Fundamental Issues in the Initial Boundary Value Problem of GR
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Luis Lehner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2008
* USD 14,923.00

0307290&lt;br/&gt;Lehner&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI, postdocs, and
graduate students from Louisiana State University in a collaboration with Helmut
Friedrich of the Albert Einstein Institute at the Max Planck Institute for
Gravitation Physics in Golm, Germany. One of the main goals of the collaboration
is to produce computational models that will be able to predict the
gravitational waves produced by strongly gravitating, highly dynamical sources,
such as black holes and binary pulsars. Prototype gravitational wave antennae
exist throughout the world, and the complexity of gravitational radiation
requires numerical methods to make interpretation of data from the detectors
possible. The numerical simulation of Einstein's equations will allow
researchers to probe deep into the theory and understand generic systems. The
computational expertise of the groups in the US and Germany, when combined, will
produce a robust simulation of the Einstein equations, which will be invaluable
in the detection and analysis of gravitational waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project also fulfills a training objective. The international project will allow
graduate and postdoctoral students involved to benefit from performing research
in another country. They will be exposed to an international collaborative
environment while also learning important new technical skills.&lt;br/&gt;