* 0307180
* FIBR: PLANNING- INTEGRATIVE STUDIES OF MUTATION BIOLOGY
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Charles Fenster, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher L. Greer
* 02/29/2004
* USD 35,187.00

Participants: Jon Agren, Joanne Chory, Charles Fenster (PI), Thomas Hansen,
Alexy Kondrashov, Stephen Mount, Matthew Rutter (coPI), Frank Shaw, Ruth Shaw,
Stephen Tonsor, Gunter Wagner, Detlef Weigel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spontaneous
mutations are the source of new genetic variants, and are the raw material of
evolutionary change. The outcomes of many evolutionary models depend upon the
rate and expression of mutations. Because mutation is infrequent, measuring
these parameters has been restricted to model organisms raised and assayed in
large numbers in laboratory conditions. However, understanding how mutations
interface with natural selection and other ecological features of the organism
requires explicitly quantifying mutation rates and their effects in the wild or
to specific environmental conditions that the organism is likely to encounter.
An accurate description of the properties of the mutation process will provide
important information about such topics as the rate of emergence of genetic
disease and their likely severity, and the potential for detrimental mutations
to lead to the decline and extinction of endangered species. Knowledge about the
ways in which specific types of mutation interface with the environment may
allow us to better use modern genetic techniques to improve crop performance or
identify genes that may be especially likely to play a role in disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This FIBR Planning Grant will facilitate a collaborative
project to investigate mutation properties on evolutionary processes in the
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. We are a group of researchers whose expertise
includes molecular and developmental genetics, theoretical genetics, and field-
based experimental approaches to the study of plant evolution. A. thaliana is
optimal for the study of mutational effects: it is the only genetic model
organism that does not move, is large enough to easily observe in the wild, and
widely distributed in natural populations. Thus, we can utilize predictive
evolutionary models, cutting-edge molecular tools, established mutation
accumulation lines, greenhouse and field experiments to connect alterations of
the genetic code caused by mutation with subsequent changes in survival,
reproductive success, and population-level evolutionary processes. The planning
grant will fund two meetings (in spring and fall of 2003) that will define in
detail the questions to be investigated. We will create a research plan that
addresses important and feasible evolutionary questions that link molecular
genetic and physiological information to the level of the whole organism.
Furthermore, we will identify and recruit other researchers who would enhance
the project. The outcome of these meetings and collaborations will be to prepare
and submit a preliminary FIBR proposal in 2003.&lt;br/&gt;