* 0307450
* Unlocking the Potential of Speckle Binary Stars for Stellar and Galactic Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* William Van Altena, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 234,341.00

AST 0307450&lt;br/&gt;Horch, Elliott
P.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the distances to
stars is about to experience an unprecedented improvement due to planned space-
based missions. These missions present broad opportunities to gain a better
understanding of stellar astrophysics. Close binary stars will play a
significant role here. To aid in the realization of this science, a systematic
program of ground-based photometric, astrometric, and spectroscopic observations
is underway. Reliable magnitude differences in multiple colors produce accurate
component luminosities and effective temperatures and is now being done by
speckle photometry. Complete spectroscopic information provides radial
velocities for conversion into mass fractions, and therefore individual masses
when combined with the visual orbit. This research enables robust comparisons
between the observations and stellar evolution models and important statistical
studies, such as a study of the chemical evolution of this region of the galaxy.
The observational data will lead to a much improved mass-luminosity relation,
including the ability to study such effects as metallicity and age, and it will
provide a list of astrophysically interesting binaries for future observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Noted astronomers are being brought to
the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth in the Southeastern Massachusetts
region for public lectures, and an elementary astrophysics course is being made
available in an online learning version. A second new course in imaging will
benefit science and engineering majors at the University and have a cross-
disciplinary aspect desirable to their future employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;