* 0307170
* RUI:  Novel Transport Properties in Strongly Interacting Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Barry Friedman, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports fundamental theoretical and computational research and
education on strongly interacting electrons confined to two-dimensions in
semiconductors. The PIs will study metal-insulator transitions (MITs). It is
generally believed that strong electronic correlations are responsible for both
the zero-field MIT in 2D semiconductors and the superconductor-insulator
transition in high-Tc superconductors, although there has been no consensus on
the microscopic mechanism for either transition. A central goal of this research
is to explore whether the zero-field MIT for interacting electrons in 2D has an
insightful topological description characterized by the Chern number. Quantum
Hall stripe phases will be studied using exact diagonalization and the density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG method). An objective is to obtain transport
properties using the Chern number description of the wavefunctions and the
generalized Thouless number method for many body systems. These calculations are
aimed to determine if there is a new liquid-crystal-like metallic phase, a
smectic phase, at low temperature. These calculations are intended to elucidate
the role played by disorder and quantum fluctuations and to give insight into
the nature of these strongly correlated electron systems. The PIs will also use
a new method based on the topological characterization of the wavefunction, to
study novel transport properties of double layer systems of strongly interacting
two dimensional electrons in order to better understand Coulomb drag transport,
and longitudinal and transverse spin transport in coupled two layer
semiconductor systems. Based on transport properties, the phase diagram and the
nature of quantum phase transitions in double layer systems will be determined.
This award supports educational experiences for students at California State
University Northridge and Sam Houston University enabling them to participate in
research. %%% This award supports fundamental theoretical and computational
research and education on strongly interacting electrons confined to two-
dimensions in semiconductors. The PIs will use an innovative theoretical
approach combined with computation to carry out research in three areas, where
the PIs will explore: 1.) whether electronic correlations can give rise to a
phase transition between metallic and insulating states as the amount of
disorder is increased; 2.) whether layered semiconductor systems can be combined
in such a way that the interactions between electrons between layers can be
manipulated to control the transport of spin and charge in three dimensional
semiconductor structures; 3.) the effect of disorder on quantum Hall states of
electrons confined to two-dimensions in a strong perpendicular magnetic field.
Each of these areas involves fundamental challenges to our understanding of
electronic states in materials and involves novel phenomena that arise as a
consequence of the correlations among electrons that result from strong
electron-electron interactions. This work also contributes to the intellectual
foundations for new generations of semiconductor devices. This award supports
educational experiences for students at California State University Northridge
and Sam Houston University enabling them to participate in research. ***

