* 0307934
* Helioseismic Probing of Solar Internal Structure and Dynamics Using GONG+ Observations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Edward Rhodes, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 309,088.00

AST 0307934&lt;br/&gt;PI Rhodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines a
recent breakthrough in the analysis of the high-degree solar oscillations with
unique observations available from the worldwide Global Oscillation Network
Group to advance our knowledge of the structure and dynamics of outermost layers
of the solar interior. This research is making improvements in the scientific
community's understanding of the structure and dynamics of the solar interior.
The group is carrying out tasks which will provide essential information about
the sun which could not be obtained without the use of the sun's high-degree
pulsations. This research will provide new knowledge of the stratification,
thermodynamics, and rotational shear flows in the upper turbulent convective
boundary layer and variations of these properties with
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will have a broad impact
in education, in infrastructure support, and in public outreach through the
training and support of both a graduate student and an undergraduate student in
observational helioseismology. The P.I. has an established track record of
training undergraduate and graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and high
school students and teachers in solar physics by having the students and
teachers join his research group both on the University of Southern California
campus and at the Mount Wilson Observatory. He also presents regular public
lectures, and serves on the Steering Committee of the Mellon Minority
Undergraduate Fellowship Program and has served as a faculty mentor for both
African-American and Hispanic students. Other members of the team from the
Stanford Solar Physics Group have a major on-going effort in Public Outreach
activities. The results from the research will be summarized on the Stanford MDI
Website. The research also facilitates the collaboration of three major
universities, the Technical University of Munich, the University of Southern
California, and Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;