* 0307720
* Numerical Simulations of Non-Equilibrium Plasmas and Their Spectra
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2006
* USD 360,153.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST-0307720&lt;br/&gt;Ferland&lt;br/&gt;Much of our
understanding of the chemical evolution of the cosmos comes from the analysis of
emission or absorption lines produced in interstellar gas. This project is a
simultaneous attack on several broad fronts extending from nearby HII regions to
luminous quasars with the common theme of developing the tools needed to chart
their chemical evolution. Much of this work centers on the development and
application of the large-scale plasma simulation code Cloudy. This is a multi-
pronged effort that combines observational astrophysics, numerical simulations,
and atomic and molecular physics. These steps are strongly interwoven and
progress from the Orion Nebula, to the giant extragalactic H II region 30
Doradus, and eventually to the intervening systems seen by their absorption
lines in spectra of distant quasars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting with a
complete model of the neutral hydrogen molecule, with a fully self-consistent
spectral simulation, the project will then extend to helium-like species, with
an important first application to the primordial helium abundance. With other
extensions, the result should be a fully self-consistent description of how gas
flows from its fully molecular state, eventually into regions where ions are
formed by photo-ionization, resulting in an almost parameter-free description of
the entire environment. The models will be tested against very deep optical
spectroscopy of the Orion Nebula and of 30 Doradus, the nearest giant
extragalactic HII region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spectral simulation code at
the heart of this project is used by other researchers in work that produces
over a hundred papers a year. Code development, with strong involvement by
students, including as parts of their doctoral theses, therefore has a very wide
impact on the community. Results from this project will also be used by the
researcher to assist with a scheme under development which will bring in-service
teachers from central Kentucky to his University campus for research briefings
and teaching strategy discussions.&lt;br/&gt;