* 0307263
* Galaxies and the Intergalactic Medium at z=1.5-3.5
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Charles Steidel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2007
* USD 481,644.00

&lt;br/&gt;AST-0307263&lt;br/&gt;Steidel&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises
several related observational programs to study the nature, large-scale
distribution, and evolution of galaxies and of the diffuse intergalactic medium,
and the relationship between the two, over the redshift range from 1.5 to 3.5,
where new observational techniques and facilities are providing the first
wholesale access to this almost unexplored era. The intent is to compile as
complete as possible a picture of the baryonic universe during the most
important era for galaxy and black hole growth. Using complementary galaxy
surveys and high quality quasar absorption line spectroscopy will reveal the
interactions between star-forming galaxies and intergalactic gas, and enable a
study of the environment dependence of absorption systems, AGN activity, and
galaxy formation and evolution. All sources of the ionizing photons that dictate
the properties of the diffuse intergalactic medium will be detected and
quantified. Deep optical and near-infrared spectroscopy will establish physical
conditions and trends amongst the galaxy population. Some of the observed fields
will be supplemented by unique information on the intergalactic medium in the
same cosmic volumes, using multiple quasar lines of sight. In other fields,
publicly available multi-wavelength and space-based data will be combined with
the new observations to study the connection between galaxies and active
galactic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental statistical information on
early galaxies and the intergalactic medium obtained by this project will be
useful to researchers in many sub-fields of astronomy, and all of the results
and data will be made available to the community. An interest in the history of
the Universe comes naturally to most people and can spark discussion between
scientists and even the most science-phobic lay person. The PI's recent
MacArthur fellowship provides an unusual opportunity to reach a larger audience
through the resultant increased visibility, and there should be many chances to
communicate the excitement of science and the scientific enterprise to
nonscientists.&lt;br/&gt;