* 0307382
* Experimental Studies at Ultralow Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Hans Bozler, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 465,000.00

This work focuses on two problems in the properties of low temperature quantum
fluids and solids: the two dimensional ground state of thin films of He-3, and
the superfluid state of highly disordered He-3 contained in aerogel. These
problems are quite different, but share both the techniques of ultralow
temperature refrigeration and the use of SQUIDs for wide band NMR. They also
deal directly with the&lt;br/&gt;nature of phase transitions in these systems.
In the case of He-3 films, the examination of the nature of ordering by two-
dimensional He-3 in very low fields will demand an improved substrate, and
directly&lt;br/&gt;address the controversial issue of the existence of a finite
temperature phase transition at zero field. Using SQUID NMR techniques allows
the study of these films over a wide range of fields including the zero field
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second effort will constrain the identification
of the superfluid order parameter in the presence of impurities by the use of
longitudinal resonance, a probe which was essential in the
original&lt;br/&gt;identification of the bulk superfluid phases. In this case,
SQUID NMR techniques will be used to look for the predicted longitudinal NMR
resonance. This experiment will test the standard picture where the "dirty"
superfluids are seen as merely suppressed versions of their "clean"
counterparts. Next-generation instrumentation of high performance SQUID systems
surpassing commercial state of the art and techniques for SQUID NMR and the
millidegree low temperature techniques produce an excellent vehicle for training
graduate students at the Ph.D. and Master's level, as well as undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project centers on interesting fundamental
physics that occurs at temperatures close to absolute zero. He-3 systems provide
excellent models for a wide range of physical behavior that has
analogs&lt;br/&gt;at more conventional temperatures. The advantage of the He-3
systems is their relative simplicity allowing them to be understood
theoretically to a much greater degree, and thus provide the connection between
theory and experiment that is needed to advance the understanding of condensed
matter systems. The first experiment involves the study of He-3 films that
behave as though they are two-dimensional. There are well known theories (within
a set of models where interactions are isotropic) that say these films cannot
order magnetically above absolute zero because of their two-dimensionality. On
the other hand, very small anisotropic distortions may have a highly
disproportionate effect resulting in magnetic phase transitions. An earlier
version of this study showed that this may be the case, however there remain
many questions that&lt;br/&gt;must be answered before this system can be fully
understood. The second project deals with the nature of the superfluid in liquid
He-3. This liquid is intrinsically the purest liquid known, but placing it
inside aerogel has the effect of introducing disorder (dirt) that modifies the
ordered state. The nature of this ordered state&lt;br/&gt;within the disordered
medium will be studied using SQUID NMR. This NMR technique has many advantages
for these experiments. It also has potential applications as wide ranging as
non-destructive testing and&lt;br/&gt;medical imaging and diagnostics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These experimental projects provide an excellent way to
train graduate and undergraduate students in a wide variety of experimental and
analytical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;