* 0307261
* Conducting an International Workshop on Sustainable Development and Concrete Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Kejin Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 02/28/2005
* USD 20,000.00

Conducting an International Workshop on Sustainable Development and Concrete
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing concern about the issues
such as global warming and other ecological changes that have drastically
influenced the existence of life. Concrete industry is considered as one of the
significant contributors to these changes. With the exponential growth of human
population and industrialization, concrete is now used not only for buildings
and roads but also for other civil infrastructure facilities such as underground
mass transit facilities, wastewater treatment systems, and marine structures.
Every year, approximately 1.6 billion tons of portland cement is produced
worldwide, generating 5% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emission. Annually, the
concrete industry consumes 10 billion tons of sand and rock and 1 billion tons
of water. Concrete greatly impacts the ecology of the planet Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to conduct an international workshop to
address the above issues. The workshop will be hosted by Tsinghua University, in
collaboration with other organizations. The goals of the workshop are to promote
global interaction and foster research collaboration so as to develop a better
understanding towards sustainable development using concrete technology. A
steering committee, consisting of members from both US and China, will be formed
for the workshop organization and implementation. US experts, especially women
or minorities, on cement and concrete materials will be invited to the workshop,
eight to ten of whom will be selected by the workshop committee and partially be
supported by the proposed NSF travel grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The China
Building Material Academy (CBMA) will sponsor and jointly host the workshop with
Tsinghua University. The Yangtze Survey, Planning, and Design Research Institute
will co-sponsor the workshop. China Yangtze Power Corporation Ltd. will host and
sponsor a field trip to Three Gorges. A proceeding of the workshop will be
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;