* 0307863
* Investigating the Stellar Populations of M33
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Tammy Smecker-Hane, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 356,098.00

AST 0307863&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tammy Smecker-Hane&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University
of California, Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Smecker-Hane and her
colleagues will undertake the first major campaign to determine the evolution of
M33, a low-mass, late-type, spiral galaxy. Unlike the giant spirals in the Local
Group (the Milky Way and M31), M33 has no galactic bulge, only a thin disk and
either a thick disk or flattened halo. Hubble Space Telescope imaging has
suggested the bulk of M33's globular clusters are significantly younger, by more
than 6 Gyr, than globular clusters in the Milky Way and M31. Because
hierarchical galaxy formation models, such as Cold Dark Matter, predict low mass
galaxies form later than massive galaxies, studies of M33 will yield powerful
constraints on galaxy evolution and structure formation
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These researchers will determine, with high
precision, the spatial extent, kinematics, and chemical abundances of the
distinct stellar populations of M33 by obtaining spectra of approximately 1000
stars. Smecker-Hane and her graduate students will use the Mosaic Camera on the
Kitt Peak National Observatory 4-meter Telescope to complete an imaging survey
of the outer disk/halo of M33 designed to separate bona fide M33 red giants from
foreground Galactic dwarfs. They will use the Keck II 10-meter Telescope to
obtain near-infrared spectra of M33 red giants from which they will derive
chemical abundances and radial velocities. The relative masses of the thin disk
and thick disk/halo of M33 will be determined and constraints will be place on
theories of thick disk/halo formation, e.g., monolithic collapse verses
satellite mergers. The metallicity distribution functions can be combined with
color-magnitude diagrams to break the degeneracy of age and metallicity and
uniquely, and accurately, derive M33's star-formation
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, two graduate students will
learn sophisticated data reduction and analysis techniques that are critical to
crowded-field photometry and multi-slit spectroscopy. Six undergraduate students
will participate in this research: three UCI undergraduates and three NSF REU
summer students. The graduate and undergraduate students will participate in
numerous educational outreach projects organized by Smecker-Hane. including
Visitor Nights at the UCI Observatory for the general public and tours for
smaller groups of K-12 students. Each summer, Smecker-Hane and a graduate
student will teach in the UCI COSMOS program, a summer program for high-school
students who demonstrate excellence in math and science. COSMOS classes have
equal numbers of male and female students, and approximately 30% are under
represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;