* 0307094
* SGER:    Development and Investigation of the Abrasion Resistance of New Ultra-Hard AlCrB14 Modified by TiB2 and Binder Phase for Even Higher Abrasion Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Alan Russell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 69,639.00

Development and Investigation of the Abrasion Resistance of New Ultra-Hard
AlCrB14 Modified by TiB2 and Binder Phase for Even Higher Abrasion
Resistance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shyam Bahadur and Alan Russell, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA, USA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to
study the abrasion behavior of ultra-hard boride materials. The abrasion
resistance of the materials will be studied by single point abrasion at low
speeds and multiple point abrasion at high speeds, and the effects of strain
rate, temperature and oxidation effects will be analyzed. The mechanisms of
material removal will be studied by electron microscopy of the abraded surfaces
as well as the deformation in the substrate. As a part of the effort, it is
intended to synthesize a new material AlCrB14, as a modified version of AlMgB14,
and modify its grain structure and mechanical properties, including fracture
toughness, by sub-micron size TiB2 additions for excellent abrasion resistance.
The synthesis of the new material addresses to the environmental concerns
involved in the processing of AlMgB14 boride because of the volatile and
reactive Mg. If the processing is successful, super hard materials with hardness
equal to or greater than that of cubic boron nitride (CBN) are expected to be
obtained. If the processing of the new material is unsuccessful, the abrasion
studies will be performed on AlMgB14 whose hardness is close to that of CBN. The
materials will be characterized in terms of hardness, fracture toughness, and
flexure properties and these will be related to the abrasion resistance. The
project is cross-disciplinary involving materials development and further
modification for enhanced tribological performance. The economic benefits of the
newly developed materials for potential applications in earth moving, mining,
rock drilling and other tool materials are tremendous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;