* 0308139
* Scalable Multi-Objective Planning for Metric Temporal Domains:     Heuristics, Algorithms and Tradeoffs
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Subbarao Kambhampati, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 10/31/2006
* USD 472,642.00

This project will develop effective algorithms for metric temporal domains. In
many real world domains, planning involves handling actions with durations that
produce and consume discrete as well as continuous resources, and goals with
deadlines. The plans themselves may differ in multiple quality dimensions,
including completion time, cost and execution flexibility. Previous approaches
for synthesizing plans in such "metric temporal" domains have been plagued by
poor scale-up potential, which inhibited the adaptation of the automated
planning technology to such domains. In metric temporal domains, goals have
deadlines, actions have temporal durations, and their preconditions and effects
occur over arbitrary intervals during action durations, and actions can produce
as well as consume discrete or continuous resources. Planning in many real-world
situations, including logistics, supply chain as well as space autonomy, has
these characteristics. Despite its potential applicability, adaptation of
planning technology in these domains has been inhibited by the poor performance
of the previous metric temporal planners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall aim
of this proposed research is to build on the advances in our understanding of
the classical plan synthesis to develop scalable approaches to metric temporal
planning domains. The contributions of the project will include: (1) development
of domain-independent heuristics based on planning graphs that are sensitive to
multiple quality metrics of metric temporal plans (2) a suite of techniques
based on constraint satisfaction problem encodings for improving the temporal
quality of a given plan and (3) development of two planning algorithms with
complementary tradeoffs, one searching in the space of position constrained
plans, and the other searching in the space of order (precedence) constrained
plans, and (4) a comprehensive investigation of the tradeoffs offered by
position constrained and order constrained planners. The contributions of this
research will be evaluated using the benchmark domains being developed in the
planning community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this work will improve
the suitability of computerized planning systems for a number of practical
application areas. They will also be incorporated into a textbook on foundations
of automated planning and scheduling and into an undergraduate level course on
automated planning and scheduling. &lt;br/&gt;