* 0308798
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Archaeomagnetism in the U.S. Southeast
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Michael Schiffer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2004
* USD 11,642.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Schiffer, Ms. Stacey Lengyel will collect and
analyze data necessary for the completion of her doctoral dissertation. This
project seeks to provide archaeologists working in the U.S. Southeast with a new
way to date their archaeological findings. The technique that will be
established through this project is called archaeomagnetic dating, and it uses
preserved records of changes in the position of the earth's magnetic north pole
to date burned, clay-rich archaeological features such as cooking hearths,
pottery kilns, or the walls and floors of burned structures. This technique has
been used successfully over the past 30 years to date sites throughout the U.S.
Southwest, Europe and Japan, and this project aims to make the dating technique
possible in the U.S. Southeast as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeomagnetic
dating depends on 1) the fact that the earth's magnetic north pole drifts around
the geographic rotation axis on the order of decades, and 2) the fact that
burned, clay-rich archaeological features, such as cooking hearths, accurately
record the position of the magnetic north pole at the time they were last fired
(e.g., the last time a cooking hearth was used). When enough archaeomagnetic
directional data are collected from well-dated archaeological features (e.g., a
cooking hearth that also yielded a radiocarbon date) in a given region, a master
record of archaeomagnetic change can be constructed in the form of a regional
reference curve. However, due to local variations in the magnetic field, each
reference curve is only valid over a 2000-km wide region. Therefore, the goal of
this project is to construct the reference curve for the Southeast, thus making
archaeomagnetic dating possible in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is important because it will provide archaeologists working in the U.S.
Southeast with a means of establishing, verifying, and refining the temporal
frameworks needed to address basic anthropological questions about past
cultures. By furnishing researchers with tighter temporal control over the
archaeological data, the regional archaeomagnetic curve developed through this
project will allow archaeologists to examine the play of sociocultural processes
across time and space and at a variety of scales, ranging from the sub-site
level (e.g., between structures) to the pan-continent level (e.g., between the
Tennessee River Valley and the Phoenix Basin). In short, the completion of the
Southeast archaeomagnetic curve will provide researchers with an independent
dating method that not only complements existing chronometric tools, but, when
used in conjunction with those tools will allow for more temporally refined
treatments of prehistoric cultural processes. This award will also assist in
training a promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;