* 0308931
* Megafossil Evidence for Ordovician/Silurian Terestrial Biotas
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Gar Rothwell, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2005
* USD 45,830.00

EAR-0308931 MEGAFOSSIL EVIDENCE FOR ORDOVICIAN-SILURIAN TERRESTRIAL BIOTAS Gar
W. Rothwell (EAR-0308931) Ohio University

ABSTRACT This research explores the origins of complex life on land, with an
emphasis on establishment of the first terrestrial ecosystems. The work focuses
on fossilized communities of organisms that inhabited the land surface at least
440 million years ago, and that provide the first direct evidence for
colonization of the land. These communities are represented by abundant
carbonaceous meso- and megafossils of thalloid organisms and/or symbiotic
associations that are preserved in Upper Ordovician and Lower Silurian fluvial
and deltaic deposits of the Appalachian Basin. Specimens are the oldest
macroscopic terrestrial fossils ever discovered, demonstrating that the earliest
complex land organisms had much greater fossilization potential than is
currently recognized. They also document that a substantial ground cover of
thalloid forms was established on the land far earlier than presently known.

Goals of the proposed research are to develop fundamental knowledge about
terrestrial life during the crucial but poorly known time interval between
initial colonization of land by complex organisms and the emergence of vascular
plants. Investigations of these Ordovician-Silurian terrestrial fossils focus on
1) documenting the first land communities, 2) determining the morphological,
anatomical and ultrastructural characters of individual fossils, and 3)
beginning to develop an understanding of the diversity, systematic affinities,
and biological interactions of the fossilized organisms. These goals will be
achieved through laboratory preparations and character determinations for
fossils that already have been collected. The work is being conducted by the PI,
and by graduate and undergraduate student researchers at Ohio University.
Systematic investigations are being pursued through collaborations with
colleagues who are experts on either the living organisms to which the fossils
are most likely related, or on fossil palynomorphs from contemporaneous strata.
Results will be disseminated by publications and presentations at national and
international meetings, with additional educational outreach being achieved
through undergraduate student laboratory exercises, and by posting of the new
findings on internet data bases.