* 0308539
* Collaborative Research:  NIRT:  Surface Reactivity of Nanocrystalline Oxides and Oxyhydroxides: Implications for Processes in the Environment
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Peter Cummings, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2006
* USD 169,878.00

EAR-0123967&lt;br/&gt;EAR-123998&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0124036&lt;br/&gt;EAR-
0124001&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystals with nanometer-scale dimensions formed by
chemical weathering and biomineralization reactions are found in rivers, lakes,
oceans, soils, sediments, and atmospheric dust. Because of their novel size-
dependent properties, nanoparticles may play disprotionately large roles in
environmental processes. However, the variation of reactivity of geologically
important nanomaterials with particle size has received little attention. The
tendency of ions to adsorb onto nanocrystalline metal oxide surfaces is
predicted to be size-dependent. Adsorption will be studied experimentally over
the temperature range of 0 - 150 degrees C in gases and environmentally-relevant
aqueous solutions. Models will be developed to quantitatively explain
differences between results for nanoparticles and those obtained on macroscopic
equivalents. If nanocrystals grow via oriented aggregations, as has been shown
previously, adsorbed ions (e.g. phosphate, arsenate, and zinc adsorbed from
solution onto iron oxyhydroxide surfaces), may be incorporated into point
defects. This may represent an important environmental ion sequestration
pathway, with direct relevance to the long-term fate of nutrients and
contaminants. Coupling of aggregation and adsorption under controlled conditions
may also provide a new approach for creation of synthetic materials with
technologically interesting properties. Ion sequestration during nanocystal
growth will be tested experimentally and explored via molecular modeling and
simulation. Calorimetric studies designed to measure surface and adsorption
energies will provide date to be used in models that will explore size-dependent
reactivity. This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).&lt;br/&gt;