* 0308292
* Workshops:  Proposal for Planning and Implementing a Higher Education Bridge Certification Authority (HEBCA)
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Mark Luker, Educause
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Gatchell
* 01/31/2005
* USD 189,413.00

The research and education community faces a pressing need for trusted
electronic communications between institutions of higher education and the
federal agencies. The only general solutions to this problem are based on Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI), a system that uses digital certificates and signatures
to bring to network communications the levels of trust and security required by
the applications. A major barrier to the implementation of PKI among
institutions is the fact that versions of the technology implemented by
different vendors or certified by different vendors or certified by different
authorities may not interoperate, effectively limiting their use to single
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A widely-accepted solution to this problem
has been designed and implemented in the Federal Bridge Certification Authority
(FBCA), which provides the legal, policy and technical framework to translate
levels of trust from one institution or agency to another. In 2001-2002,
EDUCAUSE implemented a test version of the Higher Education Bridge Certification
Authority (HEBCA), which extends this approach to the Higher Education
Community. While the test version demonstrated the technical feasibility of the
approach, it cannot be used for production because it lacks the corresponding
legal, policy and financial framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assuming the success
of the design efforts, EDUCAUSE intends to use the results of the workshops as a
roadmap to implement a production HEBCA, cross certify it with the FBCA, and
invite Certificate Authorities that serve higher education to join the HEBCA.
This will provide a uniform foundation on which universities can initiate a wide
range of trusted electronic communications with various federal agencies to
better support research and education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal will
develop and conduct a series of expert workshops to plan and implement the steps
required to establish and create the HEBCA, and to move it into
production.&lt;br/&gt;