* 0308588
* Collaborative Research: The Crystal Chemistry of Rock-Forming Chlorite
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Stephen Guggenheim, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2007
* USD 170,333.00

Guggenheim and Guidotti&lt;br/&gt;0308588 and 0308546&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
major goal of metamorphic petrology is to understand the interrelationships
among the crystallization conditions (temperature, pressure, bulk composition,
chemical activities of volatile constituents, etc.) during metamorphic
processes. Although chlorite is a common rock-forming metamorphic mineral
believed to have a composition and crystal structure that relates to these
conditions of crystallization, no structural studies of chlorite have been made
to identify how petrologic factors affect the structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, single-crystal X-ray diffraction methods will be used to examine
suites of well-characterized chlorite. For each suite except the Plumbago pluton
suite, all samples contain graphite, so that the iron oxidation state is
constrained. The metapelitic schists to be examined from Maine will have the
following characteristics: (1) formation pressures at near 3.5 kbar, (2) Al
saturated, (3) intermediate-to-high Mg2+-contents, and (4) varying formation
temperatures. For comparison, a suite from the metamorphosed Plumbago mafic to
ultramafic pluton in Maine, is selected because it is Mg-rich, but not Al-
saturated. In addition, a more Fe-rich suite will be examined. After chemical
analyses are made, structure refinements of chlorite crystals within each grade
and between grades will be compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
study will help determine how Al, Mg, Fe2+, and vacancies are distributed in the
various crystallographic sites of chlorite as a function of the pressure and
temperature of crystallization and chlorite composition. These results will help
to explain why there are relatively sharp compositional boundaries for the
permissible composition range for metamorphic chlorites. In addition, an
understanding of the variables involved in cation ordering may provide
additional understanding of the controls limiting Ti, Fe3+, Mn, Ni, Cr, etc.
substitutions. A major objective is to understand how these factors affect or
control hydrogen bonding between the octahedral sheet and the 2:1 layer in
chlorite. Most importantly, these data will eliminate the ad hoc aspect to
previous attempts to formulate thermodynamic solution models for chlorite that
are directly relevant to natural rocks.&lt;br/&gt;