* 0308061
* On The Limiting Behaviour of Regularizations of the Euler Equations With Vortex Sheet Initial Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Monika Nitsche, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 163,329.00

Vortex sheets model shear layers in fluid flow. In order to avoid finite-time
singularities in the Euler equations that govern the dynamics of a vortex sheet,
it is necessary to regularize the equations. This project compares three
different regularization methods of current importance: vortex blob methods,
Euler-alpha models, and physical viscosity. At present it is unknown whether
different regularizations have different limits as the regularization parameter
approaches zero, and this project aims to answer this question through a
combination of numerical studies and analytical methods. An answer to this
question is of intrinsic mathematical interest and of practical importance for
numerical simulations.

Possible outcomes to this investigation include: 1) Different regularizations of
the Euler equations give different limits at a fixed time. This would be of
interest for both intrinsically mathematical reasons and for applications. 2)
The limits are the same, and the chaotic features observed in recent work on the
vortex blob method are present in all cases, including the viscous case. This
would give significant insight into the physics of real fluid motion. 3) The
limits are the same, and do not include the chaotic features. This would
indicate that regularization can introduce artificial irregularities, and would
suggest work for improved regularization methods. This work aims to present
conclusive evidence towards one of these possible scenarios. It will result in
increased understanding of regularizations of the Euler equations and of fluid
dynamics with small viscosity.