* 0308559
* Genomics in the Undergraduate Curriculum: Ion Transport and Cell Communication
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Mary Lee Ledbetter, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,955.00

Genomics and bioinformatics are newly emerging areas of study at the interface
between traditional cell and molecular biology and computer science. Made
possible by the massive investment in the Human Genome Project, these areas have
not yet been effectively incorporated into the curriculum of most biology
programs, particularly those at liberal arts colleges. This project has three
parts, designed to remedy that lack. (1) It adds the new methods to the
approaches currently used by undergraduate research students in the Principal
Investigator's research laboratory. (2) A Teaching Postdoctoral Fellow is
providing the necessary expertise in data analysis to the research experience
while enriching the curriculum with course offerings in the area of
bioinformatics and gaining valuable classroom experience. And (3) students in
these and other courses are being assisted to design presentations of their term
projects to take to high school classrooms, helping to demystify the technology
while communicating the excitement of its findings. The P.I.'s research
addresses the relationship between ion homeostasis in cultured animal cells and
the cells' ability to communicate using gap junctions. Both ion transport and
cell communication are evolutionarily ancient, highly integrated with the rest
of the cell's physiology, and required for normal cell function. Over two
decades, the laboratory has shown that preventing normal function of the sodium
pump by treating a variety of cells with the drug ouabain causes a reversible
loss in cell communication. The PI is introducing DNA microarray technology into
her laboratory to work out conditions for analyzing global patterns of gene
expression. This technology, normally beyond the reach of undergraduates or
liberal arts colleges, is possible at Holy Cross because of the P.I's
involvement in the Genome Consortium for Active Teaching (GCAT), a collaboration
among 36 undergraduate institutions. Surplus microarrays provided by university
researchers are made available at low cost for use by undergraduates and
analyzed at a central facility at Davidson College. Data are posted to an FTP
site where they are accessible for analysis by any member of the consortium.
These studies are using yeast initially because they are easy to grow in bulk
under defined conditions, microarrays are readily available, and the P.I. and
her students have demonstrated the feasibility of the work in pilot studies of
the technology. Once the microarray technology is well understood, it will be
applied to gene expression in human and mouse cells, both fibroblastic and
epithelial, to understand the pattern of gene expression in cells treated with
ouabain, aldosterone, or other stimulants or suppressants of cell communication.
The results will identify genes whose expression rises or falls as a consequence
of changing ion homeostasis, making them candidates for further study as
regulators of cell communication. This project takes full advantage of the
P.I.'s long-standing expertise both in research and in undergraduate education,
supporting her work as a mentor of students and faculty. As such its impact is
not limited to collecting research results, but has added valuable benefits.
More undergraduate students are stimulated to ongoing study of biology through
immersion in this new research effort. The Postdoctoral Fellow is mentored to
develop as a future faculty member in the model of a teacher-scholar. High
school students learn first-hand about many of the exciting developments in
modern biology, and undergraduates giving school presentations hone their skills
in sharing their knowledge with society. And the infrastructure of the sciences
at Holy Cross is being enriched by the presence of the collaborative,
interdisciplinary activities associated with application of genomics to the
problem of cell-to-cell communication.