* 0308806
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Structure and Systematics of the Earliest Terrestrial Ground Cover
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Gar Rothwell, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,630.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gar Rothwell and Mr. Alexandru Tomescu at Ohio
University to study the organisms that formed the earliest known terrestrial
groundcover. Fossils of these organisms collected by the grantees in 445-435
million year old rocks of eastern North America (Virginia, Pennsylvania)
represent the oldest unequivocal evidence for life on continents, out of the
marine realm. The goal of their project is to characterize the structure of
these early terrestrial organisms, and to clarify their biological
relationships. To do this, they will isolate fossils from the rocks, prepare
them, and investigate their structure employing light- and electron microscopy.
They will then compare the fossil organisms to living groups, to clarify their
biological and evolutionary relationships.

Although the origin of life on land over 450 million years ago has been the
subject of considerable research and much speculation, the nature of the
earliest terrestrial organisms still ranks among the most crucial unanswered
questions in modern life sciences. By investigating newly found fossils of the
earliest terrestrial organisms, this project can address these questions,
strongly impacting thinking and working hypotheses in evolutionary biology and
earth sciences. By identifying the groups of organisms that were the first to
colonize the continents, this work will provide much-needed direct evidence for
the ancestors of early terrestrial colonizers, and for the initial patterns of
evolution and diversification of life on land. Characterizing the first abundant
land organisms also has important implications for global-scale interpretations
of weathering process changes that resulted from the origin of terrestrial
groundcover, and for the impact of these changes on continent-ocean chemical
cycles.