* 0308866
* Experimental Investigation of H2O, Cl, CO2 and SO2 Solubilities in Rhyolite and Andesite Melts at Shallow Crustal Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* James Webster, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2009
* USD 134,027.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand how magmatic degassing
influences explosive volcanic eruptions and the generation of many of Earth's
metallic mineral deposits, the solubilities of the volatiles water, carbon
dioxide, sulfur, and chlorine in silicate magmas will be determined
experimentally. Volatiles like these are fundamentally important to the
evolution of the Earth's mantle, crust, atmosphere, and ocean reservoirs;
chemical mobility, via fluids and magmas, within and between these reservoirs;
and magmatic degassing processes related to volcanic eruption and the generation
of mineral deposits. The capacity of magmas to transport volatiles is a direct
function of volatile solubilities in silicate melts, and once these volatile
solubilities are exceeded one or more fluid phases exsolve from melts. Current
understanding of magmatic fluid exsolution is limited to systems containing just
one or two of these volatiles, thus the proposed study will investigate
systematically: (1) the solubilities of (water, carbon dioxide, and chlorine)
and (water, sulfur dioxide, and chlorine) in rhyolite and andesite melts, and
(2) how chlorine is distributed between these geologically important melts and
fluids containing these volatiles. The extent to which chlorine is distributed
between silicate melt and fluids is of particular interest, because this
volatile is a common component of magmas, it is important to mineralizing
processes, its behavior provides key constraints on processes of magmatic
degassing, and because chlorine in the atmosphere destabilizes ozone and affects
other atmospheric processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solubility data will be
generated through hydrothermal experiments conducted at pressure and temperature
conditions that are representative of magmas that degas in the shallow crust,
and the products of the experiments will be analyzed by well-established
methodologies. The intellectual merit of the proposed investigation springs from
the experimental data which are relevant to: (1) the interpretation of volatile
solubility mechanisms in silicate melts, (2) models that allow computation of
volatile solubilities and predict processes of magmatic degassing, and (3)
ongoing geochemical investigations of magmatic degassing behavior based on
studies of silicate melt inclusions (which are microscopic samples of silicate
glass that are representative of trapped silicate melt). These data will also be
useful for models addressing the impact of chlorine on Earth's atmosphere and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigation also has broader
significance because the data, their relevance to science, and their relevance
to society will be shared through exhibits and public programs at the American
Museum of Natural History. The results and importance of scientific research are
presented to the general public through specimens, electronic media, and other
media in the museum's permanent exhibition halls; lecture series focused on
geologic processes; and through interactions with summer interns participating
in an NSF-supported Research Experiences for Undergraduate Students
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;