* 0308731
* Carleman Estimates for Systems of Partial Differential Equations with Application to the Control of Coupled Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Matthias Eller, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 89,148.00

The aim of this project is to develop Carleman estimates for systems of partial
differential equations. Carleman estimates are weighted energy estimates that
are crucial tools in control theory and inverse problems. In particular,
Carleman estimates are indispensable in the study of ill-posed Cauchy problems.
Such problems are well understood for scalar partial differential equations.
However, systems of partial differential equations are much harder to treat
because of multiple characteristics. This project develops estimates for
classical systems of partial differential equations arising in mathematical
physics, including Maxwell's equations and the system of elasticity with
variable non-smooth coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to avoid
unwanted behavior of a physical system, such as large vibrations or formation of
cracks, an accurate prediction of the evolution of the system is desirable. This
involves nondestructive measurements, for example on the boundary of the system.
This project is concerned with a better understanding of how much information is
needed in order to predict the behavior of a physical system accurately.
Advances in many areas of engineering and material science have produced
realistic mathematical models that involve systems of partial differential
equations, which are the subject of this mathematical investigation.&lt;br/&gt;