* 0308440
* BE/CNH:  Disparate Scales of Process and Nearshore Fishery Management
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Robert Warner, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,995,951.00

Public confidence in management of nearshore fisheries is at an all time low.
Along the U.S. West Coast, nearly all waters deeper than 20 fathoms (~36 m) are
closed to all bottom fishing to protect several species of rockfish from local
extinction. No-take marine reserves have been created around the northern
Channel Islands as a means of protecting biodiversity and fish abundances. The
well-documented decline of fisheries and ecological diversity of nearshore
waters has engendered a "crisis-mode" philosophy for the management of nearshore
fish resources. This interdisciplinary research project will examine the
complexity of nearshore communities and the fisheries that depend upon them.
Nearshore fisheries couple natural (ecological) and human (fishery management)
processes in an emergent dynamic system that is rich in complexity. The
project's goal is to develop a process-level description of nearshore fisheries
and their management patterned after California coastal environments. The
investigators will examine the emergent complexity that arises due to
interactions among chaotic coastal circulations, fished organism life cycles,
the productivity and suitability of nearshore habitats, the intensity and nature
of fish harvesting, the economics governing fisheries, fishers and fishery
regulations, and the bureaucratic system that implements regulations. The aim of
these analyses is to assess the balance points among costs, profits,
uncertainties, stock viability, and ecological values of nearshore fished
environments. Central to developing a predictive understanding of the
interactions between flow, fish and fishing is the notion of temporal and
spatial scales. The physics, biology, and socioeconomic processes governing this
coupled natural-human system operate on inherently different spatial and
temporal scales. Without considering the mismatch in scales explicitly,
mismanagement of fisheries is likely to continue unabated. Recent advances in
modeling coastal ocean circulations, marine life cycle dynamics, the values of
information to fishery management, and the consequences of management choices in
the face of uncertainty have independently created the pieces necessary to
assemble a synthetic approach to nearshore fisheries management. Moreover,
large-scale programs monitoring the dynamics of coastal ecosystems are providing
the empirical data necessary to parameterize and test these models. The
investigators will link these components into new computational and conceptual
models that examine optimal management choices in the face of unavoidable
physical and biological uncertainty.

The issues addressed and conceptual frameworks that will be studied will have
broad, global impacts. Declines in fish stocks and yields are not restricted to
any nation or geographical region. Indeed, the core problems from mismatches in
spatial and temporal scales are characteristic of nearly all marine fisheries.
In addition, although fisheries management commonly stops at political borders,
ocean flows and fish do not. The ecological scales of coastal ecosystems are
inherently international in scope. The international partnerships between this
proposed effort and ongoing ecological programs in Mexico, Chile, New Zealand,
and Australia will expand the regional focus of this effort to global
dimensions. This project also will provide educational opportunities across a
range of ages. This program will integrate opportunities for interdisciplinary
education at elementary, secondary, undergraduate, and graduate levels as well
as through adult programs. This project is supported by an award resulting from
the FY 2003 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on
the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.