* 0308895
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing the Mutation Models for the Evolution of Microsatellites: An Experimental and Simulation Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Paul Sniegowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,610.00

Microsatellites are stretches of DNA composed of small sequence units that are
repeated many times in tandem. The number of repeats is highly mutable, and the
appropriate model for the mutational processes affecting repeat length remains
an unsolved problem. This research will use experimental evolution to address
this problem. Twenty replicate populations of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
will be evolved for 2000 generations and the variation that has accumulated at 6
microsatellite loci will be characterized. The results will be compared to
predictions from computer simulation studies based on the three major mutational
models that have been proposed. If none of these preexisting models is
confirmed, then the extensive and novel data set obtained in this experiment
will be employed to develop a more appropriate
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microsatellites are present in the genomes of most
organisms. Analysis of microsatellite variation is used to study such basic
scientific questions as population sizes, genetic divergence between
populations, and evolutionary relationships between species. At a more applied
level, microsatellites are important tools in genome mapping in medical research
and forensic analyses in legal proceedings. Interpretation of results in all of
these areas typically requires assumptions about the mutational processes
affecting microsatellite variation. The results of this project will thus have
important implications in diverse areas of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;