* 0308078
* Robotic Dispensing of Cubic Phase for Crystallizing Membrane Proteins
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Yuan Zheng, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 12/31/2007
* USD 390,952.00

Robotics and Human Augmentation Program

ABSTRACT

Proposal #: 308078 Title: Robotic Dispensing of Cubic Phase for Crystallizing
Membrane Proteins PI: Zheng, Yuan Ohio State Univ Res Fdn

This research addresses new robotic technologies and systems which enable the
automated handling of nanoliter volumes of highly viscous bio-materials. The
robotic system is urgently needed by the proteomics community following on the
announcement in 2001 that the human genome had been sequenced. This landmark
event has led to intense activity in structural biology aimed at determining the
3-dimensional structure of the proteins coded for by the genome. About a third
of these proteins are integral to the cell's membranes and x-ray crystallography
is the only reliable method for structure determination. A method that uses the
lipid cubic mesophase (in meso) has recently been introduced for producing
diffraction quality crystals of several important membrane proteins and a
protein complex. The in meso method requires the controlled and reproducible
handling in high-throughput fashion of accurate, nanoliter volumes of precious,
highly viscous protein/lipid cubic phase mixtures of defined shape. Three
approaches will be used to facilitate the development of such a system as
follows: a) efficient-motion planning of the dispensing tool for effective
delivery of viscous materials, b) utilization of the cubic phase for coordinate
measuring, and c) computer vision verification of successful dispensing. For
efficient-motion planning the PIs will study the motion trajectory of the
dispensing tool with respect to the receiving container to assure delivery of
accurate cubic phase volumes in the nanoliter range of predetermined shape. To
locate the bottom surface of the container for accurate dispensing, the PIs will
use the cubic phase itself for coordinate measurement to obviate the need for
expensive and complex coordinate measuring machines. Computer vision
verification provides a cost effective way to monitor delivery since failure may
occur occasionally when the viscous material refuses to leave the dispensing
tool.

The intellectual merits of this research are in the creation of new robotic
technologies and systems for the automatic handling of nanoliter volumes of
highly viscous bio-materials which have never been studied before. The
development of the three new technologies related to motion planning,
coordinates measuring, and computer-vision inspection will be the primary
intellectual merits of this activity.

The broader impacts of this research include the following: a) the project will
produce a fully functional robotic system that will enable the screening of
thousands of crystallization conditions daily to expedite the better
understanding of the structure of membrane proteins, b) the results will create
a knowledge base for the automatic handling of generic viscous materials, and c)
the educational plan seeks to train students in an interdisciplinary area
encompassing engineering and biochemistry.



