* 0308543
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Natural and Human-generated Landscape Scale Effects of Migratory Biota in Tropical Streams, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Catherine Pringle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 03/31/2004
* USD 11,520.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Natural and Human-generated Landscape
Scale Effects of Migratory Biota in Tropical Streams, Puerto
Rico&lt;br/&gt;Pringle DEB-0308543&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
research consists of three projects focusing on landscape-scale effects of
macroconsumers (fish, freshwater shrimp) on Puerto Rico streams. Project one
takes advantage of a natural experiment and examines upstream effects of dams on
ecosystem properties due to extirpation of migratory macroconsumers. Project two
uses macroconsumer exclusion experiments to examine whether small-scale
manipulations predict effects of large-scale extirpation. Project three is a
longitudinal survey of the last undammed main stem river draining the Caribbean
National Forest and investigates natural variation in macroconsumer
distributions and the relevance of the River Continuum Concept to tropical
islands. All three projects examine standing stocks of epilithic fine and coarse
particulate organic matter, fine particulate inorganic matter, and algal and
insect biomass. The broader significance of this research includes direct
contributions to conservation of tropical streams by extrapolating small-scale
experiments to the larger scales at which humans affect watersheds, improving
our understanding of the ecological importance of aquatic biota and documenting
relatively pristine river conditions.&lt;br/&gt;