* 0308012
* Synthesis and Characterization of Nanoscale Metal Oxide Heterostructures for Chemical Sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Xiaoqing Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 394,562.00

Objectives of this project are: (1) to expand basic knowledge of growth and
property characterization of high-quality oxide semiconductor thin films and p-n
heterostructures; (2) to systematically characterize electrical transport
properties of the films and p-n heterostructures as a function of chemical
doping, film thickness, bias applied, and temperature; (3) to fabricate model
systems based on epitaxial single crystal films consisting of field effect
transistor (FET) structures and develop a fundamental understanding of the
effect of bias applied across the p-n junction on electrical transport
properties and selective adsorption properties; and (4) to explore fabrication
and characterization of more complex devices such as bipolar transistors with an
exposed p-n junction. These devices offer the possibility of amplified
electronic response to adsorption at exposed p-n junctions, which may provide a
new level of control at the atomic and molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal is to develop a fundamental understanding of oxide-based semiconductor
heterostructures suitable for the design of nanoengineered sorbents, tunable
displays, catalytic materials, and chemical sensors. The understanding gained is
expected to provide guidance for improvement of chemical selectivity and
sensitivity, and provide a science base for the development of microelectronic
devices for selective, tunable chemical sensing. The insights gained will be
beneficial not only for advancing chemical sensor technology and for improving
health and safety in society, but also impact the basic research and technology
development of transparent electrodes for electronic and optical devices.
Additionally, through collaboration with Ford, fundamental information that this
project will provide may improve emissions control technology for lean-
combustion engines. Thus, the intellectual and broader impact of the proposed
research may reach well beyond the realm of chemical sensing.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses basic materials research issues in a topical
area of materials science with technological relevance, and places emphasis on
the integration of research and education. The research program provides
excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated
scientific equipment. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in
the synthesis, processing, and characterization of electronic materials. The
project integrates research with educational outreach which includes (1)
creating a mechanism to expose materials research to high school minority
students through the existing NASA SHARP Plus program at the University of
Michigan, (2) involving undergraduates (particularly women and minority
students) in research early in their careers, and (3) bringing the nano-world to
the classroom through remote control of electron microscopes via the internet.
It is planned to use this facility to demonstrate to a high school class, both
live and via a virtual microscopy base, how materials can be manipulated at the
atomic scale, and also to use this system for demonstrations to attract
undergraduates to materials science and engineering. Students involved in this
project will have the opportunity to learn film growth techniques, device
fabrication, materials characterization, and to interact with high school
students. This interdisciplinary education will provide students with special
opportunities and a broad perspective valued in both industrial and academic
research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;