* 0308486
* BE/CNH:  Biocomplexity of the Greater Serengeti:   Humans in a Biologically Diverse Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Michael Coughenour, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,722,500.00

The Greater Serengeti Ecosystem (hereafter "the Serengeti") is a complex coupled
human and natural system consisting of a network of diverse and intense trophic
interactions played out over a heterogeneous landscape. Livestock and a species-
rich assemblage of large mammalian herbivores, the most abundant of which
migrate over a 12,000 square-km area each year, consume a high fraction of
primary plant production. These herbivores sustain human populations and a rich
assemblage of avian and mammalian carnivores. Moreover, humans, wild animals,
and livestock are all vulnerable to a wide variety of infectious diseases.
Broad-scale heterogeneity in land use is superimposed on this dynamic landscape.
The Serengeti National Park is a classic example of a protected area and
ecotourism destination, while the adjacent Ngorongoro Conservation Area permits
Maasai pastoralism, game reserves, (Maswa and Ikorongo) permit-controlled off-
take of trophy species, and game-controlled areas (Grumeti) that permit all
human activity except agriculture. The linkages between human and natural
components of the Serengeti are so pervasive that human decision making may be
the critical process governing the fate of the entire ecosystem. Pressure is
mounting as human and animal populations converge on the western border of
Serengeti National Park (SNP) and Mara Reserve. To study the coupling of natural
ecosystem functioning and human decision making in the greater Serengeti, this
interdisciplinary research project will use four modeling approaches: (1)
Process-rich, spatially explicit ecosystem simulation models will be developed
to predict changes in plant and animal communities as well as human use of
landscapes at different scales. (2) Agent-based models will incorporate
individual decision-making rules in a spatially explicit environment. (3)
Analytical models of community modules will explore interactions among five to
ten key species. (4) Macro-ecological models will describe system patterns and
processes as functions of major resource inputs, such as rainfall and soil
nutrients. These models will explore emergent dynamics of the Serengeti at
various organizational scales. A large amount of Serengeti field data will be
analyzed to parameterize the models and to assess their ability to explain past
dynamics and current ecosystem trends. In addition, crucial new data on human
activities and choices will be collected to understand the coupling of system
dynamics between natural and human-dominated components. This blend of different
modeling approaches and data syntheses will permit a unique integration of
ecological and social sciences. The concept of ecosystem resilience/resistance
will be directly related to the vulnerability of human
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of complex systems proposes that
emergent properties can arise from relatively simple underlying mechanisms
propagated in space and time. The vulnerability of humans and sustainability of
biodiversity in the Serengeti may be driven by a few critical constraints that
operate independently of individual components. These constraints arise from
fundamental laws/principles in psychology, biology, chemistry, and physics that
constrain key biological processes and human decisions. Alternatively, complex
systems may be sensitive to small differences in initial conditions and show a
tendency to switch between alternative states. This sensitivity suggests that
biodiversity and human welfare may be highly contingent on details such as
individual behavior, the identity of the species participating, and the precise
spatial arrangement of interactions among humans, plants, animals, and diseases.
The Serengeti provides a unique opportunity to test this hypothesis, because its
component parts are so conspicuous and its dynamical patterns have been measured
for 40 years. Finally, emergent system properties may be contingent on just a
few critical components, which would imply that the Serengeti can be understood
from networks of interaction among a few key species of plants/animals and
humans. In addition to providing fundamental new knowledge, the project will
provide insights and information of immediate value of managers and decision
makers in the study region and many other locales. It also will provide valuable
research and training opportunities for students and post-doctoral scholars, and
it will facilitate international collaborations between U.S. and African
scientists. This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2003
special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics
of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;