* 0308851
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effects of Gene Flow, Dispersal and Local Adaptation on the Distribution of Silvetia Compressa in the Intertidal Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Peter Raimondi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,764.00

Gene flow across a changing environment can counter natural selection and
prevent adaptation; this may have profound consequences for the way that
different species are distributed in space. The proposed research will examine
the effects of gene flow on adaptation to, and distribution across, a strong
environmental gradient, using the alga Silvetia compressa and its distribution
in the intertidal zone as a model system. This work will include (1) mapping the
gradient in emersion time spanned by S. compressa populations and examining how
genetic structure and demographic rates vary across this gradient; (2) measuring
dispersal distance by mimicking colonization events; (3) assessing local
adaptation to position in the intertidal zone with reciprocal transplant
experiments; and (4) directly testing the consequences of gene flow across the
gradient by conducting controlled crosses and outplanting zygotes into the
field. &lt;br/&gt; Recent theoretical advances have shown that gene flow and
local adaptation may jointly determine species distributions, yet for no
organism do we currently understand how these processes interact at the edges of
a range. Thus the results of this study will provide a key empirical test of
current thinking on the antagonistic effects of gene flow among different
selective environments. The role of gene flow in the maintenance of species
distributions has implications both for ecological theory (e.g. understanding
patterns of biodiversity across gradients and patchy landscapes), as well as for
important applied problems such as species invasions, and population-level
response to environmental change. Additional broader impacts of this study stem
from its geographic scale, and the opportunity for involvement and training of
undergraduates from multiple universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;