* 0308463
* BE/CNH:  Comparative Stability and Resiliency of Ecosystems: Five Centuries of Human Interactions with the Environment on the Eastern Shore of Virginia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Grace Brush, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,499,943.00

Coupled natural-human ecosystems now tessellate the terrestrial surface of the
Earth. There is little land that is not to some degree a consequence of its
human inhabitants. Given the capacity of modern societies to alter both the
atmosphere and ocean, even remote and unpopulated landscapes are to some degree
altered by human activity. But does this human activity affect the stability of
the natural-human system? What is the natural-human system's resistance to
change? What is its resilience (the likelihood of returning to its original
state after being disturbed)? While people often assume that the answer to these
questions must be in the affirmative, this project will assess the question
quantitatively and qualitatively through advanced socio-environmental systems
analysis. This proposal will characterize, quantify, and model the spectrum of
coupled natural-human dynamics on the Eastern Shore of Virginia over the past
500 years as, first, Native Americans and, later, European and African colonists
and their descendents interacted with their environment. This interdisciplinary
study is designed to improve understanding of the complex dynamics of a tightly
coupled natural-human system in a single locale, but at varying spatial and
temporal scales and under differing social and environmental pressures. These
efforts will culminate in the development of integrated human-ecosystem models,
which will be parameterized, calibrated, and validated by historical,
archaeological, ecological, and geochemical data to simulate natural-human
systems during specific historical periods that represent changes in human
demographic patterns, land-use practices, and technological capabilities:
Protohistoric (1550-1610); Colonial (1650-1700); Late Plantation (1800-1850);
Commercial/Industrial (1850-1950); and Modern/Conservation (1950-present). Three
working hypotheses will be investigated to understand and compare a range of
landscape- and seascape-scale ecosystems in terms of their dynamic responses:
(1) Systems with more technological societies are better able to resist change
from environmental perturbation. (2) Systems with more technological societies
are more resilient to environmental perturbation. (3) Technological societies
are themselves the critical environmental perturbation that drives the future
status of the system. Principal component analysis and other quantitative
procedures will be employed to assess system stability, resiliency, and
resistance to change during and between these time periods and to identify those
system components within time periods that are most critical to resistance,
resilience, and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated intellectual
contributions of this project include identifying constraints imposed by nature
on humans in order to explain the range of adaptive poses assumed by human
societies, assessing the response of the greater natural-human system to the
activities of human societies over a broad range of time periods and through
examination of distinctive demographic, land use, and technological regimes
within the same locale. Anticipated broader impacts of this project include
increase knowledge about natural-human dynamics on the Eastern Shore of
Virginia, in particular, and countless other inhabited land-water interfaces
throughout the world in general. The project will identify variables critical to
system resistance, resilience, and stability, thereby informing policymaking in
the Chesapeake Bay watershed and similar locales throughout the world. The
project also will provide education and training opportunities for K-12
students, undergraduate and graduate students, and the general public. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2003 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;