* 0308049
* Grounding Language in Visual Percepts
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Randal Nelson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2007
* USD 298,993.00

The goal of this project is to use perceptual abilities developed in machine
vision as foundations for a system that provides dynamic access to useful
physical-world knowledge in a form that natural-language understanding and
reasoning systems can meaningfully employ in the course of interactive dialogue
with human users. To accomplish this goal, mid-level abstractions called
"perscripts" are being developed that correspond roughly to the information
content of simple phrases and implement an associated class of recognition
operations grounded in state-of-the-art machine vision technology. Such
abstractions possess sufficient richness and power to bridge the
representational gap, while remaining absolutely tied to perceptual processes
that operate in interesting real-world environments. The knowledge obtained in
the investigation is also of basic interest from a machine vision standpoint
since it provides a validated, higher level architecture for visual perception
of a sort that is currently lacking in most implemented, real-world
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is being validated in the context of a
particular application, a "Household Assistant" whose purpose is to provide
people living in a "smart house" with information useful in activities of daily
living (e.g., "where did I leave my glasses?" or "did I take my meds?") via a
user interface employing natural language dialogue. This application is being
developed in conjunction with the University of Rochester Center for Future
Health, which has a smart home environment in place, and with the natural
language group in the Computer Science Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide for the training of graduate students in an area (practical
machine vision coupled to natural language interfaces) that has growing economic
potential. It will provide basic principles for, and working prototypes of,
intelligent computer systems that will stand between people and the physical
world. Undergraduates are involved through associated projects. The application
in the Center for Future Health addresses the needs of the elderly and the
disabled, and has the potential to have a significant economic impact as part of
an overall system that unloads caregivers for this population.&lt;br/&gt;