* 0309353
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Testing Hypotheses of Morphological Differentiation in the Introduced Lizard, Anolis sagrei
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,172.00

The current rate of species introductions is unprecedented. Introductions of new
species into communities with which they share no recent evolutionary history
results in novel interactions between the introduced species and its new
environment, and between introduced and native species. These unplanned
experiments may be used to ask questions about fundamental ecological and
evolutionary processes. Using introductions of the lizard, Anolis sagrei, we
will test hypotheses about morphological differentiation predicted from habitat
use for two traits with well-supported ecomorphological relationships among
native populations. We will test the hypotheses that hindlimb length and toe-pad
lamellae number differentiate in the direction predicted from the diameter and
height of perches that lizards occupy. To identify the origin of introduced
populations, we will reconstruct the history of the introduction by assigning
mitochondrial DNA haplotypes from introduced populations to well-supported,
geographically circumscribed haplotype clades in the native range. This allows
identification of introduced-source population comparisons for hypothesis
testing. Introductions present an excellent opportunity to test hypotheses of
adaptive trait differentiation. At a broader level, studying patterns of
differentiation and evolutionary processes in introduced populations leads to a
better understanding of the causes, progression, and prediction of biological
invasions, which pose a major threat to biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;