* 0309068
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Maternal Investment in Communally Nesting Females
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Nancy Solomon, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,980.00

Project Summary Little is known about the mechanisms of maternal investment that
affect offspring fitness in communal groups. This study is the first to evaluate
specific mechanisms of investment that affect the fitness of offspring in
communal groups. My objectives are to: (1) evaluate dam- offspring
discrimination in a communal rodent, (2) determine if communal nesting improves
offspring growth even when food is restricted, (3) determine the relative
importance of tactile stimulation, warmth and dams milk provided in communal
groups on offspring growth, and (4) monitor the survival and reproduction of
offspring reared by communal and solitary dams. I found that prairie vole dams
treat conspecific newborns but not conspecific weanlings as own. Also, offspring
in single-dam groups grow more than offspring reared by solitary dams when food
is provided ad-lib. I will test the effect of simulated tactile stimulation and
warmth provided by an additional female on offspring growth and dams milk (Expt.
3). I will monitor survival and reproduction of offspring from single-dam groups
and solitary dams in outdoor enclosures (Expt. 4). By integrating proximate and
ultimate levels of analysis, I will improve our understanding of the evolution
of communal nesting. Undergraduates have and will continue be involved in this
study.