* 0309461
* ITR: Design Space Exploration and Synthesis for Multiple-Mode Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Edwin Sha, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

Sha abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of an embedded
system is growing rapidly&lt;br/&gt;from single mode to multiple modes for
achieving adaptability but &lt;br/&gt;the algorithms and tools for enhancing
design productivity are much&lt;br/&gt;under-developed.&lt;br/&gt;This ITR
project is aimed to develop new&lt;br/&gt;techniques and design tools for
architectural-level synthesis, &lt;br/&gt;code generation, and design space
exploration&lt;br/&gt;of multimode embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
multimode system synthesis is to determine the best&lt;br/&gt;architecture
(including processors with various types,&lt;br/&gt;special hardware components,
memory, interconnects, etc.) with &lt;br/&gt;the minimum cost
and&lt;br/&gt;generate the optimal codes and schedules&lt;br/&gt;for each mode
and the transitions of modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to build
up a solid foundation of this new area,&lt;br/&gt;the project conducts a
fundamental study to understand properties and&lt;br/&gt;develop provable
algorithms to achieve the following objectives: (1) Multiple objective
optimization. &lt;br/&gt;The project develops optimization algorithms
considering multiple &lt;br/&gt;objectives, and understands the relationship
among them. &lt;br/&gt;Scheduling and combined optimization
&lt;br/&gt;techniques such as retiming, unfolding, and code-size minimization
&lt;br/&gt;are developed. (2) Design space minimization and
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes the obtained relationships among
various design criteria,&lt;br/&gt;derives strict lower bounds and upper bounds,
and &lt;br/&gt;minimizes the design space to explore. (3) Multiple-mode
synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;The project analyzes multiple mode system behavioral
models, &lt;br/&gt;and studies the global optimization and synthesis of
multimode system.