* 0309575
* ITR: Distances and Generalized Geodesics for High-Dimensional Implicit and Point Cloud Surfaces:Theory, Computational Framework, and Applications in Information Sciences and Eng.
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Guillermo Sapiro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

Almost all disciplines in information sciences and engineering use and need to
compute the distance between events and geodesics or optimal paths between them.
Geodesics are used for example for path&lt;br/&gt;planning in robotics, brain
analysis in computational neuroscience, image segmentation, and finding
fundamental geometric objects on surfaces. In high dimensions, they are the
building blocks for problems in data mining and information discovery, with
applications ranging from finance to biology to image and video processing. In
general spaces, generalized geodesics also have numerous applications, from
brain imaging to color image enhancement to computer
graphics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since distance functions and geodesics are
fundamental for the interpretation and utilization of&lt;br/&gt;data and the
knowledge and information embedded in it, it is important to have a good
theoretical understanding of generalized distance functions and geodesics, and
to develop efficient techniques for their accurate and fast computation. The
work is needed in high dimensions and for diverse types of data representations,
including implicit hyper-surfaces, sets of unorganized points such as manifold
samples obtained when learning high dimensional information from examples, and
point clouds from popular 3D range scanners. This project addresses these
theoretical and computational issues, and concentrates on specific important
applications in the areas mentioned above. These applications can be efficiently
approached only once the theoretical and computational frameworks here studied
have been derived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the educational arena, the goal is to
continue with current efforts in the interdisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;aspects of
advanced education and in the distribution and popularization of the developed
techniques,&lt;br/&gt;including making software publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;