* 0309532
* Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care Behavior
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Claudia Rauter, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 07/31/2005
* USD 218,942.00

Indirect Genetic Effects of Parental Care Behavior

Claudia M. Rauter and Charles W. Fox

Numerous studies have shown that parental care can affect expression of traits
in offspring. From the point of view of offspring, parental care is an
environmental factor like food or air temperature. For the parents, however,
parental care is a trait like any other trait; it is determined by parental
genes and the environment to which the parent is exposed. Through their effects
on the offspring environment, both parental genes and the parental environment
can affect offspring traits such as growth and developmental time. These effects
of parental genes and environment on trait expression in offspring are called
indirect genetic effects and indirect environmental effects, respectively. The
indirect genetic effects are of special interest, because they can influence
rate and direction of response of traits to natural selection. This study will
investigate how parental care affects trait evolution. The specific objectives
are to 1) determine the amount of variation in progeny traits that is due to
indirect genetic effects in an insect species with parental care, 2) investigate
whether the influence of indirect genetic effects depends on the developmental
stage in which the trait is expressed as has been observed in many mammals, and
3) examine the relative influence of indirect genetic effects in individuals
reared with and without parental care. The results of this research will
significantly increase our understanding of trait evolution in animals with
parental care. The comparison between an insect with parental care with mammals
and birds will give us insights about the generality of the evolutionary models
including parental effects. These models have been developed primarily based on
observations in domesticated mammals. The comparison of parental effects in
animals reared with and without parental care will provide invaluable
information about how parental care affects trait evolution.