* 0309695
* Stable Isotopes in Archaeological Research: An Experimental Study of Diet-Tissue Fractionation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2005
* USD 138,282.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Matt Sponheimer and Thure Cerling
will conduct a series of experiments designed to improve our ability to
reconstruct the diets and environments of ancient populations. In recent years
chemical techniques such as stable isotope analysis have become an important
tool for investigating our predecessors. The idea behind this method is that
"you are what you eat," enabling researchers to provide information about an
individual's diet and environment through analysis of their soft or hard
tissues. Importantly, one must know the proper relationship between dietary
chemical compositions and those of tissues such as bone collagen, enamel
mineral, or hair that are often preserved at archaeological sites. At present,
however, there is considerable controversy with regard to the exact nature of
these diet-tissue relationships, which can significantly complicate
interpretation of archaeological stable isotope data. The goal of this project
is to investigate these diet-tissue relationships, and in so doing, increase the
ability of archaeologists to research humanity's recent and distant
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the team will raise four mammalian
species on identical diets. Tissues will be obtained at intervals throughout the
experiment, and the team will collect data on urine, feces, methane, and
respired carbon dioxide production. The study will specifically test hypotheses
put forward by archaeologists about the effects of age, diet, and physiology on
mammalian stable isotope compositions. For instance, it has been suggested that
the consumption of milk by infants significantly alters their stable isotope
compositions relative to their mothers, and that weaning leaves an observable
isotopic "fingerprint" in their bones, teeth, and hair. This study will
investigate these and other questions for the first time in multiple species,
and in so doing, increase the accuracy of paleodietary and paleoenvironmental
reconstructions. Moreover, the samples obtained during the experiment will also
be shared with colleagues both in the U.S. and overseas in an effort to foster
greater scientific collaboration and develop new techniques for investigating
the past. The project will also train graduate and undergraduate students in
stable isotope analysis and animal nutrition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable
isotope analysis can be used on tissues of virtually any age, so this study can
contribute to our understanding of the origin of humanity, as well as the rise
and fall of civilizations. Furthermore, stable isotope analysis has become an
important tool in paleontology, ecology, wildlife conservation, physiology, and
forensic science, so this study will make an important contribution above and
beyond its archaeological significance. Thus, the project will train young
researchers, foster inter-university and international cooperation, and make
broad contributions to archaeology and other disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;