* 0309400
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolution of Host Specialization in Hawaiian Moths
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,160.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Rosemary Gillespie and Ms. Mandy Heddle at the
University of California at Berkeley to study the evolution and ecology of a
group of moths found only in the Hawaiian Islands. Some of these moths are able
to feed on only one species of plant (specialists), while others have a broad
diet feeding on many different species of plants (generalists), a phenomenon
that Gillespie and Heddle will investigate. They hypothesize there is an
evolutionary component to the host plant choices a moth makes, such that
specialized species are unable to expand their host plant range. The inability
to diversify to alternative food sources may make these species more susceptible
to extinction. By examining the evolutionary relationships among these moths,
they aim to test this hypothesis and detect specialist species that may be at
risk from extinction. To do this, relationships among the moths will be
determined using molecular (DNA sequences) and morphological data. In addition,
field collections of caterpillars will allow them to examine the host-plant
associations of each species.

The Hawaiian Islands have more endangered animals and plants than any other
state. The moths in this study are an integral part of Hawaii's forest
ecosystems; they are important prey items for birds and other insects and
different species can feed on both native and non-native plants. However,
identification guides are non-existent, and it is generally impossible to
associate ecological information with a given species. This poses serious
problems for conservation, preventing the development of any effective
management or recovery plans for rare species. As part of this study an
interactive guide to moths will be produced on CD that will include images of
adults and larvae, facilitating easy identification. This guide will be made
available to land managers, federal agencies, and research institutions.