* 0309112
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Intestinal Parasites, Acorn Masts, and Population Dynamics of Peromyscus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Janis Antonovics, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,932.00

Infectious disease may substantially impact the health and stability of natural
animal populations. White-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus) and deer mouse (P.
maniculatus) populations have been found to fluctuate due to peaks in food
availability from oak acorn masts. It is likely that intestinal pathogens
identified in Peromyscus contribute substantially to population crashes. The
goal of this project is to understand how infectious disease can cause animal
populations to crash or cycle throughout time. Long-term data on demography and
infection will be used to quantify the effect of disease on individual survival
and fecundity. In addition, experimental field manipulations will demonstrate
the causative effects and interactions of disease and food on population
dynamics of Peromyscus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments will help
determine how infectious disease impacts natural animal populations. This work
is important because for most animal-born disease outbreaks that infect humans
we know little about what factors in the animal's ecology drive disease
outbreaks. In addition, the general relationship between disease incidence and
population abundance has important implications for the emergence of new
pathogens in human and animal populations. Finally, this work will help resolve
the critical ecological factors that drive disease in natural populations and
threaten the survival of animal populations threatened by disease. &lt;br/&gt;