* 0309152
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental Investigations of the Role of Mycorrhizal Fungi in Woody Plant Encroachment in Califorina Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Abstract DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Experimental Investigations of the Role of
Mycorrhizal Fungi in Woody Plant Encroachment in California Grasslands Sousa
DEB-0309152

A growing number of studies suggest that mycorrhizal fungi may play an important
role in determining plant distributions, and the forest-grassland ecotone is a
model system to investigate this question. This research investigates the role
of mycorrhizal fungi in woody plant encroachment into California grasslands. It
examines how mycorrhizal assemblages change across the forest-grassland ecotone
and the mechanism by which these fungi facilitate woody plant encroachment. The
P.I. will use a combination of manipulative field and greenhouse experiments as
well as molecular techniques to assess the importance of mycorrhizal fungi in
woody plant encroachment. The use of molecular techniques along with field-based
manipulative experiments will provide a unique opportunity to experimentally
determine the importance of mycorrhizal fungi. This research will make a
significant contribution towards our current understanding of the factors
affecting plant distributions and the growing literature of forest-grassland
ecotone dynamics. Woody plant encroachment is a widespread phenomenon that has
considerable concerns for rangeland management. By examining a potentially key
factor affecting woody plant establishment, this research on mycorrhizal fungi
will make an important contribution to effective management strategies.