* 0309559
* Volatile Recycling in Subduction Zones and Formation of Primitive Arc Magmas: A Case Study of the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Paul Wallace, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2008
* USD 242,342.00

EAR-0309559&lt;br/&gt;Wallace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones play an
important role in global geochemical cycles because they provide a pathway for
crustal materials to be recycled into the Earth's mantle. The materials include
many volatile compounds such as water, carbon, sulfur, and chlorine. Subducted
crustal materials become heated by the overlying mantle as they descend, and the
volatiles are at least partially released by metamorphic devolatilization
reactions, after which they migrate into the hot mantle above the subducted
slab. This process causes the overlying mantle to melt because water lowers the
melting temperature of mantle rocks. Thus recycling of volatiles in subduction
zones is responsible for widespread formation of magma in Earth's mantle,
resulting in chains of volcanoes such as those of the circum-Pacific "Ring of
Fire". &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this study are to investigate how volatile
elements (H, C, S, Cl) are recycled in subduction zones and the role of
volatiles in magma generation in the mantle wedge above subducting slabs.
Because volatiles are almost completely degassed from magma during eruption, it
is difficult to measure original concentrations directly. To circumvent this
problem, the PI will analyze tiny inclusions of melt, quenched to glass upon
eruption, that are trapped in olivine crystals in volcanic rocks. Such
inclusions commonly preserve their pre-eruption volatile contents if they remain
sealed in the crystals during eruption. The PI will collect samples from a
number of subduction-related volcanoes in Mexico and analyze trapped inclusions
in olivine using several techniques to measure the concentrations and isotopic
compositions of volatiles, as well as other major and trace elements. The PI
will use the results to test some fundamental ideas about volatile recycling and
magma generation in subbduction zones and to construct quantitative models of
volatile fluxes. The resulting data set will be the most extensive in terms of
spatial coverage and most complete in terms of volatile element concentrations
and isotope ratios for any subduction zone region in the world. &lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PI will integrate research and education by the involvement of
a graduate and undergraduate student in fieldwork, sample analysis, geochemical
modeling, hypothesis testing, and presentation of results at scientific meetings
and through publications. These students will learn to use a number of
sophisticated analytical techniques. The project, particularly the fieldwork,
will involve collaboration with scientists and students in Mexico, thus
providing a mutually beneficial scientific and cultural experience for them and
their U.S. counterparts. Because of this collaboration, the project is partially
supported by NSF's Americas Program of the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;