* 0309470
* Collaborative Research: Acadian vs. Taconian Tectonism in the Southern Appalachian Western Blue Ridge - Implications for Models of Terrane Accretion
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Matthew Kohn, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 134,971.00

0309470&lt;br/&gt;Kohn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrane accretion models of
continental growth will be tested and refined in the southern Appalachian
western Blue Ridge (WBR) in a collaboration involving (a) detailed stratigraphic
and structural analysis of putative Laurentian metasedimentary basins, (b) U-Th-
Pb investigation of metamorphic and stratigraphic ages, and (c) 40 Ar/39 Ar
analysis of low-grade and high-grade metasediments in the WBR, NC and TN, via
comparison of the resulting WBR tectonic history to the series of tectonic
events recorded along strike (NE and SW), in the foreland to the NW, and to
outboard terranes. Long viewed as the first event in a series of Paleozoic
accretions affecting the eastern Laurentian trailing margin, WBR deformation and
metamorphism have been commonly ascribed to Taconian (~450 Ma) arc-continent
collision. Subsequent accretion events are thought to have occurred
progressively outboard of the WBR during the Acadian (~400 Ma) and Alleghanian
(~300 Ma) orogenies. Thus, traditionally the Appalachians support common "pile-
up" accretion models whereby arcs and continental fragments accrete one after
another to the edge of the growing continent. Taconian-age metamorphism and
deformation are well documented on the Laurentian margin in the northern
Appalachians, and in the Eastern Blue Ridge (EBR) immediately outboard of the
WBR. However, several recent studies now suggest Acadian rather than Taconian
metamorphism for the southern Laurentian margin. These include: a) the discovery
of middle Paleozoic fossils from a key WBR stratigraphic unit, b) sequence
correlations between the lower-middle Paleozoic Talladega belt to the southwest
and WBR units, and c) sparse Late Silurian-Early Devonian U-Th-Pb ages from
areas with reported Ordovician 40 Ar/39 Ar ages (which are the main line of
evidence for Taconian metamorphism). Stratigraphic and structural studies
suggest that a single cleavage-forming event affected pre-Ordovician (?) through
Siluro-Devonian rocks. Thus, the Ordovician 40 Ar/39 Ar ages may be incorrect,
and deformation and metamorphism were exclusively Acadian. If verified, these
observations for the distal SE edge of Laurentia have a major impact on
accretion models for the Appalachians because they imply that the Taconian
arc(s) did not fully accrete along the length of the continent. Instead, the
southern arc(s) may have stalled outboard until receiving a later "push" from an
approaching continental fragment during the Acadian. A tri-partite
stratigraphic, structural, and geochronologic investigation of WBR rocks will be
conducted in two transects through the Great Smoky Mountains, Murphy syncline,
and Foothills belt, to identify original ages, correlatability of rocks with
known Laurentian sediments, structural compatibility between any pre- and post-
Taconian rocks, age(s) of metamorphism, and cooling history, especially to
identify whether the Taconian orogeny, Acadian orogeny, or both affected the
area. Stratigraphic and structural research will focus on a transect along US64
from the Murphy syncline to the Foothills belt, and will show whether the
classic metasedimentary WBR sequences are in fact Laurentian, and if and how
they correlate with paleontologically well-dated Laurentian sequences along
strike to the SW (Talledega belt). Metamorphic and chronologic research will
include two transects, one along US64 (i.e., identical to the stratigraphic
transect) and a second through the Smokies. Ion probe U-Pb ages will be
collected (a) from zircons in interbedded and cross-cutting igneous rocks to
help define stratigraphic age assignments, and (b) from Proterozoic
(Grenvillian) gneisses to see whether they record any evidence for a Taconian
disturbance. TIMS U-Pb ages of microsampled metamorphic monazite grains in the
matrix of high-grade rocks and inclusions in staurolite and kyanite will provide
the most precise and accurate age estimate of prograde metamorphism. Finally, 40
Ar/39 Ar analyses of low-grade rocks and high-grade amphiboles that previously
indicated Ordovician 40 Ar/39 Ar ages will be restudied with more detailed Ar-
extraction and laser microsampling to see whether ages are biased by excess 40
Ar (amphiboles), or unreset detrital micas (low-grade rocks). All data will be
combined to show whether metasediments are truly Laurentian, and which orogenies
affected the area. The observed tectonic evolution will then be used to place
this part of the WBR into an overall framework of Appalachian terrane accretion,
both across strike in the southern Appalachians and along strike to the northern
Appalachians. Ultimately understanding the history of Appalachian terrane
assembly will inform general terrane accretion processes during formation of
continents, as well as plate reconstruction hypotheses for the lower
Paleozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have broad impact in
several areas. (a) Research-education links. This work will provide research
training for 3 graduate students and one undergraduate. As described in Hames'
and Kohn's vitas, research samples and local research areas figure heavily in
their undergraduate teaching and field programs.&lt;br/&gt;(b)
Research/education infrastructure. The collaborations described in the proposal
are largely first time (i.e., the PI's have not worked together before). This
research will strengthen tectonics community networks within the southeast, as
will the proposed collaborative work between Kohn and Coleman (UNC-CH). (c)
Educational dissemination. All PIs publish and present their results in a timely
and appropriate fashion to other geoscientists. It is also important that one
study site is in Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Kohn maintains close ties
to park personnel. New results will be rapidly disseminated to the interpreters
and ultimately the ~10 million park visitors each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;