* 0309142
* Ancestry, Altitude and Placental Development in Highlands Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/19/2002,07/31/2005
* Stacy Zamudio, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2005
* USD 236,125.00

This study seeks to discover the mechanisms that evolution favored in human
placentas that permit an unborn baby to grow normally, even when there is much
less oxygen than is present at sea level. The hypothesis is that in people with
a long evolutionary history at high altitude (Andeans), evolution has favored
the development of more blood vessels and better transport of nutrients in the
placenta as compared to women of sea level European ancestry. The project is
important because despite profound socioeconomic disadvantages, women who are
native to high altitude (Andeans, Tibetans) have larger babies and fewer
complications of pregnancy than women without an evolutionary history of
residence at high altitude (Europeans, Chinese). The broader merits of the
proposal include international collaboration with Bolivian scientists and
training of aspiring scientists in the second-poorest country in the Western
Hemisphere. The study includes marginalized and under-served Native American
women in this region, providing them with ultrasound and other prenatal tests
not available during pregnancy for poor women living in Bolivia. From a broader
scientific perspective, the results of this study will point to the placental
genetic systems most subject to evolutionary natural selection under conditions
of environmental adversity, and thereby inform scientists about the reasons why
some babies fail to grow normally during intrauterine life, regardless of
altitude.