* 0309016
* Tectonic Versus Magmatic Controls on Stress Field Characteristics, Fracture Patterns, and Fault Evolution at an Oblique Spreading Center
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Simon Kattenhorn, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 149,429.00

This project examines the controls on oblique spreading center fault and
fracture patterns on the Reykjanes Peninsula in southwest Iceland: one of the
few places on Earth where an obliquely-spreading mid-ocean ridge becomes
subaerial. The project involves a comprehensive analysis of the structural
evolution of an oblique spreading center through close examination of the
kinematic history recorded by fault and fracture patterns. The project is also
considering theoretical mechanical controls on fracture patterns and is thus
applicable to oblique spreading centers worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;Orientations of
faults and fractures are directly linked to their ages and length distributions.
Furthermore, the stress and kinematic histories evidenced by these fractures are
spatially variable across the Reykjanes Peninsula, both as a function of
distance along the length of the rift axis and as a function of distance
perpendicularly away from it. This implies that the angle of spreading obliquity
cannot be the sole control on fault and fracture patterns and evolutionary
history at an oblique spreading center. The project is testing the hypothesis
that spatial and temporal variability in stress fields and fault/fracture
evolution is due to the combined influence of the plate spreading direction,
laterally variable magma pressures in the zone of the active volcanism along the
rift axis, and local stress perturbations caused by slipping faults and surface
monoclinal flexures along the rift margins.&lt;br/&gt;The current project is
addressing these controls on oblique spreading center stress fields through a
rigorous field analysis of the distribution of fault and fracture orientations,
evolutionary history, kinematic indicators, and interpreted stress history
across the length and width of the Reykjanes Peninsula. Field observations are
being analyzed in the context of spatial relationship to centers of volcanic
activity, eruptive history, seismic behavior, and spreading obliquity.
Underlying mechanical controls on spatial variations in fault/fracture
orientations, fault kinematics, and regional stress history are being examined
using 3-D numerical models to address structural characteristics in relation to
plate motion obliquity, spatially and temporally variable magmatic activity
along the rift axis, and the impact of existing active structures on local
stress patterns.