* 0309518
* Fluvial Systems and Climate in the Southwestern U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Jon Pelletier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2006
* USD 169,999.00

Fluvial Systems and Climate in the Southwestern
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;(EAR-0309518&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jon D.
Pelletier&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluvial systems
respond to changes in climate through erosion and deposition, creating a
geomorphic and stratigraphic record of those changes. Alluvial fans of the
southwestern U.S. preserve an excellent record of these changes from time scales
of hundreds to millions of years. A large database of river and fan terraces has
been developed from decades of field and laboratory work. These terraces are a
major component of the Southwestern landscape, controlling flood hazards, soil
development, ecosystems, and even human history. Our ability to read this record
is limited, however, by a poor understanding of fluvial-system response. For
example, is climate change or tectonics the major trigger of episodes of
alluvial-fan deposition in the Southwest? Can the internal dynamics of the
fluvial system be responsible for many of the terraces we observe? Does
deposition occur during humid periods, arid periods, or the transitions between
them? What are the time lags between environmental changes and fluvial-system
response? To answer these questions, the project will focus on two distinct
times scales. PI will reconstruct Quaternary cycles of erosion and deposition
from time scales of 10 kyr to 1 Myr. This long-term focus will enable him to
determine the effects of the magnitude and timing of different triggering events
for the same basin. In addition, PI will reconstruct the spatial and temporal
variability of latest Pleistocene and Holocene erosion and deposition from time
scales of 100 yr to 10 kyr in our study area in Cuyama Valley, CA. This work
will enable specific fluvial-system dynamics and hillslope-response mechanisms
to be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI has developed a process-based numerical
model of channel flow and sediment transport in complex topography to enable him
to better understand how fluvial systems respond to climatic changes. This model
uses existing digital data sets together with scenarios of climatic and tectonic
changes to model the fluvial-system evolution for specific study areas. The
proposed research will determine the signatures of terrace age and morphology
for each entrenchment mechanism so that the dominant processes that shape
alluvial fans of the Southwest can be determined. To do this, forward modeling
of fluvial-system response to different climatic and tectonic histories will be
performed and their results compared against the ages and geometries of
alluvial-fan terraces in our study areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong
background in quantitative methods is critical to providing geoscience students
with the skills they need to take part in cutting-edge science. As a second
phase of this project we will develop and integrate an interactive version of
the numerical model into our classroom laboratory in collaboration with
geoscience-education experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;