* 0309688
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Sediment Routing across Pristine Foreland Basins: Transport, Accumulation, and Floodplain-Channel Interactions within Three Fluvial...
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Thomas Dunne, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2006
* USD 35,756.00

Collaborative Research: Quantitative Sediment Routing across Pristine Foreland
Basins: Transport, Accumulation, and Floodplain-Channel Interactions within
Three Fluvial Dispersal Systems

Charles A. Nittrouer and Rolf E. Aalto, Washington University, EAR-0310339
Thomas Dunne, University of California, Santa Barbara, EAR-0309688

ABSTRACT

Large lowland rivers comprise the primary arteries through which water and
sediment are conveyed across continents, from mountain sources to estuarine and
marine sinks, providing critical habitat, fertile agricultural land, vital water
resources, and land for tens of millions of people. River sediment also serves
as the primary vehicle to transport carbon, nutrients, and pollutants. This
project will document and model the mechanisms of sediment transport,
accumulation, and floodplain-channel interaction within three large rivers
traversing pristine foreland basins in Bolivia and Peru. In trio, these rivers
exemplify the continuum of fluvial processes and rates for lowland rivers within
a wide range of tectonic scenarios, providing an ideal natural laboratory. This
project will also continue the development of new methods for floodplain
geochronology and computer analysis of river morphology and migration using
satellite imagery. PIs collaboration with French scientists represents a
productive new international partnership. They will generate data products
useful to educators, researchers, digital libraries, and navigators, as well as
research and results to be used for teaching at the university level. The
research benefits anyone interested in the full natural range of morphologies,
rates, or mechanics of water and particulate flux, channel-floodplain
interaction, and sedimentary basin dynamics for sand-bedded fluvial dispersal
systems.