* 0309620
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Postseismic Deformation Following the 2002 Denali Fault Earthquake Sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Eric Calais, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2007
* USD 249,989.00

Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Postseismic Deformation Following the 2002
Denali Fault Earthquake Sequence

The occurrence of the Mw 7.9 November 3, 2002 Denali earthquake has created the
opportunity to collect the surface deformation measurements needed to make
significant improvements in our knowledge of the dominant deformation mechanisms
in the Earth's lithosphere and the rheological parameters of the fault zone and
surrounding crust and upper mantle. The large moment of the Denali earthquake,
the precise pre-earthquake deformation field, and the immediate field response
make this the most promising target to address postseismic deformation problems
since modern space-geodetic methods became available. Our observational strategy
consists of continuous GPS (CGPS) measurements at 16 sites located at a wide
range of distances from the rupture, including some at > 150 km, in order to
distinguish processes in the deep fault zone, the lower crust and upper mantle.
Eleven of these sites were installed within two weeks after the event and have
since been operating continuously. A fundamental objective of the proposed
research is to precisely determine the time-dependence of the postseismic
deformation signal. CGPS measurements will be complemented by two GPS campaigns
per year, using existing benchmarks, in order to spatially densify the
postseismic displacement field. We will also test the ability of InSAR to
measure the coseismic and early postseismic deformation. The observational
efforts will be complemented by comprehensive modeling efforts to evaluate
candidate deformation mechanisms such as velocity-strengthening afterslip,
poroelastic rebound, and viscous flow in the lower crust and upper mantle.
Characterization of the relative importance of each of these mechanisms is a
major goal of this research project. We will fully explore the ability of the
different model types (e.g., time-dependent afterslip on and below the rupture
vs. powerlaw flow in the lower crust and upper mantle) to fit the data while
being consistent with complementary geological and geophysical constraints.

PIs: J. Freymueller (Univ. Alaska, Fairbanks), R. Burgmann (UC Berkeley), E.
Calais (Purdue University)