* 0309025
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Comparative Analysis of the Relationship Between Size, Aggression and a Signal of Aggressive Intent in Male Northern Swordtail Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Molly Morris, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 08/31/2004
* USD 7,900.00

A comparative approach will be used to assess the evolutionary relationship
between aggression and male size across the nine species of northern swordtail
fishes. Dyadic contests and mirror image stimulation tests will be used to
measure aggression levels. The relationship between the mean male size of each
species and the two measures of aggression will be analyzed using the
comparative method of independent contrasts to determine if male size and
aggression have been coevolving. In addition, the response of males to a signal
of aggressive intent (vertical bars) will be examined to determine if this
signal confounds the relationship between aggression and size. This study is
important because it will examine the role that male-male competition has played
in the evolution of male size, while examining the possible effects of a signal
and phylogeny on aggression. In addition to graduate training, undergraduates
participate in collection trips to Mexico, project design, data collection and
are included as authors on publications for which they have made a substantial
and intellectual contribution. This project also includes international
collaboration, with students and researchers from both countries benefiting from
in-field interactions and dissemination of research at each others home
universities.