* 0309076
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Population Genetics of Black-footed Albatrosses using SNPs: Implications for Regional Differentiation, Mate Choice, and Species Conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Scott Edwards, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,200.00

&lt;br/&gt;Black-footed albatrosses are one of three albatross species that
breed exclusively in the North Pacific. Mortality of thousands of these seabirds
annually has been recorded in North Pacific fisheries. When seabirds are taken
as non-target catch (bycatch) in fisheries operations, the impact to the species
as a whole must be evaluated. An effective means to determine colony of origin
of individual bycatch specimens, and to evaluate the population-level impact of
fisheries activities, is provided by the analysis of DNA data. The objectives of
this study are to determine population parameters for the Black-footed
albatross. Genetic (DNA) data will be collected to determine rates of population
growth and/or decline, levels of migration among colonies, genetic correlates of
mate choice, and whether or not populations of these seabirds consist of
discrete and unique groups that could merit special and separate protection.
Specifically, the identification and analysis of a large number of variable
sites (named single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs) in the DNA of Black-
footed albatrosses, as well as an analysis of genes of the Major
Histocompatibility Complex (MHC), which are thought to play a role in mate
choice in some species, will provide the above information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information provided by DNA data can facilitate the
design of efficient management strategies for species that are impacted by human
activities. This work will identify those seabird populations that are most
affected by interactions with fisheries operating throughout their ranges in the
North Pacific Ocean. In collaboration with governmental agencies such as the
National Marine Fisheries Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, these
results will have important applications in the evaluation of fisheries
regulations. For example, knowledge of which colonies are most at risk will
allow managers to be proactive about species conservation and thus will inform
the timing and location of time and area closures that already are standard
practice in some fisheries (such as the Hawaii-based longline fishery).
&lt;br/&gt;