* 0309207
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  An Ethnoecological Study of the Maijuna Indians of the Peruvian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* W. Hardy Eshbaugh, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 5,097.00

The Amazon basin is one of the most botanically rich regions of the world, whose
species and habitats are poorly understood and being altered at an alarming
rate. Amazonian indigenous peoples and their cultural knowledge are even more
threatened than species and habitats. Indigenous land cover classification
systems represent a repository of ecological knowledge that have been little
studied and poorly understood. This study will utilize an ethnoecological
framework to investigate how the Maijuna Indians of the Peruvian Amazon, a
vanishing people, perceive their natural world and the resources found there and
to better understand how they act on these perceptions. The objectives of this
study are to: (1) document the land cover classification system of the Maijuna;
(2) understand how they use the culturally-based land cover types, and their
associated resources, seasonally and temporally; (3) document the ecological
knowledge and management strategies associated with each land cover type; (4)
compare the land cover classification systems of Western Science and other
Amazonian indigenous groups to that of the Maijuna; and (5) ecologically assess
the Maijuna recognized land cover types. This project will provide insight into
how indigenous peoples perceive, use, and manage resources and land cover types
in Amazonia.

Broader Impacts: Aside from its major role in training a young bio-social
scientist, this ethnoecological study of the Maijuna of the Peruvian Amazon will
benefit society by documenting a major aspect of the ethnobotanical knowledge
and heritage of an indigenous group that has become increasingly marginalized.
The results, translated into Spanish, will be distributed throughout the
Sucusari river basin to serve as a permanent record for the Maijuna descendents.
Participatory mapping, a methodology that will be used to establish the
ethnoecological landscape, has been used by other indigenous groups and
organizations to show occupation of lands, make land claims, and to defend land
from incursions. This may be especially important to the Maijuna who have lost
direct control of much of their land. The research results may serve to empower
the Maijuna community to conserve their traditional ethnoecological and
ethnobotanical knowledge and resource management strategies. Finally,
understanding Maijuna land classification systems and management strategies may
well provide insights to western civilization on how to better manage the Amazon
as it succumbs to development.