* 0309972
* Building Layers within Layers - Topotactic Reaction Strategies for the Assembly of Metal-Anion Layers within Receptive Hosts
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2008
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 05/31/2008
* USD 444,214.00

Low temperature (less than 500 degrees Centegrade) synthetic strategies will be
developed to direct the preparation of new solid-state materials. By exploiting
ion exchange and intercalation methods, metal-anion layers (transition-metal
halide, oxide, chalcogenide, etc.) will be assembled within receptive host
compounds. Emphasis will be placed on multistep reaction processing where the
sequential application of exchange/intercalation methods will lead to new
intricately layered products. A complementary focus area will be the preparation
of new host materials receptive to low temperature topotactic manipulation --
new layered oxide hosts based on perovskite and Sillen structure types will be
sought. The detailed characterization of new compounds will be a particularly
important aspect of this project. Topotactically prepared materials, as well as
new hosts, are expected to demonstrate significant structural, magnetic, and
electronic properties, especially in the case of mixed-valence compounds.

%%%

This project will have both a broad scientific and educational impact. In terms
of the scientific impact, this will be seen in the long term with the
development of an extended series of low temperature reaction strategies. A
comprehensive library of reactions can be envisioned that would allow for the
directed, rational synthesis of new nonmolecular target compounds with specific
structural, electronic and magnetic features. Such extensive capabilities would
mirror those currently available to synthetic organic chemists. With respect to
the educational impact, efforts here will focus on the training of students and
presentations to the local community. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be involved in all aspects of the research component of this program. This
experience will provide them with valuable training in the synthesis and
characterization of new materials as well as the presentation and publication of
scientific data. A further aspect of this component is the involvement of
international students where undergraduate and/or graduate students from France
will work in this research group in the laboratory; this effort will serve to
promote solid-state chemistry at the international level. Finally, to
communicate topics on solid state and materials chemistry to nonscientists in
the local community, New Orleans public schools (K-12) will be visited to give
lectures and demonstrations on concepts pertinent to solid state and materials
chemistry.