* 0309121
* Thermodynamic, Petrologic, Geochemical and Isotopic Constraints on Metal (Re, Pt, Pd, Ir, Ru, Os and Other Metals) Mobility During Hydrothermal Serpentinization of Ultramafics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2006
* USD 214,023.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamic, petrologic, geochemical,
and isotopic constraints on metal (Re, Pt, Pd, Ir, Ru, Os, and other metals)
mobility during serpentinization in ultramafic-hosted hydrothermal circulation
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding metal mobility during hydrothermal
alteration of ultramafic rocks bears importance to a number of outstanding
problems in the earth sciences, such as quantifying hydrothermal fluxes of
trace-metals into or out of the ocean, quantifying the solubilities and
transport processes of metals during subduction and mantle metasomatism, and
finally, understanding the genesis of base metal ore deposits. The hypothesis
that is tested here is that serpentinizing hydrothermal fluids can result in
significant leaching of metals from ultramafic lithologies. A three-year study,
in which theoretical and observational data are combined to investigate the
geochemical behavior of trace metals during the serpentinization of ultramafic
lithologies (at temperatures &lt;400 o), is proposed. Particular emphasis is
placed on obtaining high quality data for the platinum group elements (PGEs) and
other chalcophile elements. The mobility and transport pathways of trace metals
during hydrothermal alteration of ultramafic rocks are investigated using a
continuous harzburgite to serpentinite transition outcrop in northern
California. Detailed field mapping, petrography, and isotopic (Os, Sr, and O)
and geochemical data are combined to estimate the degree of metal mobilization,
metamorphic temperatures, and water-rock ratios during serpentinization.
Relative metal mobilities are determined by direct comparison of the metal
contents between serpentinized harzburgites and fresh harzburgites and order-of-
magnitude absolute estimates of metal solubilities are calculated using
estimates of the water-rock ratio, as constrained by bulk-rock Os, Sr, or O
isotopic systematics. The fO2, pH, and major- and minor-element composition and
speciation in the serpentinizing hydrothermal fluids are inferred by combining
thermodynamic modeling of heterogeneous aqueous equilibria with field-based
constraints on equilibrium solid phases. The theoretical solubilities and
speciations of trace metals, particularly of Re and the PGEs, are also
calculated using appropriate association constants for various complexes, if
known. This integration of observation and theory provides a better
understanding of what properties of hydrothermal fluids (e.g., salinity, fO2,
pH, and temperature) facilitate metal transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;