* 0309426
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Tactic Switching, Habitat Selection, and Evolution of Alternative Mating Tactics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Gregory Grether, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,342.00

Tactic switching, habitat selection, and evolution of alternative mating
tactics.

Gregory F. Grether and Brenda Larison

How variation is maintained in natural populations is a fundamental evolutionary
question. Among the causes of variation, sexual selection plays a prominent
role, leading to exaggerated traits, alternative mating tactics, and even
speciation. Numerous studies have examined alternative mating tactics in species
in which individuals exhibit distinct differences in traits such as size or
color, and individuals use one tactic for life. However, most species exhibit
continuous variation in such traits, and individuals exhibit flexible use of
alternative tactics. An important question is how alternative mating tactics
evolve under these conditions. Besides exhibiting continuous variation in tactic
use and physical attributes, individuals of many species have the capability of
choosing the habitats they utilize. Where different habitats promote differences
in tactic use, this may further influence the evolution of alternative mating
tactics. The proposed study will investigate whether tactic switching and
habitat selection have promoted the evolution and maintenance of alternative
tactics in a damselfly in which tactic use is associated with continuous
variation in shape. This hypothesis predicts that, 1) tactic use and fitness
should vary in response to environment and shape, and 2) males should select
environments based on their shape. Predictions will be tested through
observations, enclosure experiments, examination of energetic costs, and
development of a dynamic state model. This project provides opportunities for
undergraduate research for both U.S. students and local Panamanian students.

