* 0309772
* The Proximity effect on Semiconducting Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Udo Becker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 166,993.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with a new type of reaction
mechanism: the co-reaction of different species on semiconducting mineral
surfaces or within a semiconducting mineral. Hereby, the reactants can be some
distance apart from each other and, nonetheless, enhance or inhibit the
interaction of the other reactant with the mineral. We first described this
reaction mechanism, which we call the proximity effect, a year ago and have
begun to evaluate the distance dependence between the reaction partners. In this
project, a systematic study is proposed on such proximity effects, mainly on
sulfides but also on some important reactions on oxides. The quantum mechanical
evaluation of the reaction partners such as As/Au or Bi/Ag in galena and
pyrite/arsenopyrite will help to understand previously described processes such
as coupled substitutions and the preferred incorporation of gold into
arsenopyrite and arsenian pyrite (compared with pyrite). Furthermore, the
detailed description of surface diffusion processes will elucidate the mechanism
of cluster or nanoparticle formation on sulfides surfaces or within the bulk.
Understanding these processes is important to develop a consistent theory on the
formation of gold and silver-containing ore deposits. Furthermore, the proximity
effect may play an important role in the oxidation and weathering of sulfides
and is, therefore, instrumental for the evaluation of environmentally important
processes in acid mine drainage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
environmentally and technically important reactions on oxides will be evaluated.
It was previously observed that the electronic structure on hematite surface
steps is significantly different from the valence band structure of flat
surfaces. Therefore, the directed proximity effect will be examined along steps,
which enhances electron transfer along steps on Fe2O3 surfaces and thus, the
adsorption and oxidation of Mn at these steps. Furthermore, the combined attack
of water and oxygen on different UO2 surfaces will be compared with the
previously observed formation of oxidation patches on pyrite in light of the
proximity effect. This effect helped resolve the complicated oxidation and
weathering mechanism on a FeS2 (001) surface and may resolve the reaction path
of uraninite corrosion, which is an unwanted effect in storing radioactive
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though the proposed studies aim at a basic
understanding of the proximity effect, it will have a broader impact on a wide
variety of applications in environmental geochemistry, in the evaluation of ore
deposits, in future options for metal extraction techniques, and for other
technical applications such as the purification of drinking water using hematite
as a filter material, or the evaluation of potential hazards due to the
weathering of uranium oxide minerals. Due to the general character of these
enhanced co-reactivity processes, the theory and findings can be applied to
other fields such as physics, chemical engineering, materials science, and
nuclear engineering. Early stages and planning of this project have already
sparked collaborations across campus and with other universities. Finally, the
new teaching program on minerals and materials surfaces at the University of
Michigan can use these processes as a practical application of the interface of
quantum mechanics of semiconductors and more classical approaches to mineral
surface reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;