* 0309796
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Enrique Rodriguez-Alegria, Rodriguez-Alegria, Enrique
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Enrique Rodriguez-Alegria Display, Production, and Power in colonial Mexico This
Minority Research and Training Post-Doctoral Fellowship project examines the
roles of production, exchange, and display of material culture in the
transformation of ideologies and power in colonial Mexico. By using
archaeological and historical data, the researcher will compare the use and
production of both pottery and cloth in sixteenth-century Mexico City and
Xaltocan, an indigenous community in the Basin of Mexico. In this comparative
study he will examine the role of imports and traditional Aztec crafts in
strategies of display in a rural community and an urban center, and show how
production of pottery and cloth changed in the early colonial period. By placing
the data on craft production and display in a wider social, cultural, and
historical context, the researcher will then address issues of the relationship
between craft production, consumption, display, and the formation of ideologies
that supported class stratification in colonial Mexico. The project will begin
in Mexico, in the summer of 2003. He will excavate in Xaltocan to study colonial
ceramics in the site and compare them with ceramics from Mexico City. During
this phase of the project he will work with Elizabeth Brumfiel. He will then go
to the Museum of Anthropology of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, where
he will compare a subsample of 250 ceramic sherds from Xaltocan with the
collections from Mexico at the Museum. At Ann Arbor, the PI will work under the
supervision of Jeffrey Parsons, his NSF post-doctoral fellowship sponsoring
scientist, who will help identify the appropriate collections for comparison
between Late Aztec and Early Colonial ceramics and will guide the PI's research
on these ceramics to obtain the data necessary to understand changes in
production. The researcher will also send the subsample of 250 ceramic sherds
for chemical characterization to study the ceramics. provenience. Finally, he
will go to Spain to study cloth use and production in Mexico with historical
documents at the Archivo General de Indias in Seville. In Spain he will work
under the supervision of Jose Hernandez Palomo, who will help him identify the
appropriate documents and plan how to obtain the information needed for this
phase of the project. This study will be of broad impact to studies of cultural
change in colonial situations. It will provide a model that resolves some of the
quandaries that have plagued archaeological studies of "acculturation" by
focusing on how actors used material culture in their strategies for
transforming power in the colonial period. Furthermore, this project will impact
theories of ideology and power by focusing on production and consumption in a
period in which status and social classes were in unprecedented flux, as were
ideologies and their material aspects. Through this study, The research will
show that ideologies were manipulated, expressed, and even embodied through
mundane objects of daily life, and in the activities in which these objects were
made and used.

