* 0309546
* Investigative Process & Technology in Introductory Physiology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Scott Hawke, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 43,030.00

A computerized physiology laboratory is supporting investigative, inquiry-based
learning in a required, sophomore-level introductory core biology course,
Physiological Dynamics in Animals and Plants (PDAP). The course provides
students with an understanding of how divergent animal and plant physiological
systems with similar adaptive functions possess a unity of form and function at
the cellular level. It is adapted from an existing lab course that was developed
at Harvey Mudd College. Signal transduction is used as a paradigm to unify plant
and animal physiology. The laboratory is the first in a three-year sequence of
experiences to develop students' scientific process skills in preparation for a
capstone senior research thesis and introduces students to important data
acquisition and communication technologies. For the first six weeks, students
employ Biopac and Qubit systems in a series of animal and plant laboratory
exercises of increasing technical sophistication. In a weekly recitation
session, students learn to use web-based course management software for peer
review and develop proposals for a research project. Two-student teams then
carry out experimental investigations of their own design, reporting weekly to
professors and peer review teams through an "electronic lab notebook. " In the
final two weeks students participate in a "mini-symposia." Expected student
learning outcomes are being assessed longitudinally with the help of a
professional consultant. Results and course materials are being disseminated
through presentations at professional meetings, articles in pedagogical
journals, and through the course web site. It is expected that students will
acquire the ability to design and interpret physiological studies, that they
will develop an appreciation for parallels between animal and plant systems, and
that the program will increase student participation in physiology. Broader
impacts: The grant is serving a diverse K-12 population and enhance teacher
preparation by providing equipment to outreach programs that train teachers in
technology or employ biology majors as mentors in K-12 programs.