* 0310540
* Inquiry-Based Laboratories with a Biobehavioral Emphasis for Introductory Psychology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Richard Ettinger, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,930.00

(71) Psychology, Biological Aspects In this project, we are improving the
introductory level psychology curriculum by equipping a laboratory for
experimental and psycho-physiological studies. Our objectives are to increase
students' interest in and understanding of psychology as a research-based field,
to improve students' quantitative preparation and to provide opportunities for
use of technology, and -- for majors and minors -- to enhance students'
readiness for advanced courses by practice with key concepts of experimental
design and familiarity with descriptive data analysis. The objectives of
enhancing students' methodological and quantitative skills are in keeping with
national pedagogical emphases on critical thinking and stronger preparation in
scientific and technological areas. We are introducing active, inquiry-based
laboratory experiences for students at the introductory level. The questions
posed to the students are taken from various content areas within psychology. We
are also making use of recently published experiments in psychology by Hock
("Forty Studies that Changed Psychology," NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002) and the
collection of experiments developed for use in the E-Prime software system.
However, the one theme that is consistently being carried across areas is the
relation between biology and behavior. Few universities include laboratory
sections in psychology at the introductory level. We model our project on the
introductory course sequence and laboratory sections used at Reed College and
are adapting their approach for the student population at Eastern Oregon.
Although we have different student populations, we have similar goals of
increasing interest in research-based psychology and improving students'
facility with quantitative and methodological skills. This project also matches
our university's initiative to enhance training related to biotechnology as well
as its overall goal of being a quality student-centered public liberal arts
institution.