* 0310776
* TC:    Usage Control Models, Architectures and Mechanisms Based on Integrating Authorizations, Obligations and Conditions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Ravinderpal Sandhu, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Karl Levitt
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract

This project is developing a new approach called usage control to protection of
information and system resources in cyberspace. In addition to the traditional
concept of authorization (whereby access is authorized by explicit or implicit
permissions and rights), usage control includes obligations (conditions which
must be met before and during access) and conditions (environmental and system
conditions). Usage control further recognizes continuity of access enforcement
so the decision to allow access is not only made prior to access, but also while
the access is underway. Finally, usage control recognizes the need for
mutability whereby appropriate attributes need to be updated as access proceeds.
This project will develop, refine and formalize models for usage control. It
will consider applications from healthcare, digital rights management and
electronic commerce domains. Concurrently it will investigate architectures for
enforcing usage control. This research seeks to give clarity and intellectual
cohesion to a variety of proposals to enhance the classic access matrix model.
This intellectual foundation will in turn foster additional basic and applied
research. The results of this research are being taught in existing GMU courses
as they emerge. These results will influence and shape the next generation of
access control systems.