* 0310415
* How Do Intracontinental Faults Terminate?  The Altyn Tagh Fault and Its Connection With a Possible S-Directed Backthrust System in Western Tibet as a Type Example
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Eric Cowgill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 228,082.00

There are currently two mutually exclusive views of continental deformation:
either continents deform heterogeneously by breaking into microplates or they
deform homogenously as continua. Distinguishing between these views centers on
determining the extent to which intracontinental faults link to form microplate-
boundary systems that remain active for tens to hundreds of millions of years.
The Indo-Asian collision presents an excellent opportunity to understand the
long-term evolution of fault linkages since it has been active throughout the
Cenozoic and is cut by a number of major faults. The left-lateral Altyn Tagh
fault is the largest of these structures, and has been active since the early
stages of the collision. Understanding how this fault terminates is critical for
determining if it has formed part of a long-lived microplate-boundary system. A
field-based structural and thermochronologic study is testing the hypothesis
that the western end of the Altyn Tagh fault linked with an early Cenozoic,
south-directed backthrust belt. Field mapping and cooling histories derived from
40Ar/39Ar analyses of basement K-feldspars together indicate that three faults
are key structures within this hypothesized south-directed backthrust belt.
Whether the structural evolution of these three fault systems is consistent with
predictions of the backthrust hypothesis, the following are are being determined
for each fault system: 1) the geometry and history of motion, 2) the timing of
deformation, 3) the total Cenozoic offset, and 4) how these faults link with the
Altyn Tagh system. The study focuses on the Karakax, Yulung, and Loqzung
systems. The Karakax fault is presently an active, north-dipping strike-slip
fault but appears to have an earlier history of reverse/thrust motion. The
Yulung fault system cuts Tertiary volcanics and may have uplifted a range of
>6800 m peaks during south-directed thrusting. Within the Loqzung fault system,
Cretaceous and Tertiary strata are locally deformed by south-directed
structures. If the backthrust hypothesis is correct, the Altyn Tagh fault formed
part of a microplate-boundary system that has existed since the earliest stages
of the Indo-Asian collision. This result would support the microplate model for
the Indo-Asian collision zone and contradict the idea that continental
deformation is fundamentally homogeneous at long time scales.