* 0310995
* Neuroendocrine Basis of Reproductive Flexibility
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Thomas Coombs-Hahn, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 64,243.00

PI Transfer Abstract from original Proposal Coombs-Hahn, Thomas IBN 98-08470
Fluctuating environmental conditions require that animals time demanding
activities such as breeding to coincide with periods when food is abundant. They
achieve this by responding to cues from the environment with neuroendocrine
adjustments that affect reproductive physiology and behavior. A great deal has
been learned about these processes through studies of temperate zone birds that
breed on relatively invariant schedules each spring, but little is known of how
opportunistic species capable of breeding throughout the year time breeding
flexibly. This study explores how the brain regulates reproduction in a species
that breeds on an extremely flexible schedule. Red crossbills are finches that
are highly specialized to feed on the seeds of coniferous trees such as pines.
These seeds may be sufficiently abundant for the birds to nest at almost any
time of year. However they are not produced regularly at particular locations.
Consequently the birds must wander nomadically, and the season when they
discover abundant seeds may vary dramatically from year to year. Crossbills
regularly breed during about 10 months of the year (late December through early
October), and apparently occasionally nest even during the remaining two months.
Two complementary questions about how crossbills achieve this reproductive
flexibility will be addressed in the present study. First, how does reproductive
responsiveness to environmental cues change seasonally in crossbills? In other
temperate zone birds, the spring increase in day length first leads to
reproductive development, but then induces birds to become "refractory" to long
days. That is, they cease to respond to the stimulatory effects of long days.
This refractory period ensures that breeding terminates in time for birds to
replace their plumage and prepare for fall migration. It is ubiquitous among
temperate zone birds that have been studied thus far, and restricts flexibil ity
by prohibiting breeding for several months in late summer and autumn. It may be
absent or much reduced in crossbills. Two experiments will test to see whether
crossbills become refractory to the stimulatory effects of day length, and of
non-light cues such as food supply and behavior of mates. Second, how do changes
in crossbill sensitivity to environmental factors relate to changes in the
brain? All other temperate zone birds that have been studied show dramatic
reduction in production of brain reproductive hormones during the refractory
period. I will examine these hormones in crossbills at several times of year to
determine whether the greater reproductive flexibility of crossbills reflects
relatively constant hormone production, providing a mechanistic explanation for
their extraordinary reproductive flexibility. This study is important because it
addresses phenomenological and mechanistic questions in a species with a highly
flexible reproductive schedule. The results will clarify the physiological basis
of reproductive flexibility and help to reveal whether findings based on studies
of rigidly seasonal breeders apply to birds generally, and to reproductive
opportunists in particular. Studies of how animals respond to environmental
information help us to understand the effects of changing environmental
conditions in the short and long term, and therefore have conservation
implications. They also answer basic questions about responses to the
environment that continue to provide insight into how all animals, including
humans, may be affected by their environment.