* 0310960
* Pseudorandomness, Codes, and Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* David Zuckerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 04/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal is about pseudorandomness and its relationship with coding
&lt;br/&gt;theory and cryptography. A fundamental object in the study of
&lt;br/&gt;pseudorandomness is the extractor, introduced by Nisan and the PI. An
&lt;br/&gt;extractor is an algorithm which extracts high-quality randomness from
a &lt;br/&gt;low-quality random source, using a few auxiliary high-quality
random &lt;br/&gt;bits. Recently, the PI and co-authors have discovered
interesting &lt;br/&gt;connections between extractors and coding theory.
Specifically, they &lt;br/&gt;showed how to use Reed-Muller codes to build good
extractors, and how &lt;br/&gt;extractors yield good list decodable codes. While
there have been &lt;br/&gt;improvements in these methods, optimal extractors
have not been &lt;br/&gt;achieved, and the PI proposes to work towards that
goal. The PI also &lt;br/&gt;plans to work on related issues in coding
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PI plans to work on using low-
quality randomness in &lt;br/&gt;cryptography, where less work has been done.
Cryptography also &lt;br/&gt;motivates the notion of deterministic extractors,
which extract &lt;br/&gt;randomness from low-quality sources without any
auxiliary random bits. &lt;br/&gt;While this is impossible for general low-
quality sources, it is possible &lt;br/&gt;with more specialized ones. For
example, the PI and a student &lt;br/&gt;constructed deterministic extractors
for so-called oblivious bit-fixing &lt;br/&gt;sources. This has applications to
exposure-resilient cryptography, where &lt;br/&gt;cryptographic primitives are
made to work even if large portions of keys &lt;br/&gt;are exposed. The PI
proposes to improve previous results and work on &lt;br/&gt;related
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many scientists
use pseudorandom generators in Monte Carlo &lt;br/&gt;simulations,and may get
wrong answers without knowing it. Advances in &lt;br/&gt;pseudorandom generators
can therefore mean advances in other areas of &lt;br/&gt;science. Advances in
cryptography are also important to society, as &lt;br/&gt;computer security
becomes more relevant for national security. The &lt;br/&gt;project also has
educational benefits: the PI's research is integrated &lt;br/&gt;with his
teaching, especially in his mentoring of graduate students and
&lt;br/&gt;postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;