* 0310072
* Terrestrial Carbon Sequestration in Devonian-Mississippian Anoxic Basins: Defining the Relative Importance of Higher Plants in Organic Accumulation in Marine Black Shales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Susan Rimmer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2007
* USD 169,979.00

EAR-0310072&lt;br/&gt;Rimmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial carbon
sequestration in Devonian-Mississippian anoxic basins: Defining the relative
importance of higher plants in organic accumulation in marine black shales
(EAR-0310072)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S.M. Rimmer, T.J. Algeo, A.M. Carmo, and H.D.
Rowe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The black
shales of the Appalachian Devonian Basin (ADB) provide a unique opportunity to
assess mechanisms that influenced water-column conditions, productivity, and
sedimentation in what may have been (at times) a regionally extensive anoxic
basin. While anoxic bottom-water conditions may have influenced organic carbon
accumulation, growing evidence suggests that other factors contributed
significantly to the degree and style of biogeochemical cycling within the water
column and to the patterns of sedimentation. Algeo and co-workers (1995, 2001)
have proposed that Late Devonian-Early Mississippian time was a pivotal episode
in Earth history, during which the enhanced influx of continentally derived
nutrients may have triggered reducing conditions in the marine environment and,
thereby, contributed to carbon sequestration. Not only did this event lead to
higher levels of productivity within the marine environment, but it also
provided an enhanced flux of organic matter to the basin, that of refractory
terrestrial matter associated with the evolution of higher plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating petrographic, geochemical, and
sedimentological proxies, PIs will reconstruct Late Devonian-Early Mississippian
conditions within the ADB. The proposed research will test the hypothesis that
the advent of terrestrial higher plants played a commanding role in altering the
mode of organic carbon accumulation in a spatially extensive, anoxic marine
setting. The significant, and perhaps unique, contribution PIs hope to make is
to document a marine record of this terrestrial colonization using organic
petrography and organic geochemistry, and demonstrate that an increased influx
of terrestrial organic matter across the ADB, particularly oxidized material
that may have formed during wildfires, may have been a more important factor in
the accumulation of organic-rich sediments during that time in Earth history
than previously realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;