* 0310618
* Practical, Hands-on NMR Spectroscopy Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* John Schaumloffel, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 05/31/2008
* USD 117,515.00

Chemistry (12) We are addressing the problem of limited hands-on experience
undergraduate STEM and non-STEM majors have with modern NMR spectroscopy with
this CCLI-A&amp;I project. We are providing instruction in NMR spectroscopy to
Chemistry, Biochemistry, Biology, Environmental Science and Education majors, as
well as pre-health profession students. Students use NMR in a hands-on capacity,
in multiple courses, at increasing levels of sophistication. General chemistry
students use NMR in an introductory experiment involving compound
identification. Organic chemistry students use proton, carbon-13, multi-pulse,
and 2-D NMR in structure determination and equilibrium experiments. In Physical
and Analytical chemistry, an upper-level elective course and undergraduate
research, students use NMR and CAChe modeling for structure determination,
equilibrium and kinetic analyses, and an environmental forensics investigation.
We believe that this project provides the students an enhanced understanding of
NMR and the use of this most important technique in solving a variety of
chemically related problems. Just as important, we feel hands-on use of the NMR
helps students overcome apprehension in using advanced instruments. It is our
goal that students completing the courses involved will go on to graduate study
and join the science and technology workforce with an enhanced, first hand
understanding of NMR spectroscopy.