* 0310700
* Collaborative Research:  A Novel Approach in Improving Power Electronics and Electric Drives Courses, Curriculum and Laboratories:  Multi-University Adaptation and Implementation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Richard Wies, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2005
* USD 43,448.00

Electrical Engineering (55)- Power electronics converters and electric drives
are being put into use at an increasingly rapid rate. They enable smarter
utilization of electric and electronic systems. Declining student interest in
strategically important fields of power electronics and electric drives is the
problem being addressed by this proposal. Illinois Institute of Technology
(IIT), Montana State University (MSU), University of Alaska-Fairbanks (UAF), and
University of North Dakota (UND) are the four participating universities
collaborating in this proposal. This project will improve education in
engineering at the four participating academic institutions through adaptation
and implementation of exemplary materials, laboratory experiences, and
educational practices that have been developed and proven successful at the
University of Minnesota (UMN) under the NSF CCLI-EMD-9952704 grant. Objectives
and expected outcomes of this project are intended to revitalize courses in
power electronics and electric drives with the state-of-the-art laboratories
and, thus, to provide the power industry with a larger supply of better educated
and trained engineers. These objectives are being accomplished by restructuring
existing courses and laboratories by adapting materials and approaches developed
at the UMN. Undergraduate students as well as working professionals needing
formal training are special audiences targeted by the project. These initiatives
motivate exceptional students to pursue their careers in these exciting and
challenging fields. Therefore, they sustain and strengthen the Nation's
engineering capabilities. Meeting a critical challenge of revitalizing courses
and laboratories in these strategic fields is the intellectual merit of this
collaborative proposal. Ensuring highest quality education and multi-
disciplinary interaction with mechanical engineering, computer engineering, and
other engineering fields is the main broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;