* 0310478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Use and Land Tenure in Prehispanic Tlaxcala
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Richard Lesure, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2005
* USD 11,953.00

Under the direction of Drs. Richard Lesure and Charles Frederick, Aleksander
Borejsza will collect data for his doctoral dissertation in the state of
Tlaxcala, in the highlands of Central Mexico. He will conduct archaeological
excavations of prehispanic agricultural terraces, and examine alluvial
sedimentary sequences influenced by past land use. The data will be used to
evaluate changing relationships between land use, land tenure and social
structure, from the time of the first sedentary communities (ca. 850BC) to the
early Colonial period (ca. AD1650).

Most slopes in Tlaxcala are or have been terraced for cultivation. Cultivated
and abandoned fields are interspersed with vast areas where the soil has been
stripped away by erosion. Intermittent streams flow in deeply entrenched
gullies, making irrigation impossible. This degraded landscape is a human
creation, but its origin is unclear. In other parts of Mexico land degradation
has been blamed on the population collapse that followed Spanish conquest, and
the introduction of the plough and grazing animals. In Tlaxcala this picture is
complicated by the effects of two millennia of intensive aboriginal agriculture.
Changes in prehistoric settlement patterns suggest that different agro-
ecosystems had repeatedly been created, abandoned and reclaimed in that time
span.

Anthropologists have observed that the investments required by intensive
agriculture bind farmers to the land. The increased costs of leaving a community
where land has been improved create opportunities for social exploitation by
emerging elites. At the same time checks are imposed on the severity of
exploitation, by creating agro-ecosystems that require intensive management by
motivated and skilled smallholders, whose direct supervision or replacement is
too costly for the elite. Conditions are set for the appearance of individual
and hereditary claims to land. The terracing of slopes exemplifies this process,
as the means of both intensifying agriculture and demarcating property. Episodes
of land degradation can have equally far-reaching social consequences, by
decreasing the value and amount of available farmland.

Whether such relationships obtained in the past, however, cannot be known until
firmly dated regional sequences of agricultural change are established. Borejsza
will make a step in that direction by dating the construction and abandonment of
terrace systems and relating them to the phenomena of soil erosion and stream
entrenchment. The techniques employed in terracing and their influence on yields
will be assessed through excavation and laboratory analysis. The age of terraces
will be established by dating the organic matter, charcoal and artifacts in
soils buried by terrace construction or included in the retaining walls and
fill. River valleys downstream from terraces will be surveyed for cutbanks where
alluvial deposits are exposed. There, cycles of sedimentation and soil
development will reveal alternating episodes of slope erosion and stability.

The research will contribute to the debate about how 'pristine' the landscape of
the Americas was at contact, and to what extent its modern degraded condition is
the effect of the introduction of technologies developed in different
environments and therefore ill-adapted to local conditions. It will also explore
the social context necessary for the successful introduction of particular
innovations in agriculture and the continued maintenance of artificial agro-
ecosystems.