* 0310517
* ITR: Theory of Nanomagnets
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Eugene Chudnovsky, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 232,453.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular nanomagnets and
nanoparticles represent the ultimate limit of miniaturization of magnetic memory
units. They have also been proposed as candidates for qubits - elements of
quantum computers. This project is advancing the knowledge of magnetism at the
nanoscale by answering fundamental questions of quantum physics of small magnets
and questions about applications of nanomagnets for the information technology
of the future. Decoherence of spin states of nanomagnets interacting with a
solid matrix is being investigated. The approach is being explored that maps the
spin-tunneling problem with dissipation onto the problem of particle
localization. Theory of resonant spin tunneling via Landau-Zener effect is being
extended to a system of interacting molecular magnets. Spontaneous emission of
the electromagnetic radiation by high-spin molecules is being studied and the
possibility of superradiance by the ensemble of nanomagnets is being
investigated. Theory of resonant spin tunneling due to the spin-lattice
coupling, hyperfine and dipolar interactions is being developed for such
nanomagnets as Mn12, [Mn4]2 dimer, Fe8 crystals of LiHoxY1-xF, and others.
Cooperation with U.S. and foreign theorists and experimentalists working in the
field of nanomagnetism is being developed. The knowledge of traditional and
modern magnetism is being transferred to graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;