* 0310542
* Ecological Detection and Disease Outbreaks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Marc Mangel, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 140,000.00

Mangel The study of disease using mathematical models has a long and rich
history. Much interesting and new mathematics has been motivated by disease,
because the problems are inherently nonlinear and multidimensional. On the other
hand, the emergence of new diseases, the re-emergence of older diseases, and the
potential of bioterrorism require that the mathematics be not only interesting
and new, but applied and applicable. In most cases of disease outbreak or
emergence, learning about the parameters of the disease will occur as it
progresses. Thus, the questions sit at the intersection of the biology of
disease, modeling, and analysis of data. In this project, the PI nvestigator
seeks to apply the process of ecological detection, in which different models
compete as explanations of process and the data arbitrate the outcome of this
competittion, to emerging or re-emerging disease. The mathematical theory of
disease leads to fundamental characterizations such as the basic reproductive
rate of the disease, the critical number of susceptibles for infectives to
initially spread, and the number of infectives in the population at the time
that the first infection/death is discovered. These in turn depend on
fundamental population parameters, and those are the focus of the proposed work.
Methods are developed so that, as a disease progresses, one can learn about the
transmission coefficient of the disease, the distribution of susceptibles, the
level of aggregation in encounters between susceptibles and infecteds, and the
level of detail needed in the models, for purposes of both understanding and
prediction. These methods are based on analysis of appropriate differential
equations, computer simulation, stochastic dynamic programming and Bayesian
statistical updating. Furthermore, real populations exist in networks, rather
than as randomly mixing individuals, about which two kinds of questions can be
asked. First, given a specific model for the transmission of disease, what kind
of network is created and what are the properties of that network? Second, given
a network of social interactions, what can be said about the dynamics of the
disease on this network? Both sets of questions are investigated. The proposed
work provides new conceptual and operational tools in dealing with emerging and
re-emerging diseases such as HIV/AIDS, epidemic behavior of hepatitis C, the
outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease and BSE in the UK, the potential of smallpox
as a bioterrorist agent, and malaria. The project also provides training to the
next generation of applied mathematicians and mathematical biologists, who --
more than any generation before them -- are keen to solve practical problems in
the real world. It thus represents science in the national interest at two
different levels.

