* 0310199
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Alternative Cap and Liner Systems for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Alaa Ashmawy, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 34,542.00

0310199&lt;br/&gt;Ashmawy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Alaa Ashmawy, Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida
and Dr. Ahmed H. Abdel-Rahman, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. Proper
design and construction of municipal solid waste (MSW) landfills is a challenge
to Egyptian communities where more than 10 million tons of MSW are generated
annually, and to U.S. communities where over 200 million tons are generated
annually. In Egypt, compacted clay liners (CCLs) or geosynthetic clay liners
(GCLs) form the main component of the hydraulic barrier in the landfill liner
and cover system. However, the search for alternative cover and liner systems in
both countries is driven by the need for economical solutions while maintaining
the same environmental and safety standards. The investigators plan to design
and assess the performance of two alternative systems, namely layered
incinerator ash-soil composites and processed construction and demolition
debris. These systems will be compared to conventional liners in terms of their
performance effectiveness as well as economical benefits through an extensive
laboratory and field-testing program. The project builds upon the expertise and
current research of both investigators in this field, and is expected to provide
economical and safe designs for use by private sector landfill operators and
municipal authorities in both countries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope:
Identification and evaluation of alternative landfill liner and cover systems is
a timely issue of significant importance to the geoenvironmental community. The
research will introduce innovative methods for beneficial use of incinerator ash
and construction debris in liner and cover systems. The facilities needed for
successful completion of the project are available at both the USF and the NRC.
The project builds upon the expertise and current research of both investigators
in this field, and is expected to provide economical and safe designs for use by
private sector landfill operators and municipal authorities in both countries.
The project activities include the participation of a graduate student as well
as undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, through an REU program
at the University of South Florida's College of Engineering. International
research opportunities are provided to the U.S. graduate student who will visit
the Egyptian laboratories. Research findings will be disseminated through
publication in journals, conference proceedings, and the Internet. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;