* 0310657
* Fine Particle Migration and Solute Fluxes in Sediment Beds:  Analysis of Sediment Structural Dynamics Using 3D Micro-Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2008
* USD 285,592.00

0310657&lt;br/&gt;Packman&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work will advance our
understanding of sedimentary processes by combining detailed observations of
bulk sediment transport with fine-scale measurements of the resulting three-
dimensional sedimentary structure. These processes will be studied in a
recirculating flume in order to provide control of flow conditions and to allow
direct observation of sediment transport processes. The Advanced Photon Source
at Argonne National Lab will be used to perform 3D X-ray micro-tomography and
X-ray fluorescence mapping on intact sediment cores taken from the flumes. The
primary goals of these observations will be to examine the evolution of bulk
sediment structure, specifically the development of heterogeneous depositional
structures. Sediment mixing will also be determined from observations of the
redistribution of tracer particles that will be specifically synthesized to
provide good contrast for X-ray tomography. A conservative solute will be used
to assess pore water fluxes resulting from stream-subsurface flow coupling.
Fundamental models will be applied to assess the migration of fine particles
within the sediment bed and the resulting development of heterogeneous
sedimentary conditions. This study will provide key understanding of the linkage
between hydrologic processes and sediment structure. Graduate and undergraduate
students involved in this project will gain experience with detailed, process-
oriented, interdisciplinary environmental studies. In addition, active
international collaboration and student exchange programs will encourage project
participants to engage in global scientific endeavors. Finally, involvement of
K-12 teachers and use of project laboratory facilities for educational tours and
demonstrations will disseminate project results to pre-college students and
encourage them to pursue similar studies.&lt;br/&gt;