* 0310808
* Adaptation and Implementation of Problem-Based Learning into Engineering Thermodynamics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Karim Nasr, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 96,421.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) Thermodynamics serves as the foundation for a
sequence of thermal science courses. It is normally taught using Subject-Based
Learning where topics are introduced following a well-established textbook
sequence in a teacher-centered environment. Students often cite this course as
difficult, full of abstract ideas, and don't seem to have any recollection of
fundamental principles in future courses. Extensive research on student learning
indicates that students learn better, retain more, and understand to a higher
level in active and practical learning environments. Problem-Based Learning has
such desirable features, promoting critical thinking and enhanced retention of
knowledge. Therefore, we have restructured classical thermodynamics around
practical applications where fundamental principles are introduced just-in-time
and on a need to have basis. The work being adapted comes from Havener and
Barlow in their introduction to engineering course, which provided guidance for
our curriculum development efforts. Specifically, their work in Project Falcon
Base has been helpful.

Traditional coverage of topics is incorporated in the form of modules where
theoretical information is presented to support understanding and discovery of
knowledge as students apply inquiry-based learning. Students assess their own
knowledge in the process and produce concept maps linking fundamental principles
to working equations. This problem-based approach is student-centered and
concept-embedded, with emphasis on students leading the lecture, uncovering
basic principles, and gaining practice in higher levels of cognitive skills such
as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. Our classroom format is cooperative,
interactive, and based on students' needs. Computer simulations and animations
are integrated to help students perform parametric investigations and visualize
processes and devices. Students interacting with "industrial mentors" have
gained access to real-life data and addressing systemic issues. The objective is
for our undergraduate students to leave the course with enhanced critical
thinking skills, increased level of retained knowledge, strengthened
communication skills, and an improved ability to do research and engage in life-
long learning.