* 0310004
* Collaborative Research: Growth, Assembly, and Exhumation of Deep Crust, Southwestern Churchill Province, Canadian Shield
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 166,790.00

The western Churchill Province of Canada preserves an extraordinary geologic
record of processes active during the growth, evolution, exhumation, and
stabilization of early continental crust. The East Athabasca area in particular
exposes a huge tract (1000's of km2) of rocks that were heated to temperatures
of nearly 1000 deg C at depths of more than 20 km. In fact some of the rocks
were formed at the highest pressures ever recognized in North America. The
region can be divided into a number of small domains that preserve distinct rock
types and geological histories. Each of the individual domains record, with
impressive clarity, key stages in the tectonic evolution of the Canadian shield.
Together, they provide a map view of the complexity that may characterize the
deep crust in general. Since the deep crust is generally not accessible for
study this area provides a unique view of what happens deep in the earth's
crust.&lt;br/&gt;Most of the rocks in this study are about 2.6 billion years
old. Field and laboratory research in the East Athabasca area documents the
effects of a much younger event (1.9 billion years ago) that has transformed
these rocks leading to the hypothesis that the area represents a map view of
domains assembled in the deep crust 1.9 billion years ago immediately prior to
being uplifted and exposed. As such, the region may provide a direct view of the
rock types, structures, and heterogeneity at several km wavelengths that are
seismically imaged or inferred to exist in other areas where the deep crust is
not exposed. Crucial to strengthening this hypothesis is a better understanding
of the internal structure of individual domains and their boundaries. Goals of
this project are to understand (1) the assembly of heterogeneous deep crustal
domains; (2) the significance and cause of metamorphism 1.9 billion years ago;
(3) the role of adding melts from deep within the earth to the deep crust (4)
how an enormous area of deep crustal rocks can be exhumed; and (5) the setting
of these rocks within the broader context of western North America. This
integrated approach is placing important first-order constraints on the
character, behavior, and evolution of lower crust during crustal assembly,
stabilization, and exhumation.