* 0310139
* Theoretical Investigations of Mantle Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Ronald Cohen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

EAR-0310139&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to use first-principles
theoretical methods to study and simulate the minerals of the Earth's mantle.
The goal of this work is to (1) make predictions useful for modeling of the
solid Earth and interpretation of seismic data where data are not yet available
(2) better understand mineral behavior and help in interpreting experimental
data and (3) provide guidance for the design of experiments. The term "first-
principles" means that no experimental data are directly used; properties are
computed from fundamental physics using as basic input the positions of the
atomic nuclei and their charges. Even the positions of the nuclei can be
optimized, or allowed to move dynamically at finite temperatures. Nevertheless,
the basic problems and starting configurations generally come from experimental
data or observations. This research is not instead of experiments, but rather
works together with experimental studies. The advantages of first-principles
methods include the possibility of detecting problems with experiments or
discovering new physics, where theory and data disagree, and providing
provisional data outside the currently accessible experimental regime or when
data are not yet available due to the difficulty of such experiments. The
following are proposed: (1) To study the thermal equations of state,
thermoelasticity, and phase stability of the important solid solutions between
periclase and wustite (Mg, Fe1-x)O, silicate perovskite (Ca,Mg,Al,Si,Fe)2O3, and
transition zone garnets (Ca,Mg,Al)3(Al,Fe,Mg)2 (Si,Al)3O12 (2) To study the
behavior of iron-bearing oxides and silicates at high pressures using state-of-
the-art electronic structure methods such as LDA+U and dynamical mean field
theory (DMFT) and (3) To study diffusion in silicate
perovskite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of methods will be used. Potential
models will be fit to density functional theory computations allowing molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations at the temperature and pressures of the deep Earth.
Solid solutions will be studied using supercells and quasi-random structures as
well as effective Hamiltonians and cluster expansions with Monte Carlo. Iron-
bearing systems will be studied using methods that go beyond conventional band
theory; in particular the PI will study Fe1-xO wustite, hematite Fe2O3, and
magnetite Fe3O4 and their high-pressure polymorphs in order to better understand
the behavior of ferrous and ferric iron at high pressures and temperatures.
Special attention will be paid to the behavior of Fe, Al, and vacancies in
silicate perovskite, which have been shown to have major effects on the
elasticity of perovskite. Diffusion and finite temperature elasticity will be
studied using free-energy integrations within MD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;