* 0310295
* Inquiry-Based Environmental Science Using Stressed Stream Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Halard Lescinsky, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2006
* USD 51,677.00

Earth Systems Science (40) The establishment of a new Environmental Science
Major at Otterbein College and a recent Departmental Review caused us to rethink
our science curriculum. The Department requires senior research projects of all
students and yet we are often disappointed by how poorly even seniors understand
scientific methodologies. This project seeks to develop critical thinking skills
in our students through the incorporation of inquiry-based courses into the
Environmental Science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;This project is adapting the
Stressed Stream Analysis pedagogical model developed by James Haynes and others
at SUNY-Brockport (currently being disseminated through a CCLI-ND award to
Haynes). The three core Environmental Science courses being targeted in this
project are ESC 205 Environmental Geology, LSC 204 Environmental Biology and ESC
315 Ecological Landuse Planning and field exercises are being added in two core-
curriculum courses for non-science students. In Stressed Stream Analysis,
student learning proceeds through inquiry-based teaching towards a relevant
social goal. Students work in small groups to frame questions, collect
multidisciplinary environmental data for a potentially or actually impacted
local stream, and eventually compile an Environmental Impact Statement. The
approach combines inquiry based learning with sufficient structure and guidance
to make it a widely successful and adaptable educational approach. We are
adapting this framework to studies of Alum Creek which flows adjacent to campus
and provides the town with its drinking water as well as receives wastewater
discharge. This project is impacting freshman and sophomore environmental
science students, upper level non-science majors, upper level science students,
and local elementary and middle school teachers.