* 0310933
* Theoretical Studies of Non-Crystalline Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* David Drabold, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 246,000.00

New methods are developed to reliably model complex and technologically
important glasses and amorphous materials. The focus is on structural modeling,
atomic diffusion in the materials, and electronic properties including hopping
and transport in non-crystalline environments. This work impacts a broad and
important range of materials with applications ranging from computer memories
(solid glassy chalcogenide-silver electrolytes), digital x-ray radiography
(amorphous chalcogenides) to solar photovoltaics (amorphous silicon hydride).

This award addresses fundamental questions concerning structure, diffusive
atomic dynamics, and electron states and their dynamics in non-crystalline
semiconductors. Among these issues are: methods for creating new structural
models for complex glasses, and thorough analysis of these models (the nature of
topological and chemical ordering, electronic and dynamical properties). Using
novel techniques, we will determine non-diffusive dynamics in these glasses
(this is an important area with many phenomenological models of the diffusive
dynamics, but few atomistic calculations with "realistic" interatomic
interactions). The techniques for modeling diffusive dynamics are quite new, and
expected to develop from the experience obtained from the complex materials
studied in this grant (in a general way, such methods are relevant to problems
in biophysics like protein folding and dynamics in polymers). Finally, the work
on electron dynamics will give new insight into hopping-based carrier transport
in glasses, and other disordered materials. Also we will explore the phenomenon
of thermally driven electron hopping by direct simulation: this will add
important new insights to the finite-temperature Anderson problem.

The research conducted here will be incorporated into courses taught by the PI
and students, including those from underrepresented groups, will participate in
the research. Results of the research, atomic coordinates in particular, will be
available through the internet. There are also links to a small, startup
company, Axon Technologies, in Tempe, AZ. %%% New methods are developed to
reliably model complex and technologically important glasses and amorphous
materials. The focus is on structural modeling, atomic diffusion in the
materials, and electronic properties including hopping and transport in non-
crystalline environments. This work impacts a broad and important range of
materials with applications ranging from computer memories (solid glassy
chalcogenide-silver electrolytes), digital x-ray radiography (amorphous
chalcogenides) to solar photovoltaics (amorphous silicon hydride).

The research conducted here will be incorporated into courses taught by the PI
and students, including those from underrepresented groups, will participate in
the research. Results of the research, atomic coordinates in particular, will be
available through the internet. There are also links to a small, startup
company, Axon Technologies, in Tempe, AZ. ***