* 0310029
* Coupling Stochastic and Chaotic-Dynamic Theories with 3d-pptv Experiments to Study Flow and Anomalous Dispersion in Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 343,941.00

Cushman 0310029

Ongoing theoretical work is supported by innovative laboratory experiments
focused on dispersion in single-fluid porous media systems. The experiments are
being directed by Prof. Moroni in Italy, and the theory and data analysis are
pursued by the PI at Purdue. The experiments use index-matched fluid and solid
systems and three-dimensional photogrammetric particle-tracking velocimetry
(3D-PPTV). The idea is to use small air bubbles as reflective passive tracer
particles to track flow through space and time. From these trajectories, various
measures of particle dynamics would be derived, and these measures would be used
to test theories on dispersion and related bulk behavior. The specific
objectives include 1)Development of a three-camera system for three-dimensional
analysis, 2)Use of a moveable light sheet with a single camera to obtain
detailed geometry of the porous solid, 3)Construction of globally nonstationary,
but locally stationary, heterogeneous media; self similar media; and homogeneous
media with graded particle size distribution, and 4)Use of 3D trajectories to
obtain the mean-square displacement, local and global velocity distributions,
velocity correlation functions, and a variety of other measures. In summary, the
PIs would develop a particle-tracking technique, use a moveable light sheet to
obtain detailed geometry of the porous matrix, construct a globally non
stationary but locally stationary heterogeneous media, and use 3D trajectories
to gather data to test transport models for various types of heterogeneity.
Accomplishing the goal of more effective modeling of turbulent flow and chemical
transport in a wide variety natural and built porous media makes an important
contribution to the protection of groundwater quality. The first-time
application of an integration of 3D-PPTV and chaotic dynamics provides a
valuable new tool for use in validating new modeling ideas and in advancing
fundamental theory.

