* 0310728
* Incorporation of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Susan Ensel, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* kristina parsons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 52,392.00

Chemistry (12) NMR methodologies are being incorporated into a discovery-based
chemistry curriculum by using NMR experiments, developed at other sites, and
adapted to enhance the education of a predominantly female population. The
experiments being adapted come from various disciplines and have been published
in the Journal of Chemical Education. However, the experiments also serve to
enhance a larger picture of the curriculum. An Anasazi Instruments Fourier
Transform 60 MHz NMR will be acquired to perform the experiments in the
different laboratory courses in the curriculum. In the organic chemistry
laboratory students are using the NMR to determine the structures of the
products they synthesize. Students performing a large multi-step research
synthesis project in the second semester organic course are using the NMR to
provide clear evidence of the successful completion of the student-designed
syntheses. In the analytical chemistry courses, students are exploring the
quantitative capabilities of the NMR spectrometer and the influence of changing
acquisition parameters on spectral quality. In the biochemistry courses, the NMR
is being used to explore peptide conformation and the kinetics of glucose
metabolism. The instrumentation obtained for this project is being used in
conjunction with instrumentation purchased from previous NSF grants to the
department.