* 0310935
* Academic Excellence and Geographic Information Systems (AEGIS): Guided Multi-Disciplinary Integration of Spatial Technologies in Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Stiles, Samford University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 194,905.00

Geography (88) In this project, modules using Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) are being integrated into introductory courses across the Arts and
Sciences curriculum. The AEGIS project is teaching 14 participating faculty how
to use GIS and assisting them in the development of discipline-specific GIS
modules for introductory level courses. The goals of the project are to increase
awareness of GIS, generate growing undergraduate interest in GIS, and provide
ongoing support for multidisciplinary GIS activities at Samford University. The
outcomes are increased numbers of majors in Biology and Geography developing GIS
skills and a growth in the number of students pursuing the GIS Certificate
program. This project is adapting elements from similar programs at the
University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee, the University of Georgia, and the Florida
State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is the improved preparation of undergraduates in multiple disciplines in geo-
spatial methods, which are being applied increasingly across a growing spectrum
of professional and academic fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this project are far-reaching. The integration of introductory GIS into a
diverse array of Arts and Sciences courses is leading to further development of
GIS modules for advanced courses. It is also enhancing student research skills
by providing students with multiple opportunities to engage in data acquisition
and analysis. The impact on undergraduate research skills is strengthened by
virtue of the fact that our university has already made a commitment to Problem-
Based Learning (PBL) in many departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating
faculty enrolled in a GIS short course at the start of their participation in
the project. Following this they began working with experts to create GIS
modules and introduce them into freshman and sophomore level courses. These
faculty also plan to participate in a tune-up workshop during Samford's short
January session in order to adjust and enhance their GIS modules. Following two
years of faculty education in GIS methods and subsequent efforts to develop and
implement GIS course modules, the third year is focused on a comprehensive
project evaluation, using data from both student and faculty experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;