* 0310264
* Incorporating Gas Chromatography and CHN Elemental Analysis into the Undergraduate Science Laboratory Curricula:  A Multidisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Scott Donnelly, Arizona Western College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 96,542.00

Chemistry (12) In order to improve the laboratory experience of our students, we
are incorporating Gas Chromatography (GC) and carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen (CHN)
Elemental Analysis techniques into the science laboratory curricula at Arizona
Western College and Northern Arizona University-Yuma. Several published
chemistry, microbiology, environmental science, and agricultural science
experiments are being adapted into the four discipline's laboratory curricula.
Chemistry students use the instrumentation to monitor the uptake of a nitrogen-
based fertilizer into various vegetative and reproductive organs of wheat during
seed development and to determine a product's empirical formula, its percent
purity, and the efficiency of recrystallization. Agricultural Science students
use the instrumentation to carry out a spatiotemporal soil C:N analysis study at
various soil depths in a recently tilled but still fallow corn and alfalfa
fields. They examine the fate and transport of nematicides as a function of soil
depth and soil type and also study the difference in autocatalytic production
rates of ethylene gas- a plant growth regulator- in various foods. Environmental
Science students use the GC to measure carbon monoxide emissions from vehicle
exhaust and measure the rate of production of greenhouse gases from soil.
Microbiology students use the instrumentation to quantify soil microbial
biomass. The multidisciplinary use of the Elemental Analyzer and GC has provided
us an opportunity to incorporate new labs into the curriculum and hence expand
topic coverage in the classroom. The instrumentation now allows the faculty to
teach topics that were relegated to lecture because of non-existent
instrumentation capacity and also gives students hands-on experience with modern
instrumentation and methodology. It is anticipated that the project's emphases
on the relevancy of science to everyday life, hands-on instrument experience,
and using the surrounding desert environment as a laboratory provide our
students a valuable laboratory experience that is consistent with current
science educational trends and practices.