* 0310033
* Understanding Phreatoplinian Volcanism: The Case Study of the 1875 Eruption of Askja Volcano, Iceland.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Thorvaldur Thordarson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 229,815.00

EAR-0310033&lt;br/&gt;Thordarson&lt;br/&gt;The most dangerous widespread hazard
associated with explosive volcanism is wet ash fall during phreatoplinian
eruptions, which affects areas of tens of thousands of square kilometers.
Phreatoplinian volcanism is a poorly understood and neglected branch of our
science, despite featuring in half of the 40 Holocene explosive eruptions in
Iceland. This study targets the only historical "type example", the 1875
eruption of Askja in Iceland, to examine the roles of magmatic volatiles and
external water in "driving" phreatoplinian eruptions and the contrasts between
"dry" (plinian, subplinian) and "wet" (phreatoplinian) fragmentation processes.
&lt;br/&gt;Its goals are (1) to quantify the roles of magmatic volatiles during
phreatoplinian eruption by comparing patterns of nucleation, growth and
coalescence of vesicles between phreatoplinian and plinian/subplinian pumices,
and (2) to clarify the role of external water at fragmentation by analysis of
whole deposit grainsize distribution, and clast morphologies in all eruption
phases.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This study will promote teaching, training
and learning through conjoint University of Iceland (UI)/University of Hawaii
(UH) classes. Results will be broadly disseminated via the Internet in Icelandic
(at UI) and English (at UH) and and in public lectures. It will also be
incorporated in the volcanology courses taught at UH and UI, in summer schools
taught annually in Hilo for the Center for Study of Active Volcanoes to third
world volcanologists and to undergraduates from mainland colleges. It will train
a young female volcanologist in a wide range of techniques available at
University of Hawaii. We also hope to use this study as a "springboard" to
introduce other UH graduate and undergraduate students to Icelandic volcanism
and bring young Icelandic scientists to the United States. Infrastructure will
be enhanced as the grant will sustain and expand the physical volcanology
facilities at Hawaii that serve the needs of 3 faculty, 5 graduate students and
6 undergraduates. A major focus of this study will be to present a summary of
conclusions and impacts workshop to emergency management agencies in Iceland and
to present the result to a wider audience from the civil defense community at
the next meeting in the Cities on Volcanoes series. &lt;br/&gt;