* 0310793
* Collaborative Research: Graphical passwords -- design, analysis, and human factors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Jean-Camille Birget, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 149,957.00

1) Abstract&lt;br/&gt;===========&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number:&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0310793, CCR-0310490, CCR-0310159 and
CCR-0310571&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:&lt;br/&gt;Graphical Passwords -- Design,
Analysis, and Human Factors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: J.C. Birget and
Dawei Hong (Rutgers-Camden),&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
PIs:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. Man (Southwest State U., Minnesota),&lt;br/&gt;N.
Memon (Polytechnic U., Brooklyn),&lt;br/&gt;S. Wiedenbeck
(Drexel).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans
are not good at remembering alpha-numeric passwords, if the passwords are
complicated enough to be secure. Graphical passwords seem easier to remember and
to use. Here, an image is displayed and the user chooses a few places in the
image. To log in, the user has to click close to these places again. Older
systems use preprocessed images with predefined click regions, among which a
user has to choose. The investigators designed systems that allow users to
choose any points as click points, and that allow users to import their own
images. The investigators invented a ``robust discretization'' of images; this
enables users to produce exactly the same discrete password even though they
cannot click on exactly the same pixels at each login. Passwords are vulnerable
to ``shoulder surfing'', which consists of a user being observed, or filmed,
during login. The investigators designed password systems that are immune to
shoulder surfing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the objectives of this proposal is
a human factors study, concerning learnability, memorability, speed, security
(unsafe practices), and user satisfaction of graphical password systems. A
second objective is to design new graphical password systems, based on curves,
movement, and three-dimensional scenes, as well as to design ``bundles'' of
passwords that a user can use on different accounts, and that are easy to
remember (and distinguish) as a group. New robust discretization algorithms and
probabilistic analyses of the security of graphical password systems will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;