* 0310015
* Utility of Isotopic Patterns in Mesozoic Tooth Enamel for Ecologic Reconstructions: A Pilot Study
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Reese Barrick, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2006
* USD 33,050.00



Isotopic analyses of tooth enamel have been utilized to study changes in diet
and ecology of fossil mammalian assemblages as well as concurrent changes in
terrestrial ecosystems including the spread of grasslands in the Neogene.
However, the application to Mesozoic ecosystems has been limited because the
utility of such approaches applied to archosaur teeth have not been documented
or justified. This pilot study proposes to test the potential effectiveness of
oxygen and carbon isotopes from Cretaceous tooth enamel for such studies by
analyzing the variability of isotopic patterns within and between taxa from a
single locality. This method allows the analysis of a fauna with limited time
and space averaging. Determination of the range of values and offsets between
taxa will indicate how useful these data will be in reconstructing ecological
niche partitioning within these ancient environments. A study of a second
locality will help to understand the consistency of these relationships across
space different habitats. Successful completion of this project will open a new
avenue of research into understanding the ecologic relationships throughout the
dominant greenhouse world of the Cretaceous. Completion of this project will
involve training of undergraduates in the classroom and laboratory. Students
(graduate and undergraduate)will learn the scientific process and some specific
techniques involved in analyzing the structure of these teeth and process of
isotopic analysis and interpretation. Several semester long class projects will
involve students in this research while teaching scientific methods, exploring
new topics and procedures all in the process of gaining the data necessary for
the completion of the project. Further, the university partnership with the
North Carolina Museum of Natural Science encourages the dissemination of new
data, insights and discoveries to the public and classrooms across the state of
North Carolina. Results from this project will also lead to publication of
results in scholarly journals, but more importantly will lead to future
proposals and research into the ecologic structure and correlation of ecology
and climate in the interesting and important period of Earth history.