* 0310882
* An Algebraic Approach to Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Leslie Valiant, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

The intellectual content of the project is concerned with the study of
computational&lt;br/&gt;complexity, which aims at an understanding of which
tasks can be effciently performed&lt;br/&gt;by computers, and which ultimately
cannot. There is currently an enormous&lt;br/&gt;gap between the very restricted
computations in which the ultimate limitations can&lt;br/&gt;be analysed using
existing mathematics, and the rich variety of tasks, such as
the&lt;br/&gt;search problems that are NP-complete, where the limitations are
currently only conjectured.&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with a new
approach to these problems based on implicitly&lt;br/&gt;exponential models.
This approach is inspired by quantum mechanics, which&lt;br/&gt;describes the
transitions in physical systems in terms of well understood
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;namely linear algebra, but in order to do so works in
high dimensions. In this&lt;br/&gt;project the model of computation is also
exponential dimensional, but it needs to be&lt;br/&gt;simulatable by classical
computers effciently in polynomial time. In analogy with&lt;br/&gt;quantum
mechanics, complex computations are to be expressed in terms of well
understood&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, namely linear and polynomial algebra, but at
the cost of high dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;The questions being investigated center
on whether those high dimensional&lt;br/&gt;representations that can express NP-
complete and #NP-complete search problems&lt;br/&gt;are within the class that
can be simulated in polynomial time. The approach &lt;br/&gt;can be viewed as a
new branch of algebraic complexity theory that is inspired &lt;br/&gt;by quantum
mechanics and quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regard to broader
impacts the societal impact of the research will depend on&lt;br/&gt;its
outcome. Since the main thrust is a new view towards efficient
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for search problems in general, a positive outcome may
redefine what is computed&lt;br/&gt;in practice across a wide range of
applications. Whatever the outcome the research &lt;br/&gt;will be carried out
in an educational environment that includes an expanding group &lt;br/&gt;of
diverse students, faculty, postdoctoral fellows and visitors with interests in
&lt;br/&gt;the broad research area of computational complexity.