* 0310252
* Paleotopography of an Evolving Extensional Orogen, the Central Basin and Range, Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Nathan Niemi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2006
* USD 126,490.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to look at the
topographic evolution of a portion of the central Basin and Range in the western
United States during a period of late Cenozoic extensional tectonism. A variety
of paleoaltimeters, geologic studies, and geophysical models have alternately
predicted that the western United States has experienced either significant late
Cenozoic uplift or substantial late Cenozoic lowering due to, or at least
synchronous with, large magnitude intracontinental tectonism. In part these
disparate results may be due to the geologic complexity of the western United
States, and the fact that many of the study areas may have undergone differing
tectonic histories in late Cenozoic time. The central Basin and Range province,
between Las Vegas and the Sierra Nevada is an ideal locality to study the
paleotopographic evolution of the western United States because of 1) the wide
spread and detailed geologic mapping that has been completed, resulting in a
fairly complete palinspastic reconstruction of Tertiary extension; 2) recent
passive and active seismic and other geophysical experiments in the region which
delineate the crustal structure and 3) studies that have examined the evolution
of the sub-Basin and Range lithosphere through this same time period using
xenoliths and the geochemistry of volcanic rocks. A newly developed
paleoaltimeter based on basalt flow vesicles is well suited for approaching this
problem due to the extensive coverage of basalts in this study area, the broad
age range of the flows, and the desert environment which keeps them relatively
fresh. The PI proposes to sample approximately 40 sites for paleoaltimetry
across a 300 km transect from the Sierra Nevada to the Spring Mountains, Nevada
and determine the paleoelevations of these sites from late Miocene to Pliocene
or Recent time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has broad impacts for several
reasons; first it bears strongly on the hypothesis that late Cenozoic epierogeny
has affected climate, both in the United States and globally. The work also ties
together years of work in developing map view palinspastic reconstructions of
Basin and Range extension by adding a third dimension to the deformation, and
finally, this study will be the first broad tectonic study using the newly
developed altimeter. Collaborations with both the developers of the altimeter
and the analytical facilities which process the samples should result in a
streamlined process for future use of this altimeter, as well as testing and
demonstrating its use in tectonic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;