* 0310585
* Godunov-Type Central Schemes for Hyperbolic Problems:  Further Development, Adaptation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Alexander Kurganov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 130,743.00

Central schemes may serve as universal finite-difference methods for numerically
solving hyperbolic conservation and balance laws, Hamilton-Jacobi equations, and
related problems. Such schemes are not tied to the specific eigen-structure of
the problem, and hence can be implemented in a straightforward manner for a wide
variety of nonlinear equations governing the spontaneous evolution of large
gradient phenomena. This project aims to further improve the family of Godunov-
type central schemes, recently developed by Kurganov et al. The main ideas
behind the construction of the new, less dissipative central schemes are to use
more precise estimate of the smooth and nonsmooth parts of the solution by
considering non-rectangular control volumes; to use a more accurate projection
of the evolved data onto the original, non-staggered grid; and to avoid the loss
of information when very accurate fully-discrete schemes are reduced to a much
simpler semi-discrete form. The second main goal of the project is the
application of central schemes to various multi-phase and multi-fluid flow
models, the Saint-Venant systems of shallow water equations (which describe
flows in rivers and coastal areas), multi-layer shallow water systems, models of
transport of pollutant in shallow water, the Euler equations of gas dynamics
subject to a static gravitational field, chemotaxis models, reactive flows (in
particular, the models describing stiff detonation waves), extended
thermodynamics, shallow water equations on a rotating sphere, acoustic wave
propagation, heterogeneous elasticity, granular material flows. Naturally, these
applications involve multiple space dimensions, complex geometries and moving
boundaries/interfaces, This would require further development of the theory and
implementation of central schemes. In particular, semi-discrete central schemes
on unstructured and triangular meshes will be derived, and different adaptive
techniques will be incorporated into the central framework.

Recent development of modern technology requires reliable, efficient, high-
resolution methods for solving time-dependent partial differential equations
(PDEs), including multidimensional systems of hyperbolic conservation and
balance laws, Hamilton-Jacobi equations, and related problems. In the past
decade, a family of simple, universal, Riemann-solver-free finite volume central
schemes has proven to be an appealing alternative to the more complicated and
problem oriented upwind schemes. The advantages of central schemes are
particularly prominent when they are used to solve complicated multidimensional
systems of PDEs arising in such important fields including fluid mechanics, gas
dynamics, geophysics, meteorology, magnetohydrodynamics, astrophysics, multi-
component flows, granular flows, reactive flows, semiconductors, non-Newtonian
flows, geometric optics, traffic flow, image processing, financial, biological
modeling, differential games, and optimal control. This project is focused on
the further development and improvement of central schemes, and on their
practical applications. The new central schemes will be incorporated into a
general-purpose adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) and adaptive moving mesh (AMM)
codes, which will be freely accessible for the scientific and industrial
communities. These codes will serve as a reliable and robust "black-box-solver"
for a rather comprehensive class of time-dependent PDEs.