* 0310612
* Integrating Field and Computational Components into a Physical Geography Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul Stoelting, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 47,533.00

Geography (88) This project is being run by faculty from the Department of
Geography and Earth Science. It is integrating inquiry-based learning into the
core physical geography and earth sciences curriculum by modifying six courses.
Course activities are now based on modern field equipment and a computer
laboratory that has been upgraded into a Physical Geography Computation
Laboratory. The field equipment includes 20 Garmin GPSMap 76S GPS units, a
Topcon GTS-600 Series total station, several Swoffer Model 2100 current velocity
meters, a Bosch Electric Rotary Hammer with adapter, a sub-soil probe, a CM-031
Ground Conductivity meter, and a Bartington MS2 Magnetic Susceptibility System.
The university already has an unlimited license for ESRI's ArcGIS Suite of
software. The project is adapting similar programs at East Carolina University
and Indiana University and Purdue University at Indianapolis. Faculty from these
institutions are providing advice on the implementation of this project. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activities is derived from leveraging the use
of our teaching skills and experience with instrumentation to enhance student
learning in geographic concepts and techniques. The investigators are
experienced in teaching, curriculum reform, and the use of the requested field
and computing equipment. Although this project represents an adaptation of
similar programs at other universities, it has a larger integrative scope and it
is designed to specifically meet the needs of our students. We are linking six
physical geography courses through shared field and computing equipment, and an
inquiry-based curriculum that includes the integration of hands-on field work.
The broader impacts of the proposed activity include enhancing the learning
experiences of non-science majors, Geography majors, Geography and Earth Science
minors, those who are underrepresented in the scientific community (including
women and persons with disabilities), and pre-service K-12 teachers. By using
hands-on learning and modern equipment, this project is improving student
learning, stimulating student curiosity, and providing students with a strong
foundation for their future roles in an increasingly technological society. We
are evaluating the project by using pre- and post-tests for majors and non-
majors, and by assessing student portfolios of projects. The project design and
results will be disseminated locally, regionally and nationally, so that others
may review our project and consider it as a potential model for curriculum
revision.