* 0310146
* Collaborative Research:  Geochemistry of Ultramafic Xenoliths From the Mantle Wedge of the Kamchatka Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Gene Yogodzinski, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 124,679.00

This is a study of mantle-derived rocks found as xenoliths in three subduction-
related volcanoes located on the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Russian Far East.
The rock types of interest in this study are harzburgites and dunites that have
been chemically altered (metasomatized) by hydrous fluids or melts derived from
the down-going subducted plate, which produced millimeter and centimeter-scale
veins and mineralized zones of pyroxene and amphibole or phlogopite in the
mantle. The objective of the study is to understand the nature of the
metasomatic process and its relationship to magma genesis in Kamchatka and other
subduction systems. The project involves the collection of diverse geochemical
data, including several of the gas-phase and light-element isotope systems
(3He/4He, 3He/CO2, 13C, 18O, D) as well as heavy-element isotope ratios (Sr, Nd,
Pb and Hf) that play a key role in our understanding of subduction-metasomatic
processes. Trace element analyses will be done by ICPMS on whole-rock and
mineral solutions. These data will be augmented by high-precision, isotope-
dilution measurements of some high field strength element (Ta, Nb, Zr and Hf)
concentrations. Graduate and undergraduate students from the University of
Rochester and the University of South Carolina will be involved in all aspects
of the data collection and interpretation. This is a collaborative project,
domestically, between the University of Rochester and the University of South
Carolina and, internationally, with the Russian Institute of Volcanic Geology
and Geochemistry, in Petropavlovsk, Kamchatka, Russia..