* 0310745
* Network Processing and Network Processors: Bridging Undergraduate Learning and Research in Software and Hardware
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Liang Cheng, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,951.00

Embedded processing, where computers are used to monitor and control dedicated
hardware, is a growing presence within mainstream computer science. Network
processing, where embedded processors monitor and control communication
networks, is a premier example of embedded processing. There is a growing need
for undergraduate students to understand software-hardware co-design concepts
and to acquire practical experience in embedded processing. Network processing
and network processor architecture provide an ideal context in which to teach
software-hardware co-design at the advanced undergraduate level in Computer
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an advanced
undergraduate course in network processing that includes: 1) a project-based
introduction to embedded processing in an application area, network processing,
where there is increasing demand for skills and for which we anticipate
substantial advances in technology, 2) a strengthening of ties between academic
study of network processing and industrial practice in the field, given the fact
that most advances in network processor architectures to date have been made in
industry, and 3) growing the pool of advanced undergraduates and subsequent
graduate students with the skills for advancing this field via research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials are being adapting from Dr. Comer's graduate-
level course on network processors into an undergraduate-level course on network
processing and processors. All developed course materials, including course
notes and laboratory exercises will be freely available on the Internet to
academic institutions teaching similar software-hardware co-design courses. The
lab exercises are fitted to the Comer-Peterson text, and cross-linked the text's
web site.&lt;br/&gt;