* 0310872
* Type I: Hands-On Astronomy: Observational Activities with a Barrier Free 16-Inch Telescope
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Donald Bord, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2008
* USD 144,344.00

&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy (11) This project involves construction of a handicapped-
accessible undergraduate student observatory containing a 16-inch telescope and
a wide array of ancillary equipment. Laboratory exercises developed at
Gettysburg College and elsewhere are being adapted and combined with locally-
conceived observational activities to provide non-science majors and pre-service
teachers with direct, hands-on experience with modest, yet state-of-the-art,
instrumentation that emulates the practice of real astronomers. This
installation also offers opportunities for advanced undergraduates to carry out
long-term projects emphasizing modern observational principles and techniques.
By partnering with neighboring Henry Ford Community College (HFCC), Dearborn
students gain access to the HFCC planetarium in exchange for time at the
observatory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fosters improvements in teaching
and learning by effectively integrating and adapting established technology
previously employed successfully in education, by implementing results of
science education research that demonstrates the value of hands-on, inquiry-
based exercises in enhancing student learning, and by emphasizing important
astronomical principles relating to structure and motion, and thereby directly
addresses intellectual merit. This initiative also addresses broader impact
through its focus on barrier-free access for persons with disabilities, its
targeting of significant concepts relevant to the content needs of pre-service
teachers and physics majors alike, and its development/dissemination of
laboratory exercises suitable for use at institutions possessing small
observatories. &lt;br/&gt;