* 0310503
* Collaborative Research:     Distributed Collaborative Computing and Adversity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Bogdan Chlebus, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This project advances the state-of-the-art in distributed collaborative
&lt;br/&gt;computability in the presence of adversity. This is accomplished by
&lt;br/&gt;establishing complexity bounds for fundamental distributed computing
&lt;br/&gt;primitives. The key problems requiring distributed collaboration
&lt;br/&gt;include: performing a common set of tasks in a distributed setting,
&lt;br/&gt;modifying shared memory in a parallel setting, distributed
&lt;br/&gt;collaborative scheduling, collective coin-flipping and leader
&lt;br/&gt;election, and algorithms for gossip and consensus in message-passing
&lt;br/&gt;settings. This research is pursued along two complementary
directions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) distributed computability in abstract information
models, and&lt;br/&gt;(2) distributed algorithmics in specific models of
computation.&lt;br/&gt;Information models are tools that model information in
distributed &lt;br/&gt;systems. Information models capture essential features of
wide classes &lt;br/&gt;of low-level computing models: by proving strong bounds
in select &lt;br/&gt;information models, this research extracts new facts about
distributed &lt;br/&gt;computation in extant low-level models and expands the
understanding &lt;br/&gt;of the essential ingredients of distributed
computation. Information &lt;br/&gt;models facilitate reasoning about
distributed algorithms in a fashion &lt;br/&gt;insulated from the idiosyncrasies
of particular low-level models, e.g., &lt;br/&gt;shared-memory or message-
passing models under various assumptions about &lt;br/&gt;synchrony. The second
research direction supports the information model &lt;br/&gt;research by
exploring fundamental properties and intrinsic limitations &lt;br/&gt;of
distributed computing environments from an algorithmic point of
view.&lt;br/&gt;This research considers models of computation focusing
explicitly on&lt;br/&gt;the means of communication used by multiple
collaborating processors. &lt;br/&gt;When studying failures or asynchrony, each
of the models is augmented &lt;br/&gt;with an adversary that interferes with the
communication. The goal is &lt;br/&gt;to develop algorithms that are efficient
with respect to a composite &lt;br/&gt;complexity measure simultaneously
reflecting several standard complexity &lt;br/&gt;measures (e.g., time, rounds,
communication). Together, these approaches &lt;br/&gt;address the problem of
distributed algorithm design and analysis by &lt;br/&gt;treating high-level
information flow separately from the underlying &lt;br/&gt;algorithmic building
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact:&lt;br/&gt;This project, as a whole,
demonstrates the feasibility of a new approach &lt;br/&gt;to the problem of
modeling distributed computation. In this "information &lt;br/&gt;model"
approach, one trades problem generality for model independence; &lt;br/&gt;that
is, by focusing on highly specific assumptions about information &lt;br/&gt;flow
(which restrict the family of computational problems captured by &lt;br/&gt;the
model) one obtains results relevant to a wide class of low-level
&lt;br/&gt;computing models. Such a framework is quite appealing for the study
of&lt;br/&gt;distributed computing which, unlike uniprocessor computing,
has&lt;br/&gt;suffered from steadfast disagreement about the validity of
extant&lt;br/&gt;low-level models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
involves several well-prepared graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The project, while
addressing issues of interest to&lt;br/&gt;the entire distributed computing
community, is an opportunity for&lt;br/&gt;these students to apply tools from
applied mathematics to problems in&lt;br/&gt;computer science, become expert
with extant low-level computing&lt;br/&gt;models, and engage in original
research in the foundations of&lt;br/&gt;distributed
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;