* 0310661
* Folding and Unfolding of Polygonal Linkages, with Applications to Structural Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* R. James Milgram, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2008
* USD 650,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;We are studying folding and unfolding processes for polygonal
linkages (and other partially rigid structures with many degrees of freedom) in
dimensions two and three, with particular emphasis on applications in molecular
biology. Our primary focus is on fundamental mathematical properties (topologic,
geometric, algebraic) and novel algorithmic approaches, with the long run goal
of understanding the fundamental laws of the protein folding simulation problem.
We are proposing a novel Monte Carlo approach for move generators in energy
minimization simulations in two dimensions, based on mechanisms which
simultaneously change many angles and are guaranteed to be collision free, and
we investigate the feasibility of extending the approach in three dimensions.
The mathematics involved in this research includes techniques from algebraic
topology, algebraic geometry and rigidity theory, while the computational effort
is expected to lead to developing efficient data structures and algorithms for
planning, analyzing, approximating, and tracking such motions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides its intrinsic scientific merit, we anticipate this
project to have broader impact through a novel way of integrating research,
teaching, inter-institutional and interdisciplinary collaborations. The grant
will allow one of the PIs, who teaches at the undergraduate level at a women's
college, to establish an integrated research group including (besides
undergraduates) graduate students. By bringing top research resources and
powerful collaborations to an undergraduate institution devoted to promoting the
technical education of women in a liberal arts environment, we expect to
influence the interdisciplinary curriculum of the future, enhance the
infrastructure for research and education at the only women's college with an
engineering program, and generate models for training a diverse body of students
for graduate work, research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;