* 0310309
* Paleomagnetic Study of Indo-Asian Convergence and the Central Asian Shallow-Inclination Problem Using 33-45 Ma Volcanic Rocks Newly Discovered in Northern Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Xixi Zhao, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 286,757.00

Zhao

The PI's will carry on a paleomagnetic research program on newly discovered
volcanic rocks in central Qiangtang of northern Tibet, where Ar-Ar dates on lava
flows, dykes, and volcanic cones have recently been obtained. As part of the
intellectual merit of the proposed activity, they seek answers to the following
two leading questions: (1) The first is the consistent pattern of disturbingly
low paleolatitudes derived from a large number of high-quality paleomagnetic
studies of Tertiary rocks from sites that reach all the way from eastern China
to Kyrgyzstan, 3,000 km to the west. The difference between these paleolatitudes
and those expected from paleomagnetic reference poles for Eurasia averages 18
degrees in western China and Kyrgystan, implying northward displacements
relative to Siberia in the Tertiary that are much larger than geological
estimates of shortening across intervening mountain belts. The reliability of
these mainly sedimentary paleomagnetic data must be tested before we can
evaluate how much of the discrepancy is tectonic, geomagnetic, and rock
magnetic. (2) The second problem is the history of Indo-Asian convergence and
terrane accretion in Tibet. The existing evidence concerning this subject is
interpreted in a wide variety of ways, resulting in controversy over the timing
and geometry of terrane accretion both within Tibet and between Tibet and
Eurasia. In particular, the PI's seek answers to the solution of two important
tectonic problems in the tectonic evolution of the region: namely, the apparent
dilemma in paleolatitudes for Lhasa, west Qiangtang, Tarim, and Junggar blocks
in late Cretaceous and early Tertiary, and terrane accretion history between
east and west Qiangtang block.

Reliable paleomagnetic data are needed to answer these questions. The approach
is framed by these debates. The PI's will concentrate their sampling in volcanic
rocks wherever promising sections are available, to avoid the risk of our being
misled by the spurious inclination shallowing that often affects sedimentary
rocks. They will also make a representative sampling of red beds that are
associated with the volcanics and with fold tests. In this way they will be able
to assess the magnetic fidelity of redbeds. Successful completion of the
paleomagnetic program proposed here will, for the first time, produce reliable
paleomagnetic results from Cenozoic volcanic rocks and red beds in northern
Tibet, which are directly involved in the debate over Cenozoic inclination
shallowing in central Asia. The new paleomagnetic results will also provide pole
positions and paleolatitudes to constrain the rate calculation for Indo-Asian
convergence. The expertise in paleontology, geochronology, petrology, rock
magnetism, and structural and field geology of Chinese colleagues, who hail from
three universities in China, ensures the necessary support for this research and
argues strongly for the chances of success. The PI's anticipate the following
broader impacts of the proposed activity: (1) results will be presented at
national meetings, reported to the NSF, and published in international peer-
reviewed journals; (2) some of the results of the research will also be
introduced into both undergraduate and graduate classrooms; (3) graduate and
undergraduate student researchers will be directly involved in both field and
laboratory work; and (4) findings on the extent of Indo- Asian convergence and
the timing of Tibetan uplift may help lead to a better understanding of the
effects of the Tibetan Plateau on global climate.

