* 0310554
* Broadening Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Science Through Acquisition of a Moderate Field NMR: Adapting and Implementing Previously Developed Activities
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2007
* David Aurentz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 134,400.00

Chemistry (12) Interdisciplinary (99) Penn State University Berks-Lehigh Valley
College (BLVC) is enhancing its recently initiated four-year interdisciplinary
baccalaureate Science degree offering two options: NMR experiments from the
University of Southern Idaho are being adapted in this project. Life Science and
General Science. In addition, while recognizing the need for up-to-date
equipment, BLVC is broadening the quality of both its two-year core curriculum
and undergraduate teaching-research programs by making available current
technology and instrumentation. The BLVC Science Division strongly believes that
providing students and faculty with state-of-the-art instrumentation, and its
attendant hands-on experience, bears more impact than simply exposing the mind's
eye to textbooks and photocopied information. At BLVC, NMR technology is taught
as pivotal for structural analysis and mechanistic study in an assortment of
classes. We endorse incorporating this technology into all stages of
instruction. In regards to this, our existing outdated instrument can no longer
provide effective training for globally competitive science students. Three
goals are addressed in this proposal: 1) to broaden and raise the level of
exposure and awareness our science program has on students by acquiring state-
of-the-art instrumentation and technology and incorporating them into an array
of disciplines, 2) to seek out and implement creative new successful NMR
teaching experiments and methods appropriate to our program, and 3) to maximize
the use of this instrumentation by faculty (of diverse fields) and students;
improving students' chances of success in industry and academia while, at the
same time, increasing faculty participation.