* 0310976
* A Multidisciplinary/Intercollegiate Collaborative Experience Using a Recombinant Yeast Assay to Quantify Estrogenic Compounds in Wastewater
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Holly Morris, DeSales University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,878.00

Biological Sciences (61) The Multidisciplinary/Intercollegiate Collaborative
Experience Using a Recombinant Yeast Assay to Quantify Estrogenic Compounds in
Wastewater project is adapting a research model into a replicable instructional
module and testing that module in three courses at three institutions. The
schools participating include DeSales University, a private comprehensive
university, Lafayette College, a selective baccalaureate institution, and Lehigh
Carbon Community College, a public, two-year community college. The
instructional module focuses on the emerging national and global environmental
problem of increasing levels of estrogen in wastewater. It is an adaptation of a
research technique using a recombinant strain of the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae as a test for estrogenic chemicals that was originally developed by
Drs. Tom Wiese and Charles Miller at the Tulane-Xavier Center for
Bioenvironmental Research. The module is being introduced concurrently into an
environmental science course at DeSales University, a general biology course at
Lehigh Carbon Community College, and an environmental engineering course at
Lafayette College. The goal of the project is to improve student learning in the
sciences by exposing diverse students to basic research in a collaborative,
multidisciplinary, and intercollegiate learning experience. The impact of the
module on student achievement and its efficacy for replication in a variety of
science education settings is being assessed.



