* 0310323
* Dissected Hydrologic System at Grand Canyon: Interaction Between Upper and Lower World Waters in Modern Springs and Ancient Travertines
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 155,244.00

Crossy 0310323 The spectacular landscape at Grand Canyon provides a unique view
of a deeply dissected (1-2 km deep) aquifer system. Active springs and
Quaternary travertines provide key data for understanding the hydrochemistry of
the Colorado Plateau, as well as a record for understanding how this system has
evolved and interacted with Quaternary canyon incision. Our preliminary data
suggest the modern and ancient travertine-depositing springs, and the Colorado
River itself, record a "tale of two waters": a mixing of deeply-circulated
waters rising along faults with surface- and groundwaters of the plateau. We
propose to combine mapping, water and gas analysis, and travertine geochemistry
to test this model. Travertine occurs where major spring-producing horizons
(such as the Muav Limestone-Bright Angel Shale contact) intersect Laramide and
Precambrian basement-penetrating faults. We suggest on the basis of a pilot
study of spring water chemistry and gas analysis that large volumes of
travertine are produced from deep saline waters that are rich in CO2 and higher
in 87Sr/86Sr than waters derived from the plateau aquifers. Spring waters in two
travertine-forming localities record high He/Ar and He/N2, and 3He/4He ratios of
0.15 Ra suggesting contributions of mantle-derived He and its carrier gas CO2
potentially from nearby coeval volcanic fields. 87Sr/86Sr in central Grand
Canyon springs ranges from 0.710 to 0.735 and we will test whether radiogenic Sr
contributed by deeply-circulated waters can account for previously observed
increases in Colorado River 87Sr/86Sr between Lee's Ferry and Lake Mead. Broader
scientific impacts of the work extend to the longer-term (Plio-Pleistocene)
record of the Colorado Plateau: we propose that the radiogenic Hualapai
Limestone (~5 Ma) in the Grand Wash trough was formed by spring waters similar
to those seen in today's travertine localities (87Sr/86Sr of Grand Canyon
travertine is comparable to values reported for the Hualapai Ls.). Rapid
travertine deposition in selected localities has also caused pervasive
cementation and preservation of Quaternary terrace sequences and this allows
direct U-series dating of aggradation events and calculation of incision rates.
Dating so far suggests that major pulses of travertine accumulation occurred
over the last 350 ka. Previous workers suggested that travertine growth episodes
correspond with glacial events/ regional wetness. However, modern spring
discharge variations correspond to microseismicity, suggesting that
seismicity/volcanism influence the movements of deep water up faults. The
travertine record, combined with spring water chemistry and geochemical analysis
will provide a quantitative understanding of both the Quaternary history and
evolving hydrologic system of the region.