* 0311792
* Synchrotron Radiation Spectroscopic Study of Surface and Bulk Electronic Structure of Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Wide band gap nitride semiconductors are the focus of intense scrutiny due to
their potential applications in optoelectronic, high temperature, and spintronic
devices. However, our understanding of the basic physics of these materials lags
behind our ability to make electronic devices from them. This individual
investigator award supports a project to investigate the electronic structure of
clean and adsorbate-covered nitride semiconductors. The goals are to study the
bulk and surface electronic structure of nitride semiconductor alloys in order
to understand their fundamental electronic properties; to study gas adsorption
on well characterized nitride surfaces in order to understand their chemical
reactivity, their passivation, and the growth and stability of inorganic and
organic overlayers; and finally to study the electronic structure of model
magnetic semiconductors such as GaMnN. This project will have a significant
impact on the education of students and postdoctoral research associates by
exposing them to a highly collaborative research environment at national user
facilities. They will be educated in the physics of novel semiconductor
materials, and in the application of synchrotron radiation spectroscopies in
their study. This is an ambitious program that aims to produce definitive
measurements of surface and bulk electronic structure in wide band gap
semiconductors. The project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research
at NSF and the Physics Division at the Army Research
Organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important new class of semiconductors
based on nitrogen compounds are the focus of intense scrutiny due to their
potential applications in lasers and other optical devices that operate in the
blue/UV portion of the spectrum. These materials, know as wide band gap nitride
semiconductors, also hold the promise of being used in electronic devices
operating at much higher temperatures than conventional materials. While many
simple devices have been fabricated from these materials, there remains an acute
lack of knowledge about their fundamental electronic and chemical properties. It
is of vital importance for the full commercial exploitation of these materials
to understand their basic properties since, for example, the behavior of
electrons near the nitride surface controls their chemical reactivity, their
structural stability, and how other materials are bonded to them. This
individual investigator project will study the basic electronic properties of
these materials using two probes: photoemission spectroscopy and x-ray emission
spectroscopy. These probes involve providing the electrons in the material with
additional energy by illuminating them with intense x-rays and measuring their
response. This combination of spectroscopies will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the electronic and chemical properties of these semiconductors.
This program will also educate postdoctoral research associates, graduate and
undergraduate students in the physics and chemistry of semiconductor materials,
and the application of state of the art spectroscopic probes in their study. The
project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research at NSF and the
Physics Division at the Army Research Organization.&lt;br/&gt;