* 0311937
* A New Interdisciplinary Frontier: Merging Molecular Biology with Isotopic Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Ann Pearson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 488,478.00

The recently appreciated scope of microbial diversity hints at vast hidden
metabolic complexity in the environment. These processes govern the transfer of
carbon and energy in natural systems. However, less than one percent of all
known prokaryotes can be grown in pure culture. New, culture-independent methods
are required to investigate the ecological roles and metabolic pathways of
uncultivable prokaryotes. This project will demonstrate that carbon isotopic
analysis of nucleic acids, specifically ribosomal RNA (rRNA), can be used to
study microbial metabolism. The native rRNA in any sample is molecular biology's
analogue to the "biomarker" concept of geochemistry. The key to realizing this
important step is the recent development of a viable analytical method for RNA
separation and isotopic analysis. Intact, species-specific rRNA is separated
from mixtures of total RNA using magnetic bead capture methods. The pure
material is transferred to a moving-wire interface attached to an isotope-ratio
mass spectrometer. This represents a truly interdisciplinary achievement, as it
permits the analysis of 13C/12C ratios of nanogram-sized samples of rRNA. It is
possible to obtain both isotopic and phylogenetic information, simultaneously,
from any natural sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Goals This preliminary
study will focus on topics of recent interest in geobiology. &lt;br/&gt;(i) What
is the metabolic pathway of carbon assimilation in marine planktonic
crenarchaeota? Is the hypothesis that this organism uses the 3-hydroxypropionate
(3-HP) pathway correct? Is the magnitude of this isotopic fractionation the same
in nature as it is in laboratory cultures? If not, what might be learned about
the role of the 3-HP pathway in natural communities? &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Can we
identify the major pathway to CH4 in sedimentary and geothermal environments? To
what extent does anaerobic methane oxidation (AMO) contribute to total deep
biosphere productivity? Is it possible to distinguish metabolic differences
between different microbial taxa involved in AMO? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project fosters collaboration among research institutions and between biologists
and geoscientists. In addition to the P.I., there are five individuals
representing three research laboratories who also will participate in some
aspect of the project. This work also supports the mission of NSF to foster
educational development at the graduate and undergraduate levels. A graduate
student Ph.D. thesis will result directly from this work; and some of the
sampling will be performed by undergraduate students as the field component of a
required academic course.&lt;br/&gt;