* 0311742
* High-Performance Network Architecture with Speculative Scheduling for Globally Active Congestion Control
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Alexander Sawchuk, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, we develop efficient
congestion control&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms for high-performance interconnection
networks used in&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessors, distributed network-based
multicomputer clusters,&lt;br/&gt;storage systems, and IP router fabrics.
Techniques will be&lt;br/&gt;explored that allow rapid advancement of packets
directly involved&lt;br/&gt;in network congestion. Our approach is based on
adding minimal&lt;br/&gt;intelligence to routers and network interfaces---in the
form of&lt;br/&gt;speculative scheduling capability---such that resources are
maximally&lt;br/&gt;utilized while packets are efficiently routed. This can be
done by&lt;br/&gt;more effectively steering packets around congested areas and
by more&lt;br/&gt;precisely detecting and handling potential deadlock situations
arising&lt;br/&gt;from cyclically-correlated congestion on a closed set of
resources.&lt;br/&gt;A by-product is that global expansion of congestion
trees/cycles which&lt;br/&gt;can seriously degrade performance is prevented. In
addition to&lt;br/&gt;developing formal theoretical support for the approach,
detailed&lt;br/&gt;evaluations will be carried out through modeling and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this research is two-fold.
First, by effectively&lt;br/&gt;dispersing packets out of congested regions of
the network, higher&lt;br/&gt;sustained throughput and lower, more predictable
latency can be&lt;br/&gt;achieved. That is, more data can be sent and received
through the&lt;br/&gt;network over a given period of time, and the time it takes
for the&lt;br/&gt;network to deliver the data can be reduced, with less
variability.&lt;br/&gt;Second, by efficiently resolving deadlock in the network,
the&lt;br/&gt;routing of packets is guaranteed never to come to a halt.
These&lt;br/&gt;important factors allow computer applications which require a
great&lt;br/&gt;amount of communication between system components to run
much&lt;br/&gt;faster and dependably.&lt;br/&gt;