* 0311363
* Enhancing Bioenergetics Curricula with Inquiry-Based Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Roden, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2007
* USD 87,555.00

Biological Sciences (61) The goal of this project is to enhance undergraduate
biology majors' knowledge of how organisms capture and utilize energy from the
environment. The department has recently expanded its physiology course
offerings, which now include Comparative Animal Physiology, Plant Physiology,
Human Anatomy and Physiology, Advanced Animal Physiology, Physiological Plant
Ecology and Physiological Ecology of Animals. Since bioenergetics is a key
linkage between organisms and their environment, the project combines modern
instrumentation and inquiry-based physiology curricula to expose students to
modern techniques and allow them to address questions relating to adaptations,
global change, ecological relationships, biogeochemical cycles, and metabolic
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Plant Physiology, a laboratory to measure
photochemical quantum yield (Dr. David Becker, Pomona College) is being adapted
to prove the light reactions of bean leaves and to estimate electron transport
rates. Laboratories from Dr. Carl Pike (Franklin and Marshall College, see also
Dr. Steve Spilatro, Marietta College,
(http://www.marietta.edu/~spilatrs/biol103/photolab/index.html) designed to
teach photosynthetic adaptation and acclimation of eastern deciduous trees are
being adapted to study oxygen evolution with varying incident light levels.
Other laboratories that are being adapted to the institutional needs were
originally designed by Dr. Robert Hodson (University of Delaware) and Dr Diane
Robertson (http://web.grinnell.edu/courses/bio/qubitmanual).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Physiological Plant Ecology materials are being adapted
from several nationally known programs in plant physiological ecology, including
materials from Dr. Rick Boyce (University of Denver,
http://du.edu/~rboyce/ppe.html), Dr. Peter Curtis (Ohio State University,
http://www.biosci.ohio-state.edu/~pcurtis/courses/674%syl), and Dr. Bob Pearcy
(University of California, Davis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Comparative Animal
Physiology, Physiological Ecology of Animals, and Advanced Animal Physiology
laboratories that use gas exchange measurements to explore effects of ambient
temperature and endo/ectothermy on metabolic rate are being adapted. Models for
these laboratories include experiments designed by Dr. William Mautz (University
of Hawaii, Maui), Dr. James Carr (Texas Tech University), and Dr. Robert Hodson
(University of Delaware). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Senior biology majors also use
the new instrumentation in a capstone course that requires each student to
design, implement, and present an independent research project in both written
and oral form. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;