* 0311763
* High-Order Asymptotic and Numerical Techniques for the Simulation of Wave Scattering Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Fernando Reitich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 154,561.00

The PI proposes a development of effective and accurate algorithms for
&lt;br/&gt;simulation of electromagnetic and acoustic wave scattering processes.
&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the development of efficient, error-controllable
&lt;br/&gt;schemes based on asymptotic expansions and on direct discretizations.
&lt;br/&gt;While the computational emphasis will be on efficiency,
&lt;br/&gt;error-controllability will demand careful mathematical analysis; both
&lt;br/&gt;requirements will call for a number of intellectual innovations.
Among the &lt;br/&gt;methods based on asymptotic expansions, the PI proposes to:
(i) further &lt;br/&gt;advance his work on high-order geometric perturbation
methods. Here, &lt;br/&gt;effort will concentrate on the design of alternative
schemes with improved &lt;br/&gt;stability properties; and (ii) the search for
an innovative (rigorous) &lt;br/&gt;high-frequency (integral-equation) solver
for scattering by surfaces and &lt;br/&gt;bounded bodies that exhibits the
advantages of asymptotic high-frequency &lt;br/&gt;treatments (i.e. a frequency-
independent number of degrees of freedom) &lt;br/&gt;while allowing for error
control at any fixed, finite frequency. A &lt;br/&gt;combination of the
developments in (i) and (ii) will also be sought in the &lt;br/&gt;design of a
"multi-scale" algorithm. The program on direct methods, on the &lt;br/&gt;other
hand, shall be concerned with the development of algorithms for the
&lt;br/&gt;treatment of penetrable bodies. For this, it is proposed to develop
(iii) &lt;br/&gt;accelerated high-order methods for (volumetric) integral
equations; &lt;br/&gt;novelties in the proposed approach include the design of
specialized &lt;br/&gt;high-order quadrature rules for volume potentials, and
their incorporation &lt;br/&gt;into a general strategy for their fast
evaluation, based on (planar arrays &lt;br/&gt;of) "equivalent sources".
Finally, the proposal presents a project on (iv) &lt;br/&gt;certain specific
aspects of (Runge-Kutta) discontinuous Galerkin finite &lt;br/&gt;element
approaches, including the implementation of exact radiation
&lt;br/&gt;conditions, the design of optimal inter-element fluxes and
&lt;br/&gt;time-integration strategies, and the derivation of a-posteriori error
&lt;br/&gt;estimates for adaptive error control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetic and acoustic devices are ubiquitous in
present day &lt;br/&gt;technology. Indeed, electromagnetism and acoustics have
found and continue &lt;br/&gt;to find applications in a wide array of areas,
encompassing both civilian &lt;br/&gt;and military purposes. Among the former,
applications of current interest &lt;br/&gt;include those related to
communications (e.g. transmission through optical &lt;br/&gt;fiber lines), to
biomedical devices and health (e.g. ultrasound, &lt;br/&gt;tomography, power-
line safety, etc), to circuit or magnetic storage design
&lt;br/&gt;(electromagnetic compatibility, hard disc operation), to geophysical
&lt;br/&gt;prospecting, and to non-destructive evaluation (e.g. crack
detection), to &lt;br/&gt;name but just a few. Applications in defense, on the
other hand, include &lt;br/&gt;the design of military hardware with decreased
signatures ("virtual &lt;br/&gt;prototyping"); automatic target recognition
(e.g. bunkers, mines and &lt;br/&gt;buried ordnance, etc); propagation effects
on communications and radar &lt;br/&gt;systems (e.g. over complex terrains,
through the atmosphere, etc); &lt;br/&gt;tactical antenna design; etc. Although
the principles of acoustic and &lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic wave propagation are
well understood, their application to &lt;br/&gt;practical configurations of
current interest, such as those that arise in &lt;br/&gt;connection with the
examples above, is significantly complicated and far &lt;br/&gt;beyond manual
calculation in all but the simplest aspects. These &lt;br/&gt;complications
typically arise from geometrical and/or compositional &lt;br/&gt;complexity in
the underlying structures, from the intricacies of the
&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic fields, or from both. The significant advances in
computer &lt;br/&gt;modeling of acoustic and electromagnetic wave interactions
that have taken &lt;br/&gt;place over the last two decades, on the other hand,
have made it possible &lt;br/&gt;to shift the classical "trial and error" design
paradigm for devices that &lt;br/&gt;work on such interactions to one that
heavily relies on computer &lt;br/&gt;simulation. Still, the sheer complexity of
some applications of current &lt;br/&gt;interest and the ever-increasing
industrial demand for faster and more &lt;br/&gt;reliable software, present
significant challenges to state-of-the-art &lt;br/&gt;numerical solvers. This
proposal is focused on the design and testing of &lt;br/&gt;improved algorithms
that, based on sophisticated mathematical techniques &lt;br/&gt;and
developments, will result in implementations that will substantially
&lt;br/&gt;expand on the capabilities of presently available simulators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;