* 0311010
* RUI:     Characterizing Energy-Minimizing Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Eric Rawdon, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 179,853.00

Rawdon&lt;br/&gt; The investigator, collaborators, and students
study&lt;br/&gt;different knot energy functions and their optimal
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics include: characterizing the shape of
ropelength&lt;br/&gt;minima; finding relationships between the optima of
different&lt;br/&gt;energy functions; studying polygonal energy optima as a
function&lt;br/&gt;of the number of edges; determining the role of flexibility
in&lt;br/&gt;pulling knots tight and in packing them efficiently;
exploring&lt;br/&gt;the structure of polygonal knot space near ropelength
minima;&lt;br/&gt;determining relationships between different notions of
polygonal&lt;br/&gt;ropelength.&lt;br/&gt; From the massive knots of cosmic
strings to the microscopic&lt;br/&gt;tangling of DNA, knotting and tangling are
a part of nature. One&lt;br/&gt;physical attribute of a type of knot is its
minimum ropelength&lt;br/&gt;(i.e. the amount of one-inch radius perfectly
flexible rope&lt;br/&gt;needed to tie a configuration of the given type of
knot). The&lt;br/&gt;idea of ropelength has been used by biologists, physicists,
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians to predict the packing of helical DNA, the
speed&lt;br/&gt;at which knotted DNA moves through gel, and the average shape
of&lt;br/&gt;a knot within a large population of different
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;What is so special about ropelength-minimizing
conformations that&lt;br/&gt;they predict the behavior of real physical knots?
What spatial&lt;br/&gt;attributes influence this behavior? Furthermore, real
physical&lt;br/&gt;materials have inherent limitations, such as resistance
to&lt;br/&gt;bending. How does one incorporate inflexibility
into&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models of macromolecules? How does the
flexibility&lt;br/&gt;of the material affect how the knot tightens and how long
lengths&lt;br/&gt;pack into small spaces? In particular, can this knowledge
be&lt;br/&gt;used to design knot-making materials that are both strong
and&lt;br/&gt;resistant to slipping? The investigator, collaborators,
and&lt;br/&gt;students study these fundamental questions about knotting
and&lt;br/&gt;tangling in real physical systems. These studies lead to
a&lt;br/&gt;deeper understanding of tangled structures present
in&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology and biotechnology and to better models of
knots&lt;br/&gt;made with real physical materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;