* 0311311
* Distributed Signal Design and Optimum Transmit Strategies for Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Sennur Ulukus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2007
* USD 235,647.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0311311&lt;br/&gt;Sennur Ulukus&lt;br/&gt;U of Maryland, Coll
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increase in the number of users, and proliferation
of the services which require high bit-rates, combined with the scarcity of the
wireless bandwidth, make it more important than ever to
develop&lt;br/&gt;technologies, techniques and algorithms to make the most
efficient use of the available resources. The goal of this research is to
understand and determine the ultimate capacity limits of wireless communication
networks, and develop techniques and algorithms to achieve or approach these
capacity limits. An important consequence of this research will be the
development of principles and guidelines for the design of&lt;br/&gt;future
wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is the design
of, and algorithm development for, the physical and medium access control (MAC)
layers of multiuser vector multiple access channels. This research targets
realistic and&lt;br/&gt;important system conditions of multiple-transmitter
multiple-receiver networks (multi-cell cellular, and more generally, ad-hoc
networks), asynchronous reception, dispersive channels with nter-symbol-
interference(ISI), and fading channels. The investigator studies the design of
optimum&lt;br/&gt;multiuser transmit strategies with the aim of maximizing the
overall network capacity. Here, the transmit strategy means, for each user, the
decision of the user to transmit or not, at any given fading and interference
state, and the power and the vector it uses in its transmission, if it decides
to transmit. &lt;br/&gt;The receiver optimization is incorporated as well, when
applicable. The investigator studies&lt;br/&gt;the development of feedback- and
measurement-based, highly-adaptive, distributed and iterative algorithms for the
construction of network-wide optimum transmit strategy ensembles.&lt;br/&gt;