* 0311599
* Extending the Thread Execution Model for Hybrid CPU/FPGA Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* David Andrews, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 332,357.00

Andrews&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently emerging CPU/FPGA hybrid chips are
becoming important components&lt;br/&gt;of COTS hardware platforms for future
embedded systems. Coupled with wireless networking capabilities, these hybrid
chips offer significant computational advantages for a wide domain of
distributed systems such as sensor webs. System&lt;br/&gt;software for these
hybrids must provide a fairly general set of&lt;br/&gt;capabilities to support
domain applications, but&lt;br/&gt;must also be capable of specialized support
for each application's interfacing and performance needs. Creating such a
capability for these applications is a difficult challenge in part, because it
requires the simultaneous satisfaction of apparently contradictory forces:
generalization and specialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
developing new system software capabilities that promote&lt;br/&gt;the
resolution of these seemingly contradictory requirements. Co-design of KU Real-
Time (KURT) Linux system software components for software/FPGA implementation is
studied to facilitate a familiar and portable multi-threaded programming model
across the FPGA/CPU component boundaries. The research is developing
synchronization and control methods for threads that must execute on both CPU
and FPGA hardware. It focuses on enhanced scheduling capabilities and a
programming environment for embedded sensor web applications that presents a
familiar programming model for the new hardware architectures. This work is
expected to enable more capable real-time control (on a chip) of sensing,
computation, and data handling services than current widely-used sensor research
platforms can support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to generating new
concepts and approaches to sensor web design&lt;br/&gt;for the research
community, this effort supports an educational goal of&lt;br/&gt;establishing a
focus area in the engineering of computer based systems. &lt;br/&gt;Within this
focus area, we courses in embedded and real&lt;br/&gt;time systems including
sensor webs, run time software for embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems, and distributed
systems, are offered. This project broadens educational impact for both graduate
and undergraduate students by integrating research activities and results into
the classroom and producing interdisciplinary collaborative. The software tools,
systems software, and hardware platforms developed under this project will be
freely distributed to other universities and student laboratories for
experimentation and projects.&lt;br/&gt;