* 0311367
* Adaptive Online Laboratory in Computer Science Education
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Judith Hankins, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,863.00

Computer Science (31) This project adapts the student modeling component of the
ASSERT system developed at the University of Texas at Austin to build an
adaptive, online laboratory manual for Computer Science II, an entry level data
structures course. The main problem with the existing laboratory manual for CS-
II is that the predetermined problem sets do not account for CS-II student's
diverse levels of understanding of previous concepts. An adaptive intelligent
tutoring system can provide effective tutoring that is tailored to the needs of
the individual student. An accurate student model could capture a student's
current understanding of materials covered. Adaptive guidance using the captured
student model during problem solving can encourage cognitive processes that
stimulate learning and discourage counter-productive student activities. A user-
friendly interface is a key feature of this project. The dynamic nature of
personalization makes the design of the interface very important. Poor
presentation can cause confusion and frustration rather than improving a
student's learning process. The development of a new interface that will
expedite effective student interaction as well as ease of interaction for
teachers to the databases used to maintain teaching materials and student
modeling information is central to this project.