* 0311761
* Interacting, Disordered, Electrons: Two Tractable Limits
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Ganpathy Murthy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The focus of this theoretical research is to investigate the interplay of
interactions and disorder in two tractable limits, with clear implications for
the more generic problem. The first tractable case is the mesocopic one. Here
there are two energy scales, the single-particle level spacing and the Thouless
energy, which is connected by the uncertainty principle to the time for an
electron to sample the system. The ratio of these two is the dimensionless
conductance, g. In the limit of large g, the problem of disorder and (Fermi-
liquid) interactions is completely solvable in the same sense as a conventional
large-N theory. This approach is nonperturbative in both disorder and
interactions, thanks to the small parameter 1/g. Interesting phase transitions
and slow collective modes also emerge in this new framework, which allows one to
understand experimental and numerical results on large Coulomb blockade
fluctuations in quantum dots, and potentially the sign and magnitude of
persistent currents in mesoscopic rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second
tractable limit is in the integer/fractional quantum Hall elects, where strong
interaction results in gaps which enable a controlled incorporation of the
effects of disorder. A new Hamiltonian approach to the fractional quantum Hall
regime makes it possible to calculate physical quantities using very simple
approximations (because the nonperturbative properties of the quasiparticles,
such as their fractional charge, have been incorporated into the theory). This
formalism will be used to treat the gapped fractional quantum Hall states and
the very interesting Fermi liquid state in the half-filled Landau level in the
presence of disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a broad impact
in training of a postdoctoral research associate; in stimulating experimental
activity to verify the predictions of the theory; and it may have implications
for the use of quantum dots in quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; The
focus of this theoretical research is to investigate the interplay of
interactions and disorder in two tractable limits, with clear implications for
the more generic problem. The first tractable case is the mesocopic one, which
includes quantum dots. The second case is in the quantum Hall
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a broad impact in training of
a postdoctoral research associate; in stimulating experimental activity to
verify the predictions of the theory; and it may have implications for the use
of quantum dots in quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;