* 0311932
* Collaborative Research: Identification of Microbial Signatures in Biogenic Cave Ferromanganese Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Clifford Dahm, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 296,644.00

The role of manganese- and iron-oxidizing bacteria in the cycling of iron and
manganese is a critical question in geomicrobiology, especially in habitats such
as marine nodules, cave ferromanganese deposits, and desert/rock varnish. While
it is well recognized that these elements are involved in biogeochemical
cycling, careful work (with a multidisciplinary approach including molecular
biology, high-resolution mineralogy and geochemistry, and innovative
environmental sampling) is necessary to establish the active role of microbes in
the mineral accumulations of these elements. Many aspects of these processes are
not well understood and much remains to be done to establish that these deposits
are truly biogenic. The investigators have assembled a multidisciplinary team to
investigate the microbial and abiotic processes that produce these
ferromanganese deposits. Previously the investigators have established that (1)
ferromanganese deposits coat the walls and ceiling of Lechuguilla and Spider
Caves in areas where there are no macro-organisms; (2) bacteria that are able to
form manganese and iron oxides in enrichment cultures live in remote areas of
Lechuguilla and Spider Caves; (3) the formation of manganese minerals in culture
progresses from amorphous to crystalline Fe and Mn mineral forms over 8-10
months in preliminary studies; and (4) phylogenetic studies have established
that organisms from the natural materials and isolated cultures group with known
iron and manganese oxidizers, but are not closely related. To further elucidate
the role(s) of iron- and manganese-oxidizing bacteria in the formation of
ferromanganese deposits, the proposed research will: 1. Determine the
progression of mineral transformation in iron and manganese enrichment cultures
inoculated with cave ferromanganese deposits. 2. Investigate whether similar
transformations occur in rock varnish iron and manganese enrichment cultures. 3.
Compare these transformation products (minerals) to natural ferromanganese
deposit mineral forms occurring in caves and rock varnish. 4. Characterize the
microbial species involved in the production of these minerals in culture. 5.
Determine whether previously characterized putative manganese-oxidizing genes
are present in organisms found in iron and manganese enrichment cultures.
Information from the proposed investigations will elucidate how microbial life
flourishes in this dark, low-nutrient environment, producing an abundance of
ferromanganese deposits over geological time scales. Details of the processes
and the identities of the players that help produce these ferromanganese
deposits in caves and in rock varnish will be determined and additional novel
organisms will likely be documented from these deposits. Results from the
proposed research will provide insight into the geological alterations of iron
and manganese by microorganisms and will help to resolve unknown aspects of
these alterations.