* 0311048
*  Computer Integrated Manufacturing Outreach Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Shawn Strong, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 07/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)

In collaboration with regional manufacturing businesses, needs for advanced
studies in Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM) as part of the Manufacturing
Systems Management program are identified. The primary goal of the project is to
adapt, develop, and implement a model curriculum to prepare students as
manufacturing technologists to understand systems integration, and remote human
machine interface in a manufacturing environment. Computer Integrated
Manufacturing Outreach Laboratory (CIMOL), with the capacity for web based
remote delivery, is developed to meet the need for a higher skilled management
workforce in the industry. CIMOL uses an integrated approach to curriculum
development and includes interdisciplinary involvement from six academic
departments. Students participate in laboratory development and creation of the
graphical user interface for the remote control of CIMOL. Multiple reproducible
curriculum modules are adapted and developed for the delivery of an
undergraduate manufacturing technologist education. Project adapts exemplary
materials from the NSF sponsored AIM Center and adds an innovative component
using emerging Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) technologies.
The use of web based graphical user interface exposes a diverse population of
students, including geographically remote locations, to advanced manufacturing
equipment and facilities. Existing educational partnerships are strengthened
through the existing Ozarks Manufacturing Education Center and the creation of
new partnerships through K-12 institutions such as the Greenwood Laboratory
School and science centers such as the Discovery Center of Springfield.