* 0311854
* Microbial Community Controls on Sulfide Oxidation Rates and Cave Formation in a Subsurface Biogeochemical System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Jennifer Macalady, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Rachael G. Craig
* 03/31/2005
* USD 179,935.00

This project aims to discover rules governing microbial community assembly and
diversity, and the effects of these on geochemical process rates. These
questions are difficult to address in most ecosystems, where microbial diversity
is very high and spatial heterogeneities are large. The Frasassi cave ecosystem
is distant from surface sources of fixed carbon and nitrogen and is fueled only
by sulfur oxidation, so that microbial activity can be directly related to
sulfuric acid production. The cave hosts both neutral and pH 0-1 sulfur-
oxidizing communities, and these community types will be compared to test
hypothesis about microbial diversity and community function. For example, we
hypothesize that microbial diversity is strongly controlled by the number of
available electron donors and electron acceptors, rather than by limitations
posed by environmental extremes such as low pH. In this case, both pH 0-1 and
neutral Frasassi microbial communities will have lower diversity than a
previously studied pH 0-1 acid mine drainage system where both iron and sulfur
electron donors are available. The project also aims to identify biological and
geological controls on sulfuric acid production (cave dissolution). Molecular
biological methods will be used to quantify microbial populations, geochemical
methods to document and monitor cave habitats and microbial cultures, and lipid
and isotope-labeling methods to quantify biomass and identify autotrophic
microorganisms in the cave communities.

The project will involve 6 undergraduate thesis students and the development of
an educational module to be incorporated into the highly successful Carleton
College Geology Program in Italy. The work will generate young scientists with
interdisciplinary training in geomicrobiology and publications that identify
factors that control the structure and function of subsurface microbial
communities responsible for sulfuric acid production and cave formation. More
generally, understanding how microbial communities are assembled, and how these
patterns of assembly affect the use of available resources, is a critical
component of understanding the biogeochemistry of both ancient and present-day
environments.