* 0311117
* CREATE:  Teaching Biology undergraduates how to analyze the primary literature and think creatively about science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Sally Hoskins, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 198,298.00

(Biological Sciences (61) This project is creating a new textbook that uses
guided analysis of related sets of journal articles as a basis for constructing
biological understanding through deep analysis of individual lines of biological
research. The method of accomplishing this task: Consider, Read, Elucidate,
Analyze and Think of an Experiment (CREATE), helps students learn how to read
and understand primary literature, and simultaneously challenges them to think
for themselves, develop their own interpretations, and independently design new
hypotheses and thought-experiments. The course also includes interviews with the
scientists involved in the research, using interview questions contributed by
students themselves. The broader impacts of the project are threefold: First,
the CREATE method will foster the development of transferable understanding, as
students are able to apply the approaches learned in the course to numerous
other situations requiring analytical and interpretive skills. Second, we have
chosen to highlight work coming from the labs of at least two highly successful
female scientists. Women remain underrepresented at higher levels of academic
science, and we believe that studying the work of, and learning about the
experiences of, these women will provide inspiration to female students.
Finally, the CREATE method provides all participating students, not only those
who pursue research careers, with a deeper understanding of the scientific
process. As decisions about scientific research have increasingly become part of
public policy, we believe it is essential for undergraduate education to
contribute to a scientifically literate populace. The project is an adaptation
of Readings in Developmental Neurobiology (Purves and Patterson, 1982), a
collection of journal articles published on neural development.