* 0311905
* Computational Theory and Methods for Solving Multiple Saddle Point Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Jianxin Zhou, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 115,114.00

Dr. Zhou, the principal investigator proposes to develop theory and methods
&lt;br/&gt;which can be implemented by numerical algorithms for efficiently and
stablely &lt;br/&gt;solving multiple saddle point problems. The PI proposes
to&lt;br/&gt;(1) establish local characterizations of Unconstrained or
Constrained saddle &lt;br/&gt;points in Hilbert, Banach spaces for various
multiple solution problems;&lt;br/&gt;(2) develop numerical algorithms for
finding multiple saddle points; &lt;br/&gt;to carry out numerical tests on
various model problems and make codes available &lt;br/&gt;to other
researchers;&lt;br/&gt;(3) do convergence and error analysis of the algorithms;
develop techniques to &lt;br/&gt;enhance stability, efficiency and convergence
rate of the algorithms;&lt;br/&gt;(4) develop tools that can be numerically
carried out for investigating &lt;br/&gt;instability and maneuverability of
multiple saddle points;&lt;br/&gt;(5) study important multiple saddle point
problems in applications, such as,&lt;br/&gt;an eigen-pair problem in nonlinear
optics and the elliptic sine-Gordon equation &lt;br/&gt;in condensed matter
physics for multiple solutions and their instabilities &lt;br/&gt;and
maneuverabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stability is one of the main concerns
for system design and control. &lt;br/&gt;Conventional theory and numerical
methods are designed to find stable solutions.&lt;br/&gt;However, in many
applications, PERFORMANCE or MANEUVERABILITY is more
desirable,&lt;br/&gt;especially in system design and control of EMERGENCY
machineries for MISSION &lt;br/&gt;CRITICAL SITUATIONS. On the other hand, many
problems in applications possess &lt;br/&gt;multiple (unstable) solutions with
different performance, maneuverabilities &lt;br/&gt;(an ability to shift from
one solution to others) and instabilities. An &lt;br/&gt;unstable solution is a
transitional solution which exists only in a certain &lt;br/&gt;time period. An
unstable solution may have much higher performance and
&lt;br/&gt;maneuverability than others. Finding multiple solutions enables one
to select &lt;br/&gt;the best solution. However, due to unstable nature, those
solutions are very &lt;br/&gt;elusive to numerical computation. There is
virtually no theory in the &lt;br/&gt;literature to devise an efficient and
stable numerical algorithm for this &lt;br/&gt;purpose until recently (2001)
when the PI and his student developed a New &lt;br/&gt;Method. With which a
numerical algorithm is devised for finding multiple &lt;br/&gt;unstable
solutions and has been tested on many multiple solution problems.
&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results are quite promising and show great potential. The
projects &lt;br/&gt;described in this proposal are further developments of the
preliminary results &lt;br/&gt;in several important directions. The outcome of
the projects will greatly &lt;br/&gt;enhance people's understanding on unstable
solutions, provide numerical &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for finding multiple
solutions and promote more applications.&lt;br/&gt;