* 0311934
* Microbial Processes and Populations as Related to Zinc, Cadmium and Sulfur Speciation in Natural Metalliferous Soil Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Janice Thies, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 378,032.00

Soil environments are biogeochemical systems under continual modification by
biological and chemical processes. This research project involves the study of
field soils with elevated levels of heavy metals that resulted from natural
biogeochemical processes. The overall hypothesis is that microbial populations
involved in sulfur cycling (sulfur oxidizing bacteria, SOB; sulfur reducing
bacteria, SRB) determine the solid-phase speciation and distribution of Zn and
Cd in organic-matter rich soil environments. The soils to be studied are peat
deposits that overlie a mineral bed of Lockport Dolomite extending from Eastern
New York State to Guelph (Canada). These peat deposits can concentrate Cd and Zn
by biogeochemical processes, and the solubility, mobility and bioavailability of
these metals can increase when such deposits are drained, initiating oxidation
of organic matter and sulfides under aerobic conditions. We propose that the
structure, function, and activity of microbial populations in these soils
determine the speciation, solubility, mobility, and bioavailability of Zn and
Cd. Among the relationships to be investigated are the spatial distribution
(imaging), identity, and co-location of microbes and minerals or elements in
soil particles. To do this, soils will be sampled during wet and dry seasons.
Vertical profiles of these soils will be studied to assess the involvement of
microbial processes in metal mobility. In the laboratory, experiments conducted
under oxidizing conditions will be undertaken to investigate the potential
effects that changes in microbial community structure and function might have on
Zn and Cd dissolution and binding environment and to S oxidation states. A suite
of techniques involving wet chemistry, spectroscopy, classic microbiology,
molecular biology and fluorescence microscopy at the micro-scale will be
employed to test hypotheses about the role of microorganisms in chemical
speciation and mobility at macro-scales. We plan to obtain spatially coupled
data from confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and m-XRF and m-XRD, thereby
linking the distribution of microbes with Zn and Cd in soil particles. In
addition, we will integrate PCR- and non-PCR-based molecular analyses to obtain
directed, quantitative information about microbial populations of interest. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies in the direct coupling of
microbiological and geochemical analyses under controlled conditions, which will
help us better understand biogeochemical processes controlling trace metal
retention and solubility in complex soil environments. This research project
will advance our capabilities for linking micro- and macro-scale processes in
pollution prevention, remediation, and environmental management. This proposal
will also support a unique blend of interdisciplinary education for students who
will be trained in molecular and geochemical techniques. Overall, this research
will simultaneously advance basic knowledge of biogeochemical processes and
promote significant innovations in interdisciplinary training of environmental
scientists.