* 0311080
* Capillary Electrophoresis in the Undergraduate Curriculum in Biochemistry and Forensic Chemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Lisa Wen, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 09/30/2005
* USD 48,098.00

Chemistry (12) Capillary electrophoresis (CE) techniques have become widely
accepted by the scientific community. To fully prepare students for careers in
science or to pursuit advanced degree, we are including CE methodology into our
undergraduate curriculum. Thin layer chromatography, SDS-polyacrylamide and
agarose gel electrophoresis, and conventional liquid chromatography have been
used for some time to separate biomolecules in our undergraduate biochemistry
laboratories. With the acquisition of a versatile CE system that can be used in
the analysis of many types of molecules, we are now adapting and implementing a
specially designed set of experiments into our undergraduate biochemistry and
forensic chemistry curriculum. The experiments and protocols are all adapted
from educational and research journals, and NSF supported projects that have
been fully tested. These selected experiments allow our students to perform
qualitative and quantitative analysis of samples of biological, pharmaceutical,
and forensic significance (e.g., protein, DNA, and drug analysis) by direct
comparison of CE to other methods of instrumental separation. We are also
developing collaborations between the departments of law enforcement and justice
administration, biology, and chemistry on the use of CE methodology. After
successful incorporation of CE in biochemistry and forensic chemistry courses as
anticipated, we plan to expand the applications of the CE system to general,
organic, analytical, physical, and inorganic chemistry courses. The CE system is
also used in undergraduate research in our department. We plan to disseminate
the outcome of this project through publications in appropriate journals,
attending scientific meetings, and establishing a web site for the project.