* 0311014
* Turbo Like Codes for Distributed Source and Joint Source-Channel Coding of Correlated Sources
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Javier Garcia-Frias, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2008
* USD 213,094.00

0311014&lt;br/&gt;Javier Garcia-Frias&lt;br/&gt;U of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the study of
communications systems consisting of multiple sources transmitting correlated
information. The final objective is to exploit the correlation among the sources
to reduce&lt;br/&gt;the total transmitted energy. The techniques developed in
this research may have a broad impact in the area of sensor networks, making it
possible to develop sensors requiring less transmitted power. For example, a
possible applications could be the development of less-power-invasive
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to reduce the total transmitted
energy, the research will focus on the application of turbo-like codes, and
specifically of linear codes with low-density generator matrix to i) achieve
compression rates close to theoretical limits for a wide range of multi-terminal
correlated sources (discrete or continuous, with and without memory) and ii)
perform joint source-channel coding for a wide range of multi-terminal
correlated sources and different channel environments. The proposed system is
characterized by its simplicity at the encoder site. This simplicity facilitates
the implementation of the proposed scheme in practical&lt;br/&gt;applications.
Moreover, the encoding process is completely independent for each source, and it
does not require knowledge about the correlation model or source statistics,
which is of great interest in practical&lt;br/&gt;applications such as sensor
networks and image/video compression. In order to achieve a performance close to
the theoretical limits for source and joint source-channel coding, the
statistics of the sources&lt;br/&gt;are estimated and exploited at the decoder
in an adaptive fashion.