* 0311180
* Combining Hardware and Software Monitoring for Improved Power and Performance Tuning
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Richard Weiss, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 166,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bahar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining
Hardware and Software Monitoring for Improved Power and Performance
Tuning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamically
configuring processor resources to match a program's needs has been shown to be
an effective means of reducing CPU power dissipation without sacrificing
performance. This research focuses on combining software profiling and hardware
monitoring techniques to drive the reconfiguration process. The proposed
approach is based on the premise that each has different strengths and
weaknesses and their combination will give a better prediction of the dynamic
behavior of an application. Using this information, parts of the processor can
be run at reduced power or shut down completely when they are not needed and
powered up just before they are.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three methods that will be
explored for reducing power are: (1) fetch halting, (2) deactivating parts of
the logic that select instructions for execution and parts of the issue queue,
and (3) deactivating some of the ALU's. The three components are interrelated
because fetch halting can decrease the number of instructions that become ready
to issue, which can cause some of the functional units to become idle. In
addition, not halting the fetch unit can cause the issue queue to fill up and
delay turning off queue entries. The goal of this research is to find effective
ways of combining software and hardware techniques to significantly lower energy
consumption over a range of architectures that may include features such as
multithreading and multiple processors on a chip.&lt;br/&gt;