* 0311143
* A Lidar-Based Collaboratory for Cross-Institution Multidisciplinary Curricular Enhancements
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Jo Ann Parikh, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2005
* USD 83,254.00

Physics (13) This project expands the knowledge base of educational materials,
experiments and techniques in atmospheric laser radar (lidar), as well as
identifies technical approaches and instructional methodologies that facilitate
collaboration and resource sharing across institutions and remotely controlled
experimentation. The project installs a lidar facility at Central Connecticut
State University (CCSU) as well as computer resources for data analysis and
project dissemination at Southern Connecticut State University (SCSU). Together
these two labs form a "collaboratory". A collaboratory is a collaboration
between two institutions to provide and share facilities and expertise that
enhance the learning for students from both institutions. The project develops a
progressive series of modules for integration into physics, computer science,
geoscience, and chemistry courses. Two new senior-level courses are being
developed in which physics students from CCSU work together with computer
science students from SCSU in teams to conduct lidar-based atmospheric science
experiments. The project is an adaptation of recent curriculum developments
(e.g., Project INTER-MATH, DUE-9455980) as well as a previously supported NSF
equipment project, ATM-0116039. The PIs are working with faculty who teach
courses from both institutions to integrate the lidar system and its
capabilities into the curriculum. The project has an evaluation component and
the PIs are publishing the results of this work at conferences, web pages and in
peer reviewed journals. This project serves as a national model for cross-
institution multidisciplinary team education based on institutional resource
sharing.