* 0312697
* Georg Frobenius and the History of Linear Algebra
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Thomas Hawkins, Trustees of Boston University
* Fixed Price Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 88,464.00

Project Abstract SES 0312697 Thomas W. Hawkins, Boston University "Georg
Frobenius and the History of Linear Algebra"

This proposal is to write an intellectual biography of the mathematician Georg
Frobenius (1849-1917), who was trained in the mathematical school of Kronecker
and Weierstrass at the University of Berlin in the 1870s and eventually returned
to Berlin to play a prominent role in the direction the school took during
1892-1917. Although his impact upon present-day mathematics has been
considerable, his work and its influence have been little studied by historians.
Because Frobenius was not one of the mathematical giants of his era but a more
typical mathematician, the proposed study will contribute to a more balanced
understanding of how mathematics actually progresses. The proposed study will
focus upon Frobenius's many contributions involving the theory or application of
linear algebra. Since such work grew out of his investigation of a diverse
spectrum of mathematical fields throughout his career, a good overview of his
mathematical activity is a by-product. Considerable attention will be given to
the context of his work, with three types of context being distinguished: prior,
collateral, and subsequent developments. "Prior developments" includes those
mathematical developments essential for an understanding of the disciplinary
ideals of the Berlin school of Kronecker and Weierstrass that played an
important role in guiding Frobenius in his selection of problems and in his
approach to resolving them. "Collateral developments" refers to developments
that are independent of Frobenius's work but led to more or less the same
result. Frobenius was involved in an unusually large number of instances of
multiple discovery that fall within the scope of the proposed study. They will
be studied as a means of gaining a greater appreciation of both the special
characteristics of Frobenius's work (vis `a vis that of his co-discoverers) and
of the fact that he was very much a man of his mathematical times, abreast of a
wide spectrum of 19th-century developments and typical in his interests albeit
untypical in the Berlin-style manner in which he pursued those interests.
Comparison of his work with that of his co-discoverers will also contribute to
an understanding of how and why his work has impacted present-day mathematics.
This involves consideration of the "subsequent developments" that, for reasons
to be analyzed, incorporated the work and ideas of Frobenius thereby shaping
present-day mathematics. The goal of the project is a publishable book that will
shed light on the emergence of linear algebra from diverse areas of 19th-century
mathematics and will clarify the central role played therein by Frobenius. On
another level, it will represent an historically informed characterization of
Berlin-style algebra, from its roots in the work of Weierstrass and Kronecker to
its continuation at the hands of Frobenius's prize student, Issai Schur. Such a
characterization should prove illuminating by comparison with the abstract
algebraic style that emerged from Gottingen somewhat later. The book can have a
broader impact in two ways, both of which are facilitated by its focus on linear
algebra, a basic part of mathematics that is studied and utilized by
mathematicians and a broad spectrum of scientists. On a pedagogical level, it
can provide students of mathematics with a vicarious experience of what is
actually involved in the human endeavor of mathematical research. It can also
help expand the small infrastructural base of historians of mathematics by
engaging the interest of mathematicians and scientists in history of
mathematics, and encouraging them to collaborate with historians.