* 0312789
* ITR:  Atomic-Scale Simulation of Non-Glide Processes for Dislocations in Intermetallic Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Murray Daw, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 280,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research and education
seeking to exploit a recent convergence of developments in theoretical methods
and algorithms to study atomic scale processes important to the mechanical
properties of intermetallic alloys. Intermetallic alloys are useful as
structural materials in high temperature environments, and are of fundamental
scientific interest in part for their rich phase structure and deformation
mechanisms. This proposal will study the fundamental atomic scale processes that
govern the usefulness of these materials.

The PI aims to develop computational tools that are predictive in an area where
experimental results are complicated and often difficult to interpret,
deformation in intermetallic alloys. Slip in intermetallics occurs primarily by
the motion of dislocations, the basic units of slip in a lattice. It is well
known that the motion of dislocations is affected by diffusion in these ordered
lattices. In particular, a number of interesting and unexpected processes have
recently been discovered which involve the interaction of diffusing vacancies
with dislocations. To understand these complex reactions requires detailed
atomistic simulations. New developments in the area of computational materials
make this problem approachable in ways that were not possible before.
Traditional molecular dynamics follows the motion of atoms on a time-scale of
the natural lattice vibrations in the solid. Diffusive hops occur rarely on that
time-scale. Several new techniques have been developed to deal with such rare
events. These accelerated molecular dynamics techniques will be used to study
the mechanisms of the diffusive processes near dislocations. These methods are
very well suited for implementation on parallel Beowulf clusters of commodity
computers as proposed here.

Computational tools are having impact on the design and use of materials through
industry and national labs. The introduction of physically based modelling into
engineering environments enhances the confidence and efficiency with which new
materials and processes can be developed. This award supports the training of
graduate students in this area and in advanced scientific computing. Codes
developed under this program will be made available to the broader community and
integrated into the curriculum of a new computational materials science course.
%%% This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to
the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports computational research and
education seeking to exploit a recent convergence of developments in theoretical
methods and algorithms to study atomic scale processes important to the
mechanical properties of intermetallic alloys. Intermetallic alloys are useful
as structural materials in high temperature environments, and are of fundamental
scientific interest in part for their rich phase structure and deformation
mechanisms. This proposal will study the fundamental atomic scale processes that
govern the usefulness of these materials.

The PI aims to develop computational tools that are predictive in an area where
experimental results are complicated and often difficult to interpret,
deformation in intermetallic alloys. Slip in intermetallics occurs primarily by
the motion of dislocations, the basic units of slip in a lattice. It is well
known that the motion of dislocations is affected by diffusion in these ordered
lattices. In particular, a number of interesting and unexpected processes have
recently been discovered which involve the interaction of diffusing vacancies
with dislocations. To understand these complex reactions requires detailed
atomistic simulations. New developments in the area of computational materials
make this problem approachable in ways that were not possible before.
Traditional molecular dynamics follows the motion of atoms on a time-scale of
the natural lattice vibrations in the solid. Diffusive hops occur rarely on that
time-scale. Several new techniques have been developed to deal with such rare
events. These accelerated molecular dynamics techniques will be used to study
the mechanisms of the diffusive processes near dislocations. These methods are
very well suited for implementation on parallel Beowulf clusters of commodity
computers as proposed here.

Computational tools are having impact on the design and use of materials through
industry and national labs. The introduction of physically based modelling into
engineering environments enhances the confidence and efficiency with which new
materials and processes can be developed. This award supports the training of
graduate students in this area and in advanced scientific computing. Codes
developed under this program will be made available to the broader community and
integrated into the curriculum of a new computational materials science course.
***

















