* 0312252
* Paleoethnobotany of the Bonneville Basin, western North America
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* David Rhode, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 82,632.00

The Bonneville Basin of Utah and Nevada is well known for cave sites having deep
stratified archaeological records of human occupation spanning the last 12,000
years. These archaeological sites contain abundant well-preserved remains of
plants that were mainstays of the diet of hunter-gatherers living in this arid
region. With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. David Rhode will
carry out an analysis of plant remains from several archaeological sites in the
Bonneville Basin. These collections include those already obtained from Danger
Cave, Floating Island Cave, and Camelsback Cave, as well as new collections that
will be made at Bonneville Estates Shelter, a cavern in eastern Nevada currently
undergoing excavations and having a detailed archaeological sequence extending
through the Holocene. Dr. Rhode will integrate data from these individual sites
to create a regional record of changing plant-oriented subsistence strategies,
and use this record to document how people changed their subsistence strategies
in relation to long-term climate-driven changes in available plant resources.
This research addresses four main research issues. First, archaeologists have
long thought that the earliest inhabitants of the Bonneville Basin adopted small
seeds as a dietary staple during the very early Holocene, much earlier than
elsewhere in the intermountain West. This hypothesis will be re-examined using
new evidence from Danger Cave and Bonneville Estates Shelter. Second, the
regional record of plant use will show how foraging societies responded to
widespread aridification and a decline of abundance of key food resources that
began 8000 years ago, and which foreshadowed the development of foraging
strategies that characterized many Great Basin native groups since then up until
European contact. Third, a period of 'Neoglacial' climatic amelioration
4000-3000 years ago is expected to have strongly affected subsistence resource
abundance and subsistence strategies, potentially resulting in dietary
specialization toward high-return resources or, alternatively, retaining dietary
generality but allowing a broad expansion of population. The regional record
will allow tests among these alternatives of adaptive flexibility to resource
abundance vs. adaptive integrity and population growth. Finally, cultural
developments and subsistence shifts that occurred within the last 1500 years,
including the expansion of Fremont farming societies and the subsequent return
to foraging by Gosiute peoples, will allow a test of the tradeoffs between
foraging and farming strategies and social integration in the context of
regional environmental change in dryland environments. The record of prehistoric
plant use developed for the Bonneville Basin will rank among the longest and
most detailed available from North America and as good as any such sequence
known worldwide. It will be compared with an equally well-dated and detailed
paleoenvironmental record, to address important issues of regional prehistory
and of adaptations of foraging societies to changing climates and resource
distributions in drylands. Dr. Rhode will train undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as interested members of local archaeological groups, in
paleoethnobotanical techniques, and the research will be used to develop public
displays at Utah's Danger Cave State Park, enhancing greater public enjoyment
and appreciation of the value of archaeological resources in understanding of
our past.