* 0312851
* ITR:  Optimal Diffusion Mechanisms for Fast and Robust TCP Congestion Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 349,978.00

Random Early Detection (RED), introduced in the early 90's emerged as the first
significant Active Queue Management (AQM) designed to coexist with TCP - a
concept that revolutionized congestion control of the Internet. Although
numerous improvements on RED have been proposed recently, such as Adaptive RED,
SRED, REM, and BLUE, many of the fundamental weaknesses inherent in all of these
AQM protocols have not been overcome, including over-parameterization, design
and implementation complexity, and the lack of robustness to varying traffic
mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on developing a
new generation of active congestion control mechanisms based on the concept of
optimal error diffusion discovered in signal processing and extensively used
today in this field. Notably a duality exists between the mechanisms in packet
marking or dropping with that of optimal dithering and quantization in signal
processing. More precisely, (binary) quantization is analogous to packet marking
where the average queue length, used as the input to RED, is quantized to "on"
(marking) or "off" (no marking). The quantization (marking) error is then
diffused over to subsequent quantization (marking) operations. Optimal
quantization or dithering is attained with the so-called error diffusion filter,
which, when applied to the AQM problem leads to remarkably efficient congestion
control mechanisms coined here as Diffusion Early Marking (DEM). Unlike many AQM
systems, random variable generation is not required as error diffusion attains
optimal (pseudo-random) dithering, and more importantly DEM only requires a
single control parameter which is designed based on the estimation of active
flows or on other network statistics measuring congestion. As such, the proposed
methods rely on cross level interactions for improved AQM performance.
Expectation maximization (EM) algorithms and other simpler statistical methods
applied on ECN markings, for instance, promise to provide adequate and robust
estimates of congestion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms in DEM thus allow
it to maintain a stable average queue length with a varying number of flows.
Preliminary results on the design and optimization of DEM are remarkably
promising. There are however, numerous open problems that need to be addressed
prior to its implementation including: (a) methods for the optimal design of
parameters controlling rate and queue-length based packet drop mechanisms, (b)
fast and robust estimation of the number of active flows and network congestion
based on packet header information and/or queue dynamics, (c) diffusion
mechanisms for networks with mixed traffic including web mice and elephants, (d)
development of DEM differentiated service mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major contribution of the proposed research is on the application of the rich
theories of quantization and robust estimation to the design of novel and robust
AQM mechanisms that rely on cross-layer information. The new AQM mechanisms, in
concert with the estimation framework to be developed, promise to adequately
control the congestion of networks with various traffic mixtures and non-
stationary traffic dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of the
proposed work is the testing of DEM routers with real traffic in an experimental
and scalable testbed. The availability of this testbed will be valuable in
providing students with a deeper understanding of difficult network concepts,
such as congestion control and active queue management, and allowing then to
gain hands-on experience in network traffic management and control.&lt;br/&gt;