* 0312988
* ITR: Semantically Tractable Questions: Theory and Implementation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Oren Etzioni, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2007
* USD 395,000.00

Understanding arbitrary natural language sentences is widely regarded as very
challenging. Yet understanding questions such as ``What is the capital of
Italy?'' or ``What Chinese restaurants are open on Sunday in Seattle?'' seems
straightforward even for a machine. While natural language sentences have the
potential to be subtle, complex, and rife with ambiguity, they can also be
simple, straight forward, and clear. This project formalizes this intuition by
identifying classes of questions that are ``easy to understand'' in a well
defined sense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People are unwilling to trade reliable and
predictable user interfaces for intelligent but unreliable ones. To satisfy
users, Natural Language Interfaces (NLIs) should not be allowed to misinterpret
their questions often, if at all. Consequently, this research project has three
components. First, it introduces a theoretical framework for analyzing the
reliability of an NLI by formally defining the properties of soundness and
completeness and identifying a class of semantically tractable natural language
questions for which sound and complete NLIs can be built. Second, it is shown
that the theory has practical import by measuring the prevalence of semantically
tractable questions and by measuring the performance of a sound and complete NLI
in practice. Finally, the project extends the framework to dialog systems and to
increasingly broad classes of natural language
sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has the potential to reinvigorate
basic research on NLIs, and to have the broader societal impact of making
powerful information resources more readily available to ordinary people
regardless of their knowledge of Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;