* 0312487
* ITR:     Automatic Translation of Scientific Literature to Braille
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Eitan Gurari, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2007
* USD 359,325.00

This project develops transcribing software to make scientific and technical
literature freely and almost instantaneously available to braille readers
through fully-automated translation of both MathML and LaTeX to Nemeth braille.
The PI's software will be the first braille transcribing utility capable of
simultaneous and automated processing of mathematical formulas, scientific text,
spatial arrangements and XML-described formats. MathML is an emerging low-level
standard markup language for archiving mathematical content, and for
communicating and processing mathematics by machines. LaTeX is a high-level
language for writing mathematical documents. Scientific word processors can
export documents in LaTeX, and many authors also use it directly with text
editors. A prototype, which transforms MathML to Nemeth braille mathematics, was
built on top of the PI's TeX4ht, a powerful tool for automatic conversion of
LaTeX documents to MathML mathematics plus XML text. This two-layer approach
avoided the need to readdress numerous difficulties, already resolved in TeX4ht,
which had plagued earlier attempts to convert legacy LaTeX to Braille, and also
answers the call of the National Federation of the Blind to develop tools for
direct translation from MathML into Nemeth Braille. The subject areas of machine
translation of MathML code to other formats and of automatic generation of
Nemeth braille from XML-tagged source have received little attention. The work
will identify problem areas in both fields, provide solutions with respect to
the braille transcribing system, and identify significant topics for further
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: At the current going rate,
it takes over six months to translate a single textbook at a cost of $5,000 and
more. The PI's software will be highly portable across numerous platforms, and
will be disseminated free of charge as open source in the public domain, as is
already the case for LaTeX and TeX4ht. The ultimate outcome of the project
should be increased productivity for the large number of people who must rely on
Braille to read, which will in turn lead to increased integration of braille
readers into technical professions. &lt;br/&gt;