* 0312222
* New PDE Based Models and Numerical Techniques in Level Set Surface Processing, Imaging Science and Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 979,694.00

Stanley J. Osher and Luminita A. Vese The investigators together with junior
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and students develop novel and efficient
computational techniques for partial differential equations of fourth order
arising in imaging science, including medical imaging, image processing,
computer vision, and graphics, as well as material science. They begin with
analysis done on their previous TV model by Yves Meyer. This gives a unique
blend of nonlinear partial differential equation and functional analysis as well
as new and very useful models for image decomposition. This leads the
investigators to the analysis of more general fourth order equations used in
imaging science, with geometric applications and interpretations, as well as new
efficient computational and numerical methods to approximate these and other
related partial differential equations. Problems considered include image
decomposition into cartoon plus texture, Wulff evolution of shapes in crystal
growth, image disocclusion by the Euler elastica model, image restoration via
geometry of level sets, as well as reconstruction of surfaces from unorganized
data points (such as LIDAR, LADAR, 3D cloud or geoscience data) in the form of
patches belonging to the same unknown surface. This investigation dramatically
advances the state-of-the-art in material science (e.g., microchip design),
image analysis, computer vision, and graphics. These fields are of great
strategic value in the US information technology industry, in nanoscience, in
homeland security, and in medical imaging. The level set method and
applications, developed by the investigators and collaborators, has impacted
numerous areas of technology -- see, e.g., the Google website for close to 5,000
hits on "Level Set Methods" with a spectacular range of applications from
Hollywood graphics to underwater explosions to control of passenger aircraft to
developing new microchip designs and beyond. The investigators' new models
reduce the burden of laborious human operations for the processing of large-
scale data sets, enhance the efficiency of domain scientists as well as ordinary
users, facilitate modeling and rendering tasks, and streamline the pipeline of
information and materials processing.

