* 0312413
* ITR:  Distributed Learning in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sanjeev Kulkarni, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

The possibility of deploying a large number of networked sensors presents great
opportunities for a host of commercial, military, and homeland security
applications, but also presents enormous technical challenges. To fully utilize
the potential of such&lt;br/&gt;networks, advances will be required on a number
of fronts and through all layers of the network. However, in addition to dealing
with most of the difficult issues of wireless communication networks, sensor
networks give rise to a number of additional&lt;br/&gt;issues as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor networks must do a great deal more than just
support communication. Transporting bits does not automatically lead to
intelligent decision-making, and connectivity does not automatically result in
coordination. In a sensor network there is a joint purpose to be accomplished by
the entire network as a whole. There are fundamental questions about which bits
to transmit, where to send them, and how to utilize them. Moreover, there are
issues of whether to do computations locally, or to pass information to higher
layers and perform partially centralized computations. These tasks must be
accomplished in the face of scarce resources, notably limited time, bandwidth,
and power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One key area where breakthroughs are needed, and
which is the focus of this project, concerns how to learn, adapt, and make
decisions to carry out the goals of the sensor network in a complex and
distributed environment. Accomplishing a joint&lt;br/&gt;goal for the entire
network poses significant information processing challenges. Myopic or local
information gathered by the individual sensors must be fused for
global&lt;br/&gt;decision-making. These tasks are complicated by the large
number of sensors, each of which may be heterogeneous, multimodal, possibly
dynamic, and uncalibrated. In some applications the scene-sensor geometry may be
unknown or only partially known, and&lt;br/&gt;the environment itself will
typically be complex and dynamic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key element that
distinguishes learning, adaptation, and decision-making in sensor networks with
most previous work in these areas is the distributed and local nature of the
information gathering together with the rich and varied structure in the
information and decisions to be made in the face of limited resources. A
degenerate appeal to existing methods by sending all the data to a centralized
node may be impossible or infeasible in many situations, and certainly will not
be the most effective way to utilize limited resources. In this project, we
address key problems in distributed learning in sensor networks, to begin to
develop an understanding of the fundamental capabilities and limitations of
learning and decision-making in sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;