* 0312093
* ITR:  Online Algorithms and Information Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Lawrence Larmore, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 312,000.00

In Information Technology decisions must typically be made before all inputs are
available. Whether it is setting up virtual circuits in order to carry IP
traffic over ATM networks, deciding whether to leave a disk spinning in between
accesses to data, or keeping cache coherent in a multiprocessor architecture --
online algorithms play a crucial role in such diverse areas as machine learning,
robotics, operating systems, network routing, distributed systems,
databases.&lt;br/&gt;It is somewhat surprising that despite such need for online
algorithms in Information Technology many fundamental problems remain
open.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many problems under investigation are from a 2002
Dagstuhl Workshop on online algorithms, where, in an open problems session,
those problems were selected, whose solution were considered to have greatest
impact. The investigators focus on these and other problems, some of which
represent long-standing challenges in computer science, and whose solution are
likely to have enormous impact on Information
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators, who have a record of
successful research in the area of online algorithms, as well as in other areas
of computer science, give substantial effort to cracking some of the hardest
outstanding open problems in the area, not by seeking ad hoc techniques, but by
developing general tools. A new tool that is used in this project is the concept
of knowledge states, which had not been previously formulated by other
researchers. In addition to investigating online algorithms in the usual models,
the investigators consider other models that involve restrictions on computation
resources or information flow, such as tracklessness, limited memory, and
limited computational time. These restrictions are intended to model real-life
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators concentrate their efforts
specifically on the following problems: the deterministic k-server problem for k
= 3, the randomized k-server problem for k = 2, the metrical task system
problem, the CNN problem, and the cache problem. The investigators examine some
additional online problems, such as the weighted server problem, the weighted
cache problem, and online scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
activity aims at significant advancement of knowledge and understanding across a
broad area. The investigators are especially seeking a better understanding of
the true nature of online randomization. Online algorithms are needed for an
enormous variety of practical situations, in fact, most real-life problems
require online algorithms, as decisions must typically be made before all inputs
are available. Very wide application of the techniques is
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project seeks to strengthen
UNLV as a center for undergraduate and graduate student education in theoretical
computer science for Nevada, which as an EPSCOR state has limited funding. In
the past, NSF funding has enabled students from Southern Nevada, and especially
women and other underrepresented groups to pursue theory at UNLV, and it is
important for UNLV to further gain momentum in this area. As in the past, the
results of this research are used as teaching material in courses at UNLV. More
importantly, a substantial quantity of the material is being made available on
the World Wide Web in the form of tutorials, where it is available broadly
across the network, especially to non-traditional students. The results are to
be disseminated in conferences and society will benefit as the online techniques
the investigators develop are applied to many areas, including computer
networking, memory management, and databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;