* 0312651
* ITR:  Collaborative Research - Information Technology  Issues for Complex Engineering Product: Mass Customization in Geographically Distributed Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Miguel Gonzalez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 99,913.00

This study is grant provides funding for an investigation of the issues
associated with information technology in the manufacturing of complex
engineering products using mass customization in the north/south maquila
manufacturing systems. Mass customization is a concept based on the processes
associated with the production and delivery of products with diverse
configurations, as prescribed by the customer, with a veryrelatively short lead
time. It is believed thatthat mass customization can provide a competitive
advantage for the Mexico based maquila manufacturers and reduce the loss of jobs
and businesses to overseas operations. This research will focus on the
development of the IT backbone which is critical for successful implementation
of mass customization methodology for assembly of application to complex,
customized products. There are three key elements of this research: the
identification of an appropriate design methodology for mass customization of
complex, customer-defined products for the North/South maquila manufacturing
environment;, the identification of manufacturing methodology to support mass
customization; and the identification of critical Information Technology issues
for integration of product design-component manufacturing-product assembly to
optimize the effectiveness in terms of cost and speed of the mass customization
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The If successful, the results of this research
will provide a general framework with which to understand the information
technology issues associated with mass customization. The long term goals to be
addressed in this study areIt is anticipated that the following deliverables
will be created: a methodology for the identification and modeling of product
variants and their impact on mass customization;, a methodology for the
identification and modeling of manufacturing processes and their impact upon
mass customization;, a suitability metric for mass customization;, a conceptual
framework for information technology issues in mass customization; and an
evaluation of the conceptual framework. This research will be jointly conducted
at Michigan State University and the University of Texas - Pan American, that is
located in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. The location of the two
institutions mirrors the geographic configuration of many maquila operations -
engineering function in the north and manufacture in the south.. Participation
in this research by industrial partners that have home offices in Michigan and
maquila operations in Texas, and application of the mass customization framework
developed should provide benefits for the manufacturing operations that operate
under the north/south scheme; particularly the historically economically
disadvantaged areas in South Texas. &lt;br/&gt;