* 0312360
* Improving overlap-finding techniques for whole genome shotgun data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* James Yorke, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,375.00

Yorke&lt;br/&gt; A genome (the DNA in a cell) can be represented by
a&lt;br/&gt;sequence of letters called "bases." A large genome can
consist&lt;br/&gt;of billions of bases. Chemical techniques allow scientists
to&lt;br/&gt;read only a few hundred bases at a time. The whole genome
shotgun&lt;br/&gt;(WGS) assembly technique creates a draft of the sequence of
a&lt;br/&gt;whole genome by selecting such short fragments at random from
the&lt;br/&gt;genome, determining the sequence of the fragments, and
then&lt;br/&gt;computationally re-assembling millions of these fragments.
Two&lt;br/&gt;fragments are said to "overlap" if it is plausible that they
come&lt;br/&gt;from the same part of the genome, based on a comparison of
their&lt;br/&gt;sequences. The goal of this project is to focus efforts
on&lt;br/&gt;producing an extremely robust set of overlaps, using
a&lt;br/&gt;combination of sophisticated error-correction techniques, as
well&lt;br/&gt;as "localizing" fragments to validate overlaps by ensuring
that&lt;br/&gt;both fragments come from the same vicinity of the
genome.&lt;br/&gt;Several issues complicate the determination of which pairs
of&lt;br/&gt;fragments overlap. First, most genomes contain many
"repeat&lt;br/&gt;regions," i.e., two or more almost identical copies of
long&lt;br/&gt;stretches of sequence. Thus, two fragments that do not
actually&lt;br/&gt;overlap may look like they do. Second, the random
sampling&lt;br/&gt;technique results in many base errors --- bases can be mis-
read&lt;br/&gt;or missed entirely. These errors, combined with the fact
that&lt;br/&gt;repeat regions usually differ slightly, make it very difficult
to&lt;br/&gt;distinguish a spurious overlap from a true overlap in which
one&lt;br/&gt;or both fragments contain read errors. Thus, if extreme care
is&lt;br/&gt;not taken, it is easy to use a spurious overlap and
thereby&lt;br/&gt;mistakenly connect distant parts of the genome.
Preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results in collaboration with Celera Genomics, the Baylor
College&lt;br/&gt;of Medicine, and The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR)
have&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated that the investigator's current techniques
can&lt;br/&gt;already produce more sequence at higher quality. The goal
is&lt;br/&gt;improve these techniques and make them widely available.&lt;br/&gt;
The determination and interpretation of genetic information&lt;br/&gt;is one of
the great challenges of the twenty-first century. The&lt;br/&gt;genome, i.e.,
all the DNA in a cell, is the molecular basis of&lt;br/&gt;diversity and the
cornerstone of genetic information. Draft&lt;br/&gt;genomes have been obtained
for human, mouse, and some insects,&lt;br/&gt;fish, plants, and bacteria. This
is a start, but a full&lt;br/&gt;understanding of biological processes cannot be
had by studying&lt;br/&gt;the genomes of only a handful of species. The federal
government&lt;br/&gt;is spending about 100 million dollars per year
generating&lt;br/&gt;sequence data. Millions of small pieces of a genome are
sampled&lt;br/&gt;from the genome. The second stage is called "assembly,"
when&lt;br/&gt;these pieces are re-assembled on a computer like a giant
jigsaw&lt;br/&gt;puzzle. The puzzle is complicated by two facts: first, many
of&lt;br/&gt;the puzzle pieces have small errors that make them mis-
fit&lt;br/&gt;against pieces that they SHOULD fit with; and second, many
pieces&lt;br/&gt;that should NOT go together actually fit together quite
well.&lt;br/&gt;This makes it extremely difficult to correctly assemble a
genome.&lt;br/&gt;There are two ways to decrease the ambiguities: first, one
could&lt;br/&gt;generate more pieces. However, each new piece costs about
$2,&lt;br/&gt;and one would need to generate millions of new pieces to have
a&lt;br/&gt;significant effect on assembly quality. The investigators use
a&lt;br/&gt;second route. They attempt to squeeze as much information out
of&lt;br/&gt;the existing pieces as possible. The latter route
is&lt;br/&gt;substantially cheaper, and there is still much room
for&lt;br/&gt;improvement here over existing techniques. The investigators
are&lt;br/&gt;using sophisticated mathematics to help discern with
extreme&lt;br/&gt;precision those pairs of pieces that do, and those that do
not,&lt;br/&gt;fit together. Preliminary results of the investigators --
in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with several large sequencing centers --
have&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated that using their techniques to "pre-process"
the&lt;br/&gt;pieces can produce more of the genome, with fewer errors.
This&lt;br/&gt;project aims at extending these ideas further and making
them&lt;br/&gt;freely accessible to all investigators. The impact on the
federal&lt;br/&gt;genome (biotechnology) projects is potentially
great.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;