* 0312676
* ITR:     Synthesis System for Discrete Event Systems through Solving Equations over Mathematical Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Brayton, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

An automaton has states and transitions between states; some states are marked
as "accepting". Starting from the initial state, a sequence of input symbols
causes the automaton to change states in response. If a sequence can cause the
automaton to end up at an accepting state, the sequence of input symbols is said
to be accepted and is defined to be in the language of the automaton. Finite
state machines (FSMs) differ from automata in that all states are accepting and
each input symbol is divided into an input part and an output part. Automata and
FSMs are used to define "regular" languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
interesting problems can be defined in terms of automata, FSMs, or Petri nets
and the languages involved. These include problems in binary and multi-valued
logic synthesis, engineering change, design of discrete controllers, logic
verification, testing, deriving winning strategies for discrete games,
construction of protocols, and cryptography. It was observed by our group that
these diverse applications could be formalized in a unified way in terms of
language solving. In general, these problems can be stated in terms of the
synthesis of a subsystem or component, given a known environment and an external
specification. The component to be synthesized may already exist, in which case
the goal is to provide a better or optimum alternative. In other cases, no
implementation may yet exist, and the goal is to check if such a desired
subsystem exists, and if so to find an optimal implementation. An example of the
former is a digital system as found on a microchip composed of interacting
components. The system may operate correctly as is, i.e. the system already
satisfies its external specification, but one of the components should be
improved, in terms of speed, cost, power, etc. An example in which an
implementation may be unknown is a control system where we are given a "plant"
and an external specification, stating that the output of the plant always stays
within certain bounds (is stable), and we want to synthesize a Moore type FSM
feedback control unit which does the job. "Engineering change", occurs when a
system has been almost completely designed, but at the last moment, a bug in its
concept requires the system's specification to be changed. A question arises if
just one component can be changed while the other components are left alone. In
a biological system, the ability to make measurements inside a component is
often limited, but a model of the component is required to be synthesized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There can be several ways that two subsystems interact
(can be composed). In hardware, typically two components are wired together and
their interaction synchronized using a clock; on each clock tick, information is
exchanged. In software, the communication is "asynchronous"; information is sent
to another component only after enough time has passed so that the other
component has had enough "cycles" to compute its
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such problems can be reduced to solving an equation
of the form, ,where X is the unknown component to be derived, A describes the
behavior (or environment) of the known part of the system, S is the external
specification or desired behavior, is a type of parallel composition operator
describing how A and X, are to communicate, and is a conformance relation
stating when the overall system satisfies the specification. Like many systems
of equations, the solution may not be unique; hence there is also the problem of
finding a "best" solution. Sets of restricted solutions that have appropriate
additional properties are of interest, e.g. no deadlocks or livelocks, or a
solution that is a Moore-type FSM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop the mathematical tools required for solving equations
over various mathematical machines, composition operators and conformance
relations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine and characterize, for various problem areas,
subsets of restricted solutions, which are of practical interest.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Develop efficient computer tools for constructing solutions within different
mathematical representations.&lt;br/&gt;4. Study and formulate the types of
equations that are useful for different applications. &lt;br/&gt;5. Develop
methods for extracting optimum solutions.&lt;br/&gt;6. Build a software system
where the equation is easily specified and efficient tools for constructing
optimum solutions have been implemented.&lt;br/&gt;The last goal is important
because the known methods of solutions are computationally complex. This has led
to the lack of any system for constructing solutions and exploring these
problems. We have already developed a system, MVSIS, for the synthesis and
optimization of multi-level, multi-valued, non-deterministic networks. It has
been made especially efficient in manipulating logic. We propose to represent
language solving problems in MVSIS and develop new implementations of various
operations required to derive the solutions. In addition, we will develop
methods which find an optimum sub-solution from a general solution.&lt;br/&gt;