* 0312976
* ITR:     Economics of Network Pricing and Resource Provisioning in a Competitive Market
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Tamer Basar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 331,000.00

Pricing has been extensively studied as a tool to relieve congestion in the
Internet. In much of the prior literature, however, pricing is viewed as an
incentive to the end users to self-regulate in a manner such that the network
resources are shared in a fair manner. This view of pricing, which has its roots
in convex programming and duality theory, equates the price of a resource with
the incremental benefit to the system utility of adding one unit of the
resource. However, the impact of price as a possible revenue stream for the
Internet Service Provider (ISP) is usually ignored in this prevailing point of
view. This three-year program, we will study pricing from a new perspective, one
of maximizing the revenue of ISPs. The research proposal will also study the
impact of such an active pricing scheme on the customers of the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Research to be
carried out in the context of this project is expected to lead to major advances
in the methodology and design of pricing schemes and resource provisioning in
communication networks, as well as to some new fundamental results in the
theories of static and dynamic games, learning algorithms, and distributed
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will develop a
new graduate-level course on game theory, geared toward engineering students.
The course will incorporate several applications of game theory in network
economic models. The PIs, who have a good record of accomplishment in recruiting
women and other under-represented groups as graduate students, will focus their
efforts in involving these students in the proposed research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;