* 0312028
* Quantum Transport and Metallic Nanocohesion
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Charles Stafford, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2006
* USD 303,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on electrical transport in nanoscale
conductors and their associated mechanical properties. A great deal of progress
has been made in understanding electrical transport in nanoscale conductors
using quantum transport theory, but progress has been much less systematic in
understanding the mechanical properties of nanoconductors. This is an
intrinsically harder problem, since unlike transport, cohesion is not determined
solely by the electrons at the Fermi surface, but depends on the entire Fermi
sea of conduction electrons, as well as the valence electrons and nuclei. Ab
initio computational techniques are ideal for studying the ultimate limit of
atomic-scale conductors, but they provide few clues to the properties of metal
wires intermediate in size between one atom and current 100nm technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and co-workers have developed a unified description
of the cohesive and conducting properties of the cohesive and conducting
properties of metallic nanoconductors, based on a nanoscale generalization of
the free-electron model (NFEM). This model has proven to be remarkably rich,
explaining observed correlations in the tensile force and quantum conductance of
gold nanowires, conductance histograms in noble- and alkali-metal contacts, and
the quantum suppression of shot noise in atomic-scale gold wires. Perhaps most
importantly for technology, the NFEM predicts that electron-shell effects can
overcome the surface-tension driven instability in thin wires, suggesting that
stable, atomically-thin metal interconnects are possible. Further analyses will
be carried out of the lifetime of these metastable structures under thermal
fluctuations, of the limitations of nanowire length due to Peierls instability,
and of the possibility of stable "superdeformed" nanowires. Novel schemes for
nanoscale self-assembly guided by electron waves will also be investigated
within this theoretical framework. Finally, several extensions of the NFEM are
proposed to treat problems involving interactions, crystal structure, and
multivalent atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research can have a major impact
on the future development of electronic components and devices at the nanoscale.
The research will be done in collaboration with the group of Hermann Grabert in
Freiburg, Germany, who also coordinates the European Research Training Network
on nanoscale conductors. A series of lectures on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
will be organized for the public and industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
grant supports theoretical research on electrical transport in nanoscale
conductors and their associated mechanical properties. This research can have a
major impact on the future development of electronic components and devices at
the nanoscale. The research will be done in collaboration with the group of
Hermann Grabert in Freiburg, Germany, who also coordinates the European Research
Training Network on nanoscale conductors. A series of lectures on Nanoscience
and Nanotechnology will be organized for the public and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;