* 0312233
* Coupling Within and Between Nanophases of the Global, Metastable Structure of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Bernhard Wunderlich, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2006
* USD 384,000.00

The proposed research involves a study of molecularly coupled processes in
polymers. In the past there were two ways to describe polymer molecules
thermodynamically. One was to treat the whole molecule as a single component,
despite the fact that a single polymer molecule may consist of 10,000 chain
atoms of which each has a certain amount of independent mobility. The other was
to treat each of the chain atoms as an independent component, despite the fact
that all chain atoms are linked together. Neither description works for all
situations. The new idea is to test the possibility to identify local or
temporal decoupling. The local decoupling limits the chain segments that can be
treated as an independent component. The temporal decoupling limits successive
steps in a process which occur too slowly to be acted upon by a single molecular
driving force, a common occurrence in slowly acting polymers. In the last ten
years, temperature-modulated calorimetry was developed to a degree to be able to
quantitatively distinguish reversible and irreversible processes. The effect of
frequency- and amplitude-variation of temperature-changes is studied with this
technique and allows to find the time- and position-effect of reversible and
irreversible processes such as melting and crystallization, which can then be
linked to the decoupling described above. Multi-phase, metastable structures of
different component length were found to undergo transitions of different
degrees of reversibility. Semicrystalline materials and copolymers of
incompatible blocks are characterized as globally metastable systems of micro-
and nanophases with strong connections across their boundaries due to polymer
molecules that are longer than the phase dimensions and become part of more than
one phase with intermediate decoupling. Changes of state involving
crystallization, ordering, orienting, melting, disordering, mixing,
vitrification, and devitrification are to be studied. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research would be an increased understanding of polymers, a part of
science which presently involves more than half of all scientists. The broader
impact involves a reduction of the need for trial and error in the application
to polymeric materials as soon as the connection between structure, properties,
and processing is established in areas such as fibers, films, plastics, etc. and
including also biological polymers such as proteins and starches. The basis of
the quantitative, thermodynamic analyses proposed is the Advanced THermal
Analysis System (ATHAS), developed over the last 30 years with NSF support.
Extensive teaching efforts reach from scientific publications, discussions, and
lectures, to instruction of students and postdoctoral associates, all on an
international level. A computer course is available over the internet for study
of the new results. Over the last 5 years, the duration of a prior NSF Grant the
Data Bank and Computer Course were accessed by more than 25,000 visitors.