* 0312172
* Fundamental Studies on Aluminides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Ramana Reddy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2009
* USD 475,000.00

A major objective of the proposed study is to evaluate the role of ternary alloy
additions to aluminides in decreasing their brittleness. This study deals with
the evaluation of thermodynamic properties of Ti and Nb aluminides, and
determination of the stability of various alloy phases in different
environmental conditions. This research will enable to evaluate the phase
stability of intermetallic aluminides that are candidate materials for many
industrial applications. The stability of alloy phases also depends on the
environmental conditions. Study of phase stability in the aluminide systems at
different temperatures and environmental conditions also falls under the scope
of the proposed research. A major goal is to determine the thermodynamic
properties of aluminides with/without ternary alloying addition such as Cr, Zr,
Mo, and V, using solid-state galvanic cell equilibrium technique. In addition,
theoretical models will be developed to predict the stability of alloy phases
based on the results of the thermodynamic and mass transport experiments. The
reaction products will be analyzed using several techniques such as Optical
Microscopy (OM) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), X-ray Diffraction (XRD),
Electron Microprobe Analysis (EPMA), Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and
Micro-hardness Tester. The work is expected to generate a newer understanding of
the kinetics and thermodynamics of stable phase formation. The results of these
studies are expected to ultimately lead to the development of an innovative
cost-effective method of processing aluminides for
commerce.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research
consists in the development of a laboratory capable of conducting both
experimental and theoretical research in the area of advanced materials at the
university to enhance the understanding and application of intermetallics in
various fields. This research aims at improvement of our understanding of the
phase stability in advanced materials and also provides a basis for the
development of newer intermetallic aluminides. The present research program
would provide a wide variety of expertise in teaching and research, a strong
base of external research support and to instill new creative and critical
thinking among students. Enrichment of scientific research is possible through
the variety of learning perspectives that is available in this environment. The
funding of this research provides an opportunity for graduate and undergraduate
students including underrepresented minorities to develop understanding and
experience in the metallurgical and process areas of
research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;