* 0312355
* U.S.-Hungary Research on a Definitive Structural Characterization of Building Units of Biomolecules
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Henry Schaefer III, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 45,008.00

The goal of this U.S.-Hungarian research project between Henry F. Schaefer III
of the University of Georgia and Attila Csaszar of Eotvos University, Budapest,
is to study the structure of biomolecules and their models using the latest
highly sophisticated techniques of computational quantum chemistry. Prof.
Schaefer's group at the Center for Computational Quantum Chemistry performs
leading research in electron structure theory and applications to relevant
chemical problems. Prof. Csaszar's group has expertise in computation of the
structure and properties of molecules, developing new techniques in theoretical
molecular spectroscopy and cross-disciplinary investigations that involve
physical chemistry and organic/biochemistry. Together, this US-Hungarian team
intends to use the available advanced computing platforms to close the gap
between computations on model systems and real experiments. The collaboration
should yield reliable electronic structure data on chemically topical subjects,
including: 1) electron and proton affinity data on bio-molecules; 2) NMR
chemical shifts and J-coupling constants on peptide models; and 3) solvation
data on amino acids. Success would provide the chemical research community with
benchmark calculations for important biochemical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This chemistry project fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the
introduction of U.S. and Hungarian graduate students to the international
research community through work at the partner institutions and direct
involvement in the project's advanced computation and modeling techniques.