* 0312834
* Theoretical Investigations of the Spectroscopy and the Associated Structure and Dynamics of Liquids and Their Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Brian Space, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 06/30/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Professor Brian Space, of the University of South Florida, is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to theoretically investigate
correlations between spectroscopy and the associated structure and dynamics of
liquids and their interfaces. This research will further the understanding of
condensed-phase structure and dynamics by understanding how molecules respond
when exposed to infrared light. Particular interest is in describing systems
that are complicated by the presence of both resonant and nonresonant
excitations. Understanding these emerging spectroscopic techniques is of import
to selective probing of site-specific molecules and to the manipulation of
matter at the nanoscale. The work proceeds by development of theoretical
expressions and efficient computer strategies for calculating spectroscopic
observables for liquids from molecular dynamical simulations and instantaneous
normal mode calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interfaces between materials are
critically important in biology, chemistry, and physics but are difficult to
reliably characterize. New experimental spectroscopic approaches capable of
probing the interfaces have been developed for such purposes. However, a primary
issue related to fulfilling the promise of an interface-specific spectroscopy is
in determining how to interpret the information gleaned from experimental
spectral signatures especially since these signatures may be due to both
solvents and interfacial properties. Simulation of the solvent effects is
particularly challenging since it requires the accurate description of the
dynamics of a system of dipole moments. This research is performed in concert
with strong undergraduate and graduate education initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;