* 0312078
* ITR: Behavioral Information Security: The Politics, Motivation, and Ethics of Information Security in Work Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kathryn Stam, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 171,444.00

Many technical solutions to information security only function well when
operationalized effectively by individuals and groups of people. The present
proposal addresses this constraint by focusing on "behavioral information
security," defined as the complexes of human action within organizations that
influence the availability, confidentiality, and integrity of information
systems. By harnessing theories from the social and organizational sciences,
this approach attempts to advance the understanding of the nature and
antecedents of security-related behavior in organizations. Prior research by
these investigators has revealed that conflicting organizational subcultures,
inappropriate organizational incentives, communication barriers, and
disconcerted ethical standards for behavior each and all interfere with the
effective enactment of information security in organizations. The proposed
research will build on this completed and in-progress work to develop a
theoretical framework for behavioral information security in organizations. The
framework will explicitly address the tension between organizations' interests
in controlling behavior and individuals' rights (e.g., self determination,
speech, privacy). The project will observe and document security-related
behavior in organizations, using a multiple case study approach. Team members
will conduct a series of onsite interviews and job observations with workers,
managers, and information technology professionals at ten to twenty
organizations with operations in the research team's regional area, including
small and large organizations, for profit and non-profit organizations, and
possibly a governmental organization. The team will identify and analyze the
specific social configurations, power dynamics, learning opportunities, freedom
of action, and personal characteristics that influence how workers decide to
comply with, resist, or improve upon prescribed information security behavior.
Compilation, transcription, and analysis of interview and observational data
will lead to the development and testing of a preliminary theoretical framework.
Investigators will disseminate project results through conferences, scholarly
journal submissions, and brief practitioner articles and through the development
of a project website. At the close of the project, they will compile a data
archive for use by other scholars that includes de-identified versions of all
transcriptions. Additionally, the project intends to work with the trade press
on behavioral approaches to information security. This project has the potential
to enhance the effectiveness of information security practices in critical
infrastructure organizations such as hospitals and utilities. Because the cost
of information security continues to rise in many industries, it also has
potential economic benefits in many sectors. Simultaneously, however, by
attending to the concerns of workers, the results may help organizations to
avoid infringing upon or diminishing individual workers' rights.&lt;br/&gt;