* 0313821
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Relationship Between Limb Shape and Locomotor Mechanics and Energetics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Liza Shapiro, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 8,947.00

In the analysis of evolutionary changes in body structure, an underlying
presumption is that a potential advantage of a modification is reduction in the
amount of energy required to perform a particular task. For researchers in
physical anthropology, energetic arguments regarding the costs of locomotion
have only been considered in the study of the evolution of human bipedalism. The
importance of energetics in the origins of the more generalized form of primate
locomotion, quadrupedalism, has all but been ignored. This study will examine
the role of energetics in the evolution of primate
quadrupedalism.&lt;br/&gt;Since many regard quadrupedalism to have been an
aspect of the locomotion favored by the earliest primates, and since it has been
demonstrated that the form of quadrupedal locomotion displayed by primates
differs both kinematically and kinetically from that of non-primate mammals,
understanding the role energetics plays in primate quadrupedalism should provide
new insights into the selection pressures acting during primate origins.
&lt;br/&gt;Primates have muscles distributed closer to their hands and feet than
other mammals due to their grasping extremities. This limb shape should
theoretically cause muscles and tendons to use more energy during locomotion,
thereby increasing locomotor energetic costs. Surprisingly, researchers have
found that regardless of limb shape, animals of the same body size have the same
energetic costs. Though there has been much debate in the literature, these
results are as yet unexplained. &lt;br/&gt;This study proposes that animals with
a greater proportion of muscle mass near their extremities will alter their gait
in order to maintain similar energetic costs compared to animals of similar body
mass. The relationship between limb shape and the mechanics and energetics of
locomotion will be examined in a longitudinal sample of infant baboons (Papio
cynocephalus). Because infants' limb shapes change with age, this study will be
able explore how gait changes may offset the energetic costs of distally
distributed limb mass allowing animals to do similar amounts of muscular work
during locomotion. Results of this study will provide a new view of how
competing selection pressures, such as grasping extremities and reduced
locomotor costs, may have led to some unique aspects of primate
gait.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to contributing to our understanding of primate
locomotor evolution, this project will serve the community by taking an active
role in undergraduate education. Two undergraduate assistants will be trained in
techniques such as morphometric and kinematic data collection and analysis.
Additionally, the CO-P.I. will be developing a kinematics laboratory based on
this study for the P.I.'s undergraduate primate anatomy course. This lab will
include computer-based instruction in locomotor research methodology and data
analysis. By having undergraduate participation in this project, as well as
integrating this project with the classroom, the proposed study promotes a
greater understanding of the newest techniques used to answer questions about
the evolution of primates. Finally, this study will foster inter-disciplinary
relationships between colleges at The University of Texas at Austin. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;