* 0313174
* ITR: Collaborative Research - Information Technology Issues for Complex Engineering Product: Mass Customization in Geographically Distributed Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kenneth David, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,087.00

This study is an investigation of the issues associated with information
technology in the manufacturing of complex engineering products using mass
customization in the north/south maquila manufacturing systems. Mass
customization is a concept based on the processes associated with the production
and delivery of products with diverse configurations, as prescribed by the
customer, with a very short lead time. It is believed that mass customization
can provide a competitive advantage for the Mexico based maquila manufacturers
and reduce the loss of jobs and businesses to overseas operations. This research
will focus on the development of the IT backbone which is critical for
successful implementation of mass customization methodology for assembly of
complex, customized products. There are three key elements of this research: the
identification of an appropriate design methodology for mass customization of
complex, customer-defined products for the North/South maquila manufacturing
environment; the identification of manufacturing methodology to support mass
customization; and the identification of critical Information Technology issues
for integration of product design-component manufacturing-product assembly to
optimize the effectiveness in terms of cost and speed of the mass customization
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will provide a
general framework with which to understand the information technology issues
associated with mass customization. The long term goals to be addressed in this
study are: a methodology for the identification and modeling of product variants
and their impact on mass customization; a methodology for the identification and
modeling of manufacturing processes and their impact upon mass customization; a
suitability metric for mass customization; a conceptual framework for
information technology issues in mass customization; and an evaluation of the
conceptual framework. This research will be jointly conducted at Michigan State
University and the University of Texas - Pan American, that is located in the
Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. The location of the two institutions mirrors
the geographic configuration of many maquila operations - engineering function
in the north and manufacture in the south. Participation in this research by
industrial partners that have home offices in Michigan and maquila operations in
Texas, and application of the mass customization framework developed should
provide benefits for the manufacturing operations that operate under the
north/south scheme; particularly the historically economically disadvantaged
areas in South Texas. &lt;br/&gt;