* 0313803
* Atomic Level Control of Interface Chemistry for Metal Deposition on Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Andrew Teplyakov, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2007
* USD 395,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
Professor Teplyakov and his coworkers in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Delaware are examining the mechanisms of deposition of metallic
films onto silicon and silicon oxide surfaces modified with titanium nitride
barrier layers. Precise control of the chemistry of deposition of aluminum,
copper, and titanium nitride barrier layers using photochemical methods in
combination with traditional chemical and physical vapor deposition methods is
the goal of the research. In situ infrared spectroscopy is used to monitor the
reaction mechanism and structures of the resulting multi-layer interfaces. A
molecular level understanding of the deposition processes is the result of this
work. Student exchange and curriculum development with the Pontifical Catholic
University of Peru is an important aspect of the research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms and parameters that control
the quality of metal films and barrier layers in microelectronic applications is
the goal of this research project. Professor Teplyakov and his coworkers at
Delaware are using in situ infrared spectroscopy to probe the structure of
multi-layer interfaces on silicon and silicon oxide substrates. This information
is relevant for the development of electronic materials processing protocols in
the microelectronics industry. &lt;br/&gt;