* 0313688
* MRI:  Development of an XRF Laboratory: Integrating Geology Undergraduate Coursework with Geochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Jarrad Wagner, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2004
* USD 198,106.00

0115647&lt;br/&gt;Putirka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant, made through the
Major Research Instrumentation Program, provides partial support of the costs
for development of an x-ray fluorescence (XRF) laboratory at the Indiana
University of Pennsylvania (IUP). This grant includes acquisition of a Philips
MagiX Pro x-ray fluorescence spectrometer. The new laboratory will represent the
only XRF facility in the western PA region, and will thus satisfy a crucial need
within the region for a flexible and precise chemical analysis tool. In
particular, this laboratory will support a wide range of research activities at
IUP, Penn State and the University of Pittsburgh. For reasons of flexibility,
this instrument includes a He attachment, which allows for the analysis of
liquid and loose powder samples, and a new crystal developed by Philips (PX-9),
which increases the intensity gain on transition and rare earth elements by a
factor of 1.5-1.8, compared to the LiF (200) crystal. This grant also includes
funds for an array of sample preparation equipment, including furnaces,
crucibles and a Claise fusion machine for the preparation of glass beads, and a
press and ancillary equipment for the preparation of pressed powder pellets. The
research activities at IUP that will be supported by this acquisition include:
1) An investigation of the volcanic plumbing systems within the Snake River
Plain, Idaho, and at Mauna Kea volcano, Hawaii. 2) An unraveling of the
paleoclimate record contained in terrigenous sediments recovered from deep-sea
cores. 3) The elucidation of crystal structures and defects of organic and
inorganic substances. 4) A study of InAs/InxGa1-xSb and GaN/GaxIn1-x solid
solutions, which are being developed as electronic devices. This laboratory
facility will also provide a central component to curriculum revisions at IUP
that aim toward a seamless incorporation of research and undergraduate
coursework. A new course will be developed that will be devoted to the
instruction of analytical methods. Several of our existing courses (Mineralogy,
Geochemistry, X-ray Crystallography, Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology) will
also be revised to incorporate meaningful research components. IUP's existing
General Chemistry sequence will also be modified so that students at the
freshmen/sophomore level are introduced to XRF analytical techniques; analytical
methods will thus be reinforced throughout the undergraduate curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;