* 0313606
* U.S.-Romania Research: Jurassic and Cretaceous Decapod Crustaceans from Romania:  Early Radiation Patterns in the Decapoda
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Rodney Feldmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 47,652.00

The goal of this U.S.-Romanian research project between Rodney M. Feldman and
Carrie E. Schweitzer of Kent State University and Iuliana Lazar of the
University of Bucharest is to expand our knowledge of the diversity of fossil
decapods during Jurassic and Cretaceous time intervals when stem groups of the
order experienced major diversification events that set the stage for the
appearance, then expansion, of modern decapod fauna, such as crabs, lobsters and
shrimp. The team of U.S. and Romanian experts and students will jointly examine
the sedimentological history and paleontology of four sites in the southern
Carpathian Mountains, a region that has not been well studied due to previously
limited access. Stable isotope analyses and new data derived from the fieldwork
will be combined to describe the taphonomic and paleoecological history of the
assemblages. Because these mountains lie at a crossroads between northern and
western Europe, known to contain rich decapod faunas in the Jurassic and the
Tethyan seaway to the south, the researchers hope to determine where the two
major diversification events were centered. Results are expected to enrich our
understanding of the taxonomy, biostratigraphy, biogeography and evolution of
decapods, a globally important group of organisms.

This project in paleontology fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S.
students to the benefits of international collaboration through fieldwork at
Carpathian sites and direct involvement in the project's analysis of ancient
sediments and fossil decapod radiation.