* 0313866
* GOALI:  Catalysts for Copolymerization of Acrylate Monomers with Simple Olefins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Ayusman Sen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2006
* USD 422,000.00

Prof. Ayusman Sen, Chemistry Department, Pennsylvania State University, and Dr.
Brian Goodall, Rohm &amp; Haas Company, are supported by a GOALI grant from the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division
for the development of high activity catalysts for the copolymerization of
acrylate monomers and simple olefins. In this study catalysts based on complexes
of copper(I), palladium(II) and rhodium(III) will be targeted. The choice of
these metal ions stems from their relatively low oxophilicity, which will serve
to minimize any interactions between the metal ion and the acrylate ester group.
Specifically, the catalytic properties of a series of bis(oxazoline) copper
complexes, Pd(II) complexes of monoanionic, nominally bidentate ligands,
including sulfonated phosphines and "nac-nac;" and tripodal Rh complexes of
triazacyclononane will be evaluated. Detailed mechanistic studies will be
undertaken to determine the nature of the catalytically active species and the
steps in chain propagation. The results will be used to tune the catalysts to
achieve control of the copolymerization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The incorporation
of functional groups into an otherwise non-polar polymer allows the control of
important properties, such as toughness, adhesion, barrier properties, surface
properties (paintability, printability, gloss, hardness, mar resistance),
solvent resistance (or its inverse), miscibility with other polymers, and
rheological properties. This project aims to develop high activity catalysts
that allow the synthesis of polymers that are composed of polar acrylates and
nonpolar olefins. Because no efficient catalyst is available for rapidly
copolymerizing olefins and acrylates to high molecular weight polymers, the
successful completion of the project will fill a missing link in polymer
science. Rohm and Haas is an industrial leader in the production of acrylate
polymers and Prof. Sen is an academic expert in copolymerization. Hence,
partnership between the two will provide a unique environment for the
development of practical catalysts. The project will contribute to the
development of human resources in science and technology through the education
of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral scholars in the
overlapping areas of structural and mechanistic organometallic chemistry,
polymer chemistry, and catalysis. Additionally, the collaboration with Rohm and
Haas will provide the researchers with valuable industrial
experience.&lt;br/&gt;