* 0313501
* 2010 Project:  Identification and Functional Analysis of Genes Required for Gametophyte Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 896,250.00

0313501&lt;br/&gt;Sundaresan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
identify and determine functions of gametophytic genes in Arabidopsis. A mutant
screen for gametophytic mutations using Ds insertion lines will be performed,
resulting in the identification of an estimated 400 gametophytic mutants. The
genes disrupted by these insertions will be identified by sequence and posted on
a website at UC Davis (http://www-plb.ucdavis.edu/Labs/sundar/).
Characterization of gene function will be carried out through integrated
genetic, cellular and developmental study of the female and male gametophytes in
the mutants. The characterized mutants will be made publicly available through
deposition in the ABRC stock center. In addition, we will use expression
profiling to identify female gametophyte-specific genes. Relatively little is
known about the genes and functions required for gametophytic development in
flowering plants. The aim of the 2010 project to determine the functions of all
Arabidopsis genes will require the identification and characterization of
gametophytic genes, which play a critical role in plant reproduction. These
studies will also yield potential applications towards the control of
reproduction in crop plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project
will provide comprehensive training in plant biology research for postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students at both participating
institutions. Efforts will be made to recruit individuals from underrepresented
groups to participate in this project. In the case of undergraduate students,
the PIs will work with specific programs at their institutions intended for the
purpose of encouraging minority participation in research. In addition,
participants in the project will be involved in outreach efforts to schools
through the attachment of high school students and through workshop modules in
middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;