* 0313411
* ITR:      A Semantic-Based Approach for Automated Response to Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Karl Levitt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2007
* USD 456,000.00

Abstract

Proposal number: 0313411 Title: A Semantic-Based Approach for Automated Response
to Attacks PI: Karl Levitt

Historically computer security efforts have focused on relatively simple
prevention mechanisms, on detecting attacks that are not prevented, and manual
efforts to stop the attack and/or clean up afterwards. These procedures are
ineffective when faced with fast moving, programmed attacks or in jumping ahead
of an attacker using a complex series of malicious procedures. In these cases,
automated response procedures are required. Practitioners, however, are wary
about automatic response because of the high false positive rates generated by
today's intrusion detection systems. If automated response systems are allowed
to block detected attacks, many legitimate transactions would be accidentally
blocked. Furthermore, an attacker could exploit the automated response to launch
a denial of service attack. This project will investigate a new approach to
automated response reasoning. The approach is based upon a semantic model of the
effects on the system due to both attacks and possible responses. Planning of
responses is performed with the goal of removing attacker capabilities without
affecting the critical capabilities of the system. A successful response system
will stop fast-moving programmed attacks automatically without hindering the
normal operations of the protected system.