* 0313881
* Polarimetric Radar Observations of Precipitation: Measurements, Analysis, Modeling and Retrievals
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* V. Chandrasekar, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2007
* USD 347,521.00

This research centers on using the CHILL research radar at Colorado State
University to study the polarization properties of radar echoes from
precipitation. One objective is to compare the polarimetric information
available from two modes of operation: (1) rapidly switching the transmitted
wave form between horizontal and vertical polarization; (2) transmitting
circular polarization and simultaneously receiving the horizontal and vertical
components - the so-called hybrid mode. Experiments will determine which of
these modes is more suitable for applications such as estimating rainfall rate
by combining measurements of the radar reflectivity with various parameters that
describe the polarimetric properties of the radar signal. Another objective is
to evaluate and refine a method based on fuzzy logic of classifying the type of
precipitation (rain, hail, snow, melting snow, etc.) by a suitable combination
of polarimetric parameters. The method will be evaluated by in-situ observations
by a storm-penetrating research aircraft (the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology armored T-28). Also to be investigated are ways to estimate the
raindrop size distribution from polarimetric observations, using both airborne
and ground-based measurements for verification. These studies will provide
important guidance for the planning, now under way, to introduce polarimetric
measurements in the network of weather surveillance radars operated by the
National Weather Service.