* 0313514
* Arabidopsis 2010 Project:  Development of Arabidopsis Proteome Chip
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael Snyder, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,200,000.00

The complete genome sequence of Arabidopsis has revealed a large number of novel
genes, however DNA sequence alone offers few clues as to their specific
functions. Currently, much effort is being devoted toward studying gene function
and expression. Although important, these studies are not sufficient to predict
the structure, function, and activity of proteins in the cell. Proteomics, the
global analysis of proteins, is emerging as an important area of research. In
this pilot project, a small collection of expression clones of Arabidopsis open
reading frames will be generated. Using this collection, optimal protein
expression systems will be developed to produce and purify Arabidopsis proteins.
The proteins will be printed to generate pilot protein chips, which will then be
screened for various biochemical assays, including protein-protein interaction
assays, protein-DNA/RNA interactions, protein-phospholipids interactions and the
identification of substrates for kinases and other
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The rapid progress in the field
of large-scale biology has provided the opportunity to understand the function
of biological networks as a whole. Since the biochemical function of a gene is
manifested through its encoded protein, recently much emphasis has been devoted
to the development of new tools for proteomics. Therefore, this project will
ultimately provide an enormous valuable resource to the scientific community for
a variety of applications aimed at the high-throughput study of protein function
in Arabidopsis. The advantage of proteome chips is that a comprehensive set of
individual proteins can be directly screened in vitro for a wide variety of
activities. Furthermore, once the proteins are prepared, proteome screening is
significantly faster and cheaper than other methods. The reagents and
information generated from this project will be available to the scientific
community (http://bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu/genome/plant) on a regular basis and are
expected to significantly enhance the analysis of protein function in
Arabidopsis.&lt;br/&gt;