* 0313524
* Collaborative Research: CHRONOS Network for Earth System History:  Development of Integrated Databases and Toolkits Accessible through a common Portal
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* James Ogg, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 129,999.00

Cinzia Cervato, Iowa State University, (EAR-0315216) Chaitonya Baru, San Diego
Supercomputing Center (EAR-0313738) Vladimir Davydov, Boise State University
(EAR-0312392) Brian Huber, Smithsonian Institution, (EAR-0312171) Anthony A.
Koppers, Scripps Institute, (EAR-0311889) R. Mark Leckie, University of
Massachusetts, (EAR-0314113) James G. Ogg, Purdue University, (EAR-0313524)
Bruce Wardlaw, U.S. Geological Survey, (EAR-0314415)

ABSTRACT

Modern Earth system history research depends increasingly upon the analysis of
multidisciplinary, voluminous, time-calibrated data. The process of determining
the availability or even the existence of Earth history data remains a time-
consuming and error-prone enterprise because there are no centralized
depositories or Web-enabled means for locating and retrieving data. The goal of
CHRONOS is to unify current and future stratigraphic databases into a powerful
system for producing a dynamic global time scale for Earth history and for
understanding the complex relationships of past geologic, climatic and
evolutionary trends. Web-services and an extensive on-line suite of toolboxes
will allow global researchers and the general public to access, analyze and
visualize chronostratigraphic information. Another goal is a vastly improved
high-resolution geological time scale. A logical series of tasks is planned in
order to accomplish these goals, with the ultimate goal being for all
geoscientists to be able to apply the CHRONOS system of integrated databases for
deciphering the complex interactions of the Earth system through all of geologic
time. In addition to its primary goals of enabling networking of international
databases and facilitating creative research, the CHRONOS outreach programs will
promote education of Earth's fascinating history.

