* 0313458
* International Conference on Applied Computer Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Erich Kaltofen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 12/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

This the first International Conference Applied Computer Algebra (ACA), held in
Raleigh North Carolina, July 28-31, 2003. In the past several years there has
been a dramatic increase in the applications of computer algebra (CA) in
engineering, science and education. The goal of this conference is to facilitate
this important progress through an international meeting that emphasizes
applications of computer algebra and interdisciplinary interaction between
computer algebra researchers and serious users from other disciplines. The ACA
conference complements nicely the already well-established conferences, such as
ISSAC, which are essentially the intradisciplinary forum for computer algebra
researchers on fundamental theories (rather than applications and inter-
disciplinary interaction). The conference is organized as a collection of twelve
mini workshops (sessions) organized by prominent researchers and focused on
their own application areas including education, engineering, physical sciences,
economics and life/medical sciences.

This conference will have the broad impact on two communities: the huge user
community and the research community. The user community will be able to learn
about the state of the art theories and algorithms that are proven to be
applicable. The research community will be able to learn about important
problems/challenges facing the serious users from other disciplines, inspiring
fresh new theoretical research and algorithm design.