* 0313044
* ITR: Trusting the Machine: Onboard Computing, Automation, and Human Control in the Soviet Space Program, 1957-1988
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Vyacheslav Gerovitch, Dibner Institute for the History of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2005
* USD 115,400.00

Project Abstract ITR 0313044 Vyacheslav Gerovitch, Dibner Institute "Trusting
the Machine: Onboard Computing, Automation, and Human Control in the Soviet
Space Program, 1957-1988"

This project examines the crucial issue of automation vs. human control that is
largely underestimated by standard histories of the Soviet space program, with a
specific focus on the introduction of computers on board. It will investigate
the technical, institutional, economic, and political factors that shaped the
development of Soviet onboard computing and prompted Soviet designers to place
much greater emphasis on automatic control systems at the expense of the role of
cosmonauts in the piloted space program. Included will be a comprehensive and
critical analysis of spacecraft designers, onboard computer designers, and
cosmonauts' perspectives in an attempt to place the issue of human-machine
interaction in a larger technical, social, and political context. The proposal
will also examine the division of functions between human and machine at
different stages in the Soviet space program, investigate the consequences of
choices made by Soviet designers, and draw lessons from these historical
developments for today's understanding of human-machine interaction in complex
technological systems. The proposal combines archival studies of recently
declassified documents related to the development of computing in the Soviet
space program with in-depth interviews of spacecraft designers, onboard computer
designers, and cosmonauts. This will produce a systematic study of the
development of the Soviet onboard computing and the space program from the
analytical perspectives offered by science and technology studies. The proposal
will also extensively use the Web to build a network of collaboration with space
program veterans and other historians. The project promises an innovative
analysis of the crucial issue of automation vs. human control in the Soviet
space program. The hypothesis that the delay in the introduction of onboard
guidance computers had significant negative consequences for the Soviet piloted
program will be tested against historical documentation. This project will place
this issue in the context of the international space race and bring a
comparative perspective into the study of Soviet onboard computing. It will also
enhance the understanding of social, economic, and political factors that shaped
the development of Soviet technology in the second half of the twentieth
century. The project's website will bring together spacecraft control system
designers, computer designers, cosmonauts, and historians on both sides of the
Atlantic, and will thus foster collaboration across disciplinary and national
boundaries. This project will also contribute to the current discussions of the
problems of reliability and safety in complex human-machine systems.