* 0313762
* Pre-State Social Transformations in Central Mexico: Formative Archaeology in Apizaco, Tlaxcala
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Richard Lesure, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2005
* USD 64,337.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Richard Lesure will lead a team
of archaeological specialists and students in investigating social processes
behind the emergence of ancient civilizations in the highlands of central
Mexico. Anthropological archaeologists have long been interested in exploring
the material products of early civilization -- the pyramids, sculptures, or
other artifacts that survive -- from the perspective of social science. An
important goal is tracing and explaining the origins of urban life and state-
level political organization. Models of state origins have become more
sophisticated and complex over the years, and it is now clear that a holistic
understanding of any particular ancient civilization requires coordinated
efforts among investigators working on different aspects of the problem.

Lesure and his collaborators will advance anthropological understandings of the
ancient Teotihuacan civilization of Central Mexico by studying rural life at the
margins of the main centers of sociopolitical development. A team of American
and Mexican archaeologists will conduct excavations in the Apizaco region of the
modern Mexican state of Tlaxcala. They will be working at the sites of villages
of the period 800 B.C.to 100 A.D., uncovering a range of domestic features
including refuse dumps that previous work indicates are rich sources of evidence
on ancient economy and society. Analysis of materials will be a collaborative
effort among Ph.D. specialists and graduate students in training, including
experts in ceramics, stone tools, animal bones, and botanical remains. Research
will focus on the degree of stability or change in economic and social
organization during the centuries leading up to the urban coalescence at
Teotihuacan. Specific topics to be investigated through the careful analysis of
material remains are the organization of production and consumption, the
character of social inequalities, levels of taxation by external powers, and
local portrayals of people in art. These studies will reveal much about the
specifics of economic and social organization in Apizaco during the time period
of study, but they will also have larger theoretical implications for the
investigation of ancient civilizations. An important unresolved issue is the
geographical scale of socioeconomic transformations critical to the rise of
urban life. In the centuries before state emergence, were social and economic
changes narrowly restricted to the specific areas in which cities ultimately
emerged, or were these transformations much more widely spread? That sort of
consideration can contribute to our ability to answer further questions, such as
why did the earliest cities emerge in the specific places in which we find them?

Work in a peripheral area like Apizaco cannot answer all questions concerning
the emergence of civilization in central Mexico, but it addresses some important
ones. Further, while major centers like Teotihuacan itself are now well
protected, smaller sites of the Apizaco region are being rapidly destroyed by
modern growth. Lesure's work will result in a detailed and permanent record of a
fast-disappearing archaeological resource. The research setting will provide a
variety of opportunities for contacts and information sharing between American
and Mexican scholars, as well as the training of undergraduate and graduate
students. Specialists will work collaboratively in answering research questions,
and students will actively participate as analysts and authors.





