* 0313974
* Development of a Structural and Stratigraphic  Framework for the McMurdo Sound Region, Western Ross Sea.
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 03/31/2006
* USD 18,250.00

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation, provides support
for a workshop to develop a structural and stratigraphic framework for the
McMurdo Sound region of the western Ross Sea. Extensive new information has
accumulated in recent years on the structure, stratigraphy, landscape evolution,
glacial history, and volcanic chronology of the Transantarctic Mountains and
Victoria Land Basin in the southern McMurdo Sound region. New seismic, magnetic
and gravity data have also been acquired in the area. Participants in the
workshop will assess and synthesize both old and new data sets in the context of
modern knowledge of the rift basin architecture. The principle objective of the
workshop is to produce an updated, regional structural and stratigraphic
framework for the coupled rift/rift-flank system in the southern McMurdo Sound
region, incorporating volcanic and glacial processes as key drivers of this
unique geodynamic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be international in scope, with participants from Germany, Italy,
New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America. The workshop
activities will improve and enhance international collaboration on Antarctic
sciences questions and will help to develop a well-integrated science community
with international partnerships for future interdisciplinary research. Workshop
results will be reported at international science symposia, future planning
workshops focused on Antarctic research frontiers, and via established community
World Wide Web sites, to ensure broad dissemination&lt;br/&gt;