* 0313951
* Development of Reconfigurable Technology Platforms for the Millimeter-Wave Communication of Sensor Nodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Joy Laskar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The dawn of the 21st century is witnessing a tremendous demand for
wireless (untethered) communications services operating at frequencies extending
into the millimeter-wave regime (Ku to Q-band). The move to&lt;br/&gt;higher
(millimeter-wave) frequencies has been motivated by the need for more and more
bandwidth for multimedia applications such as wireless real-time video
transmission, internet access, and by the increased&lt;br/&gt;overcrowding of
the lower frequency bands. The vision of this proposal is a multi-function
platform that can rapidly reconfigure to support multipoint-to-multipoint mmW
communications using low probability of&lt;br/&gt;intercept (LPI) line-of-sight
communications among a group of independent communications or sensor nodes.
Applications include tracking radar sensors, and electronic warfare (EW), and
electronic intelligence (ELINT)functions. Secure sensor communications have
additional constraints over commercial applications including: small size,
immunity to jamming, low probability of detection, and guaranteed mission life.
Thus UHF and low microwave frequency bands popular in civilian networks may lose
out to mmW, in spite of the advantages of more mature technology and better
propagation channels afforded in these lower frequency bands.The intellectual
merit of this proposal is to establish a foundation for the development of
reconfigurable communication nodes, which could be implemented as a System-On-
Package (SOP) platform and could serve as a foundation for the reconfigurable
sensor networks of the future. Sensor networks that can be reconfigured for
different functions (chemical/explosive/bio-detection, secure emergency
communications for different frequency bands, surveillance sensors in airports
and stations)are critical for national anti-terrorism efforts and offer the
promise of a significantly improved national security and prevention, as well as
a quick reaction time in emergency situations. Last, but not least, the proposed
vertical integration and miniaturization coupled with the power efficiency in a
cost efficient way may provide a path to the deployment of very large sensor
networks."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;