* 0313984
* SGER: An Integrated Study of Post-Flood Hydrology, Ecology, Politics and Policy Change: A Cross-National, Urban Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Binayak Mohanty, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2005
* USD 29,970.00

0313984&lt;br/&gt;Mohanty&lt;br/&gt;Natural disasters such as floods,
earthquakes, and hurricanes have impacts&lt;br/&gt;far beyond the physical
damage related to the actual event. The policy and&lt;br/&gt;political impacts
of natural disasters can be immediate, in the form of&lt;br/&gt;federal disaster
relief aid, or long-term, as in changes to long-standing&lt;br/&gt;land use
regulations. As a result of Tropical Storm Allison, Houston&lt;br/&gt;suffered
over $5 billion in damages, the loss of 22 lives and an
estimated&lt;br/&gt;73,000 homes. Recently, as a result of major flooding in
Central Europe, the&lt;br/&gt;German city of Dresden, and Prague, in the Czech
Republic, experienced&lt;br/&gt;similar disasters, the impacts of which are
being estimated in the billions&lt;br/&gt;of dollars. The similarity of these
events provides a unique research&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to contribute a broader
understanding of the role of focusing&lt;br/&gt;events on policy development,
politics, and the general health and well&lt;br/&gt;being of society. From a
research perspective, we are interested in&lt;br/&gt;understanding how focusing
events, such as urban flooding, develop and&lt;br/&gt;propagate across scales
and influence decision processes in regard to&lt;br/&gt;physical infrastructure
and subsequent changes in policy. The objectives of&lt;br/&gt;this SGER proposal
are two-fold. First, we propose to initiate contact with&lt;br/&gt;social and
physical scientists in Europe and develop a collaborative&lt;br/&gt;research
team capable of focusing on the broad topic of public policy change&lt;br/&gt;as
a result of urban flooding. Researchers will expand upon
personal&lt;br/&gt;contacts in their respective areas and seek out additional
collaborators in&lt;br/&gt;substantive research areas within the physical and
social sciences, as well&lt;br/&gt;as geographical areas impacted by both
recurring and nonrecurring urban&lt;br/&gt;flooding events. In so doing, we will
also identify sources of relevant and&lt;br/&gt;reliable data, and to the extent
possible, collect baseline hydrologic,&lt;br/&gt;ecologic, and social field data
on the impact of the recent flooding&lt;br/&gt;incidents such as those in
Germany, the Czech Republic, and Houston. The end&lt;br/&gt;point of this phase
of the SGER project will be a well-defined, and&lt;br/&gt;committed
interdisciplinary and cross-national research team. The
second&lt;br/&gt;objective is to integrate the disciplines of political
science/public&lt;br/&gt;administration, hydrology and the geosciences into a
strategically sound&lt;br/&gt;large scale, multi-year cross-national,
collaborative, interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research proposal for submission to
either multiple NSF programs, or one&lt;br/&gt;major cross-cutting NSF
initiative. The context for this proposal is&lt;br/&gt;cross-national. The
integration of the physical and social sciences also&lt;br/&gt;reflects the
current interest from NSF in approaching complex social and&lt;br/&gt;natural
problems through multiple perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;