* 0313283
* ITR: Knowledge-Based Inference Techniques to Ensure the Security of Database Content
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Wesley Chu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2007
* USD 393,312.00

The utility of databases could be much greater if they were generally accessible
across a network. But such network-available databases face serious security
challenges. Users can use inference techniques on information from multiple
databases to obtain data that none of these databases would directly divulge.

We propose to build a system to protect network-accessible databases form this
threat by establishing an inference protection system at the directory (e.g.,
the standard resource description framework, RDF) site. The system will require
that all requests, sent to sites that store the databases, be submitted through
the RDF directory site. As a result, this site will be able to observe the
information content of all requests. By keeping proper records on the requests
submitted by each user, and by using knowledge about database schema, contents
and patterns leading to security violations, this site will be able to detect
when an individual user is attempting to use data mining techniques to infer
information that he could not obtain directly. A test bed of the proposed
security violation protection system will be constructed. A series of
experiments with data traces from real applications will be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed system.

