* 0313730
* BIOCOMPLEXITY--Multiscale Simulation of Avian Limb Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* James Glazier, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,089,769.00

0083653&lt;br/&gt;Glazier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing multicellular
organisms exhibit dramatic changes in shape and form, as well as the emergence
of rapidly changing spatial organization of specialized (differentiated) cell
types, e.g. neurons and muscle fibers. These events, which generate the body
plan and the various organs, depend on regulated gene expression, elaborate
interactions between and among cells, and coordinated cell movement. Gene
expression by itself cannot give a full account of the emergence of body plans,
specific forms and shapes. Genetics and biochemistry interact with the physical
properties of individual cells and cell aggregates in the course of development,
making it a multiscale process of enormous complexity. As in many complex
processes, however, one can discover dynamical and organizational rules at
various levels if appropriate techniques are used to analyze developing
organisms. This project brings together biologists, experimental and theoretical
physicists, mathematicians, and computer scientists, each of whom has experience
analyzing individual biophysical problems, and brings their expertise to bear on
a specific developmental process-the formation of the vertebrate limb.
Experimental and theoretical methods will be used to investigate the emergence
of the limb bud from the body wall, the control of genes mediating cell
aggregation, the spatiotemporal regulation of the limb skeletal pattern, and the
ingrowth of nerve fibers into the limb from the spinal
cord.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will result in a multilevel
characterization including subcellular, cellular and supracellular mechanisms
which will provide a causal understanding of vertebrate limb development, as
well as generate analytical tools that can be used to study similar problems in
developmental biology. These tools will include software for solving the
inevitably complex systems of mathematical equations that describe the interplay
of genetic and material properties found in living embryos. New software will be
built and distributed to model not only limb development, but also other types
of organ formation and illness (e.g. tumor metastasis and vascularization). The
overall strategy represents a step towards genuinely integrated research on
animal development to deliver on the promise of the gene sequencing projects of
the previous decade.&lt;br/&gt;