* 0313560
* SGER:  Geometric Morphometrics-Based Visualization and Analysis of Morphological Integration: A New Look at Bivalve Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Peter Roopnarine, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2004
* USD 31,245.00

SGER: Geometric Morphometric-based Visualization and Analysis of Morphological
Integration: A New Look at Bivalve Evolution

Peter D. Roopnarine EAR-0313560

ABSTRACT

The proposed research is a novel approach to morphological integration, a long-
standing interest in morphological studies. Morphological integration is a
measure of the relationships among morphological characters at the level of the
organism. Patterns of morphological integration are descriptions of how the
phenotype of a monophyletic group of organisms is actually assembled from
recognized characters. Variation of patterns within a monophyletic clade is
therefore representative of adaptive histories, as well as phylogenetic and
functional constraints. The present study proposes to develop a new method for
the derivation and analysis of patterns of morphological integration within a
very diverse and geologically old clade of bivalved molluscs, the superfamily
Veneroidea. Viewing patterns of morphological integration within a clade, and
over geological time, will allow this study to address an important
paleobiological concept, namely the precise role of phenotypic construction in
morphological constraint, adaptive radiation, and phylogenetic diversification.

This proposal is novel because integration patterns will be derived from
geometric morphometrics-based analyses, which will allow direct visualization on
the phenotypes of the study organisms. The analyses will also encompass the
longest interval of geologic time yet considered for a study of integration,
approximately 80 million years. Furthermore, it is proposed that these patterns
be analyzed in the recent frameworks of network theory and the mathematics of
complexity because: 1) Patterns of morphological integration are true networks
of relationships among regions of the organism's morphology, and 2) Network
theory has been applied recently to both the very lowest levels of the
biological hierarchy, such as genomic organization and gene function , and the
highest levels, such as trophic food webs. Patterns of morphological integration
at the level of species and monophyletic clades represent a critical link
between these two ends of the hierarchy.

