* 0313903
* Spatial Subsidy of an Intraguild Predator: Consequences for Top-down and Bottom-up Impacts on Insect Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Denno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 412,000.00

Spatial subsidy of an intraguild predator:&lt;br/&gt;consequences for top-down
and bottom-up impacts on insect herbivores&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
herein proposes to extend our work on natural enemy versus host plant control of
insect herbivores (planthoppers) inhabiting the Spartina alterniflora salt
marshes along the Atlantic coast to include the effects of an extensive spatial
subsidy of intraguild predators (Pardosa wolf spiders) from a neighboring upland
system (Spartina patens). Specifically, spatially dependent hypotheses are
tested concerning the impact of this annual predator subsidy as it interfaces
with spatial variation in vegetation structure on planthopper dynamics, food-web
interactions, and the probability for trophic cascades in Spartina alterniflora.
As natural habitats become more fragmented and the exchange of players among
systems increases, it becomes imperative to understand the consequences of such
predator incursions on food-web dynamics and local biodiversity. Also,
elucidating the consequences of predator subsidies on insect herbivores has
important implications for agriculture. For example, pest managers are now
seeking ways to encourage natural enemies and promote pest suppression in
cropping systems by establishing "spatial refuges" for predators in neighboring
habitats. Thus, gaining insight into factors that promote the exchange of
predators between different habitats may lead to more effective pest management
strategies in a world of mandated pesticide reduction. &lt;br/&gt;