* 0313203
* ITR/NGS: High-Performance Configurable Hardware Using Liquid Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Lockwood, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2007
* USD 512,779.00

With advances in VLSI fabrication and chip placement and routing technology, the
area&lt;br/&gt;consumed by a CPU and its traditional on-chip components has
shrunk to the point of liberating significant chip area. Meanwhile, the use of
reconfigurable logic such as Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) devices is
increasing, due to improvements in the speed and capacity of those devices.
While commodity processors perform well for most applications, such
processors&lt;br/&gt;cannot deliver the performance of a more customized
approach. On the other hand, the cost of developing application-specific
processors is quite expensive, and therefore not worthwhile unless many parts
can be sold. Reconfigurable hardware offers an economical alternative to
obtaining high performance, so that commodity processors of the future might
enjoy increasingly greater levels of reconfigurability. This could bring
customized logic within the reach of low-volume, high-performance applications.
However, software and architectural innovations are required to make this
happen. We propose to bring the advantages of custom logic to low-volume but
high-performance applications by semiautomatically generating customized
reconfigurable logic. By coupling soft-core commodity processors with
reconfigurable logic, an application is essentially offered a liquid
architecture, where the definition&lt;br/&gt;and implementation of the
computer's instruction set, its coprocessors' functionality, and its supporting
structures can be easily changed. With proper software support, liquid
architectures can improve the performance of many kinds of
applications,&lt;br/&gt;ranging from high-performance, scientific calculations
to low-power, embedded systems. Our&lt;br/&gt;research aims to develop the
software infrastructure and methodologies needed to obtain high performance of
applications on reconfigurable hardware deployed in diverse settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;