* 0313827
* SFS Capacity Building: Enhancing the IAS Curriculum at Wichita State University
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Chin-Chih Chang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 06/30/2006
* USD 199,857.00

The Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) department and the Computer
Science (CS) department at Wichita State University are jointly developing a
broad and innovative curriculum covering various facets of Information Assurance
and Security (IAS), with the support and assistance of the Center for
Information Security at the University of Tulsa. Five professors from the ECE
and CS departments at Wichita State University are working closely with the
Center for Information Security faculty at the University of Tulsa to develop
the course contents and projects suitable for undergraduate and graduate
students in the area of IAS. This project develops the curriculum and laboratory
facilities that will be required to train the students in the area of
Information Assurance and Security. The project goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Build
the core curriculum and create necessary laboratory facilities for student
education and training in the area of IAS. &lt;br/&gt;2. Create an IAS
laboratory at Wichita State University. &lt;br/&gt;The expected impact of the
project includes the following: &lt;br/&gt;1. Enhanced curriculum, laboratory
facilities and research activities in the area of IAS at Wichita State
University. &lt;br/&gt;2. More opportunities for Wichita State University and
other local college students to register for IAS related courses. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Increased awareness of information security related issues in the community.
&lt;br/&gt;