* 0313442
* Support for Graduate Student Attendees at the 18th North American Catalysis Society Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Richard Gonzalez, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 03/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

This grant will support the attendance of graduate students and young principal
investigators at the 18th North American Meeting of the Catalysis Society to be
held June 1-7, 2003 in Cancun, Mexico. The meetings of the Catalysis Society are
held biannually and are the premier events for catalysis researchers in North
America and throughout the world. Symposium topics include recent advances in
environmental catalysis and green chemistry, hydrotreating and heavy crude
upgrading, catalysis by nanoparticles and nanostructures, metal and oxides,
acid-base catalysis, homogeneous catalysis and single site polymerization, fuel
cells, catalysis in organic synthesis, combinatorial catalysis, catalysts
deactivation and reaction engineering, computational catalysis, biocatalysis,
advances in catalyst preparation and characterization, and industrial catalysis.
The objective of this proposal is to defray meeting attendance costs, especially
for graduate students and young investigators. With co-funding from other
sources, support for about 60 participants will be provided. Special emphasis
will be placed on including a diverse group of young researchers in the awards.

The conference will involve exchanges of scientific information by nearly
800-1000 investigators and 80-100 graduate students. Students will benefit
tremendously from the experience, and this grant will enable a diverse group of
students to attend, including women and minorities from varied geographical
locations in the United States. The poster presentations and informal
interactions permit students and young investigators to gain a much broader
perspective of catalysis research and the importance of their own contributions.