* 0313241
* ITR: Cryptography: from user needs to protocol design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Daniele Micciancio, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Cryptography is a powerful security tool that has not reached its
&lt;br/&gt;full potential in applications. &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
approaches to making cryptography easier to &lt;br/&gt;use at multiple levels:
easier for the protocol designer, for the software &lt;br/&gt;applications, and
the policy maker. The project is naturally divided &lt;br/&gt;into three areas,
roughly corresponding to the above list:&lt;br/&gt; - The study of formal
verification methods for protocol design. These&lt;br/&gt;methods will help the
designer to make sure that protocols meet the &lt;br/&gt;robust security
standards accepted by the cryptographic and complexity &lt;br/&gt;theory
communities. &lt;br/&gt; - The design of versatile cryptographic primitives
whose performance &lt;br/&gt;can be tuned to the needs of specific applications.
This includes the &lt;br/&gt;analysis of cryptographic primitives with respect
to modern efficiency &lt;br/&gt;and security measures, e.g., history
independence, incrementality, &lt;br/&gt;forward security, and combined uses of
the above.&lt;br/&gt; - The analysis of the security and privacy desires of
individual users&lt;br/&gt;and policy makers, and the study of innovative
solutions to their problems. &lt;br/&gt;For example, the project explores the
design of identification cards that &lt;br/&gt;provide secure identification
without violating the privacy of the users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact:
Security is vital to ensure public confidence in the information
&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, and cryptography is a potent tool for computer
security.&lt;br/&gt;Yet, cryptography is currently under-utilized and frequently
misused.&lt;br/&gt;By making cryptographic tools easier to use and understand,
the project &lt;br/&gt;aims to facilitate increased and better informed use of
cryptography. &lt;br/&gt;The project also aims to contribute to the national
debate on appropriate &lt;br/&gt;uses of information technology, and, in
particular, explore ways to &lt;br/&gt;protect individual privacy without
damaging national security. Finally, the &lt;br/&gt;project will contribute to
the education of cryptographic specialists &lt;br/&gt;who can communicate
clearly with non-specialists, such as implementers and &lt;br/&gt;legal
experts.&lt;br/&gt;