* 0313183
* Collaborative Research:     ITR:     Fundamental Performance Trade-offs for Ad Hoc Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Edmund Yeh, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 120,537.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various types of ad hoc wireless networks have
been the subject of&lt;br/&gt;much recent interest. For our purposes, these
networks can be&lt;br/&gt;characterized as a set of nodes
that&lt;br/&gt;communicate with each other over wireless channels using little
or no&lt;br/&gt;fixed&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. In such a network, to reach
its&lt;br/&gt;destination, a message may need to be forwarded over
several&lt;br/&gt;intermediate links. Examples of this type network include
mobile&lt;br/&gt;ad hoc networks (MANET's), sensor&lt;br/&gt;networks, and
various hybrid ad hoc/cellular architectures.
Such&lt;br/&gt;networks&lt;br/&gt;have the advantages of being rapidly
deployable and requiring little or&lt;br/&gt;no&lt;br/&gt;fixed infrastructure.
However, efficiently utilizing this type of&lt;br/&gt;network is&lt;br/&gt;a
challenging task due, in part, to the interference between nodes,
the&lt;br/&gt;time-varying nature of the communication channels, the
energy&lt;br/&gt;limitations of untethered nodes, and the&lt;br/&gt;lack of
centralized control via, for example, base stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of ongoing research with the goal of&lt;br/&gt;furthering
understanding of basic performance trade-offs for ad&lt;br/&gt;hoc networks.
This work takes a cross layer view and&lt;br/&gt;considers both physical layer
limitations as well as higher layer&lt;br/&gt;performance metrics such as packet
throughput. Techniques from&lt;br/&gt;queueing theory, optimization, and
information theory will be&lt;br/&gt;utilized in this work. In contrast with our
previous work on problems of this type in&lt;br/&gt;single-hop wireless
settings, or, that is, models more appropriate&lt;br/&gt;for cases such as
cellular networks, where all communication is to&lt;br/&gt;or from a single
point, in this project, we are focusing on multi-hop&lt;br/&gt;ad hoc networks,
with multiple transmitters and multiple&lt;br/&gt;receivers. In this
environment, several new issues complicate the&lt;br/&gt;analysis. These include
the routing and forwarding of traffic&lt;br/&gt;within the network and the
scheduling of transmission and&lt;br/&gt;reception by each node. Specific
problems that are being addressed&lt;br/&gt;include&lt;br/&gt;characterizing
network stability and identifying adaptive resource&lt;br/&gt;allocation
policies which maximize packet throughput.&lt;br/&gt;