* 0314581
* An International Training Workshop on Tropical Soil Properties and Hydrology Linked to Existing Forest Dynamics Projects; Barro Colorado Island, Panama; September 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Kyle Harms, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 55,000.00

0314581&lt;br/&gt;Harms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
support a workshop on how the structure and dynamics of a tropical forest are
related to physical properties of the environment in which they occur. The
meeting is being organized by Dr. Kyle Harms of Louisiana State University, in
collaboration with Dr. Cristian Samper of the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute in Balboa, Panama. The workshop will bring together graduate students
and senior researchers from the United States, Europe, and eight tropical
countries to learn and exchange techniques aimed at characterizing the soils and
hydrology of research plots already established for long-term studies of forest
diversity and dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will contribute to an
ongoing NSF-funded research project coordinated by the Center for Tropical
Forest Science (CTFS) of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute that is
attempting to link tree diversity with global variation in tropical soils,
climate and other physical factors. There are now 15 large-scale forest dynamics
monitoring plots within the network coordinated by CTFS and the proposed
workshop will more than double the participation of people and geographic
regions in the overall project. Workshop activities will consist of: (1) evening
lectures and informal discussions on the theory and background of nutrient
cycling and hydrology in tropical forests; (2) Discussions of experimental
design and sampling techniques to measure soil-borne resources; (3) Hands-on
practice of key soils and hydrological analyses at the Barro Colorado site; and
(4) Discussion and development of a variety of new measurements and protocols
that could be carried out inexpensively, and independently by local
collaborators at each site. Thus the proposed workshop would promote the
involvement of many international participants in the design of projects, would
ensure that data collection at all sites follows a unified set of methodologies,
and would catalyze further cross-site comparisons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;