* 0314514
* RUI: Supramolecular Utility of a Versatile New Electron Acceptor
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Darren Hamilton, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 135,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Darren Hamilton at Mount Holyoke College will continue a research
program that is built exclusively around the synthetic and physical chemistry of
mellitic triimides, a new class of electron acceptors developed in the PI's
laboratory and published for the first time in 2001. A significant program of
study is planned based the observation that these new triimides may be classed,
structurally and functionally, with the diimides of benzene, naphthalene, and
perylene. These structures have received a great deal of attention, principally
due to their strongly electron accepting nature. They have played key roles in
the development of numerous areas of investigation in supramolecular chemistry,
involving areas such as topology and molecular scale machinery, electronic
materials, mimics of redox active biological co-factors, DNA intercolators, and
sensors. The overarching aim of the program of study proposed is to fully
introduce the new triimide building block to this diverse arena by demonstrating
viable access to the core, and characterizing emergent properties in its
derivatives and the molecular assemblies that may result. Research projects
based on the triimide platform will provide stimulating and varied laboratory
experiences for undergraduates that will involve synthesis, spectroscopy, and
materials characterization. The work will give participants an important glimpse
of an expanding contemporary area of research inquiry, and will contribute to
the strong tradition of preparation that characterizes chemistry at Mount
Holyoke College.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program supports Professor Darren Hamilton at Mount Holyoke College who plans to
broadly impact two key elements of research-based scholarship in an
undergraduate college. First, to enliven the experimental sequence taken by all
students by including modules that both demonstrate important concepts and
provide materials of use to the larger research program. Second, to attempt to
identify and encourage students early in their college careers who have not
previously considered the possibility of involvement in research, or who have
been reluctant to step forward. Using this mechanism of exposure, female
undergraduates will be encouraged to consider the question of their involvement
with a research program, through participation in a summer program, or through
supervised independent study. As of a decade ago, one in four women chemists in
the US graduated from Mount Holyoke College, and the college remains one of the
most productive sources of women PhD chemists.&lt;br/&gt;