* 0314875
* Multi-semester Interwoven Problem for Teaching Basic Core STEM Material Critical to Solving Dynamic Systems Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Stephen Pennell, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 266,725.00

The proposed project presents a new, creative approach to address student
understanding of related material in different courses through the use of a
multi-semester interwoven project to reinforce basic STEM material critical to
solving engineering problems. A strong laboratory component with multimedia and
hands-on application of STEM material will reinforce theoretical concepts.
Through the use of a common problem for dynamic systems that spans across
several courses (basic math skills, laboratory measurement and model development
to predict dynamic system response), students are better equipped to solve a
real dynamic system problem which requires the use of many STEM tools. A strong
laboratory component measuring a real system using a web-based data acquisition
system requires the students to "think outside the box" and apply theoretical
concepts through practical hands-on learning. An open ended project forces the
students to take ownership of learning material which integrates several themes
and underlying STEM material promoting a life-long, self-learning process.

This interwoven project contains basic core STEM material that is easily
transferable to all engineering disciplines as well as other institutions. Since
the project will result in educational material online, geographic, ethnic and
gender barriers will be overcome and will allow for universal access to the
material. This multi-semester, interwoven project concept with an online
experiment is the salient feature of this program; integration of STEM material
is accomplished in a relevant, meaningful way for student comprehension and
retention.