* 0314666
* A Greener, Controllable, Metal Mediated Route to Polyanilines
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Ronald Elsenbaumer, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

H.V. Rasika Dias and Ronald Elsenbaumer, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington, are supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program for developing new methods for
the preparation of a commercially important electrically conductive polymer,
polyaniline. They are studying new catalyst systems that will polymerize aniline
under conditions that are milder, cheaper and more environmentally friendly. The
tunability of the catalyst system allows better control over the polymerization
and may allow incorporation of other co-monomers and better processability of
the polyaniline. The key to this family of catalysts is the highly fluorinated
ligands such as&lt;br/&gt;[HB(3,5-(CF3)2Pz)3]-. Copper complexes of these
nitrogen-based, fluorinated ligands can bind and activate oxygen without
undesirable side-reactions between the ligand and
oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyaniline is a conducting polymer with good
stability and important optical, electrical and electrochemical properties.
Polyaniline is currently used in electrochromic displays, rechargeable
batteries, microelectronics, antistatic materials, sensors and anti-corrosion
coatings. The current industrial synthesis of polyaniline is expensive and
produces a great deal of undesirable waste products. This new catalyst family
may provide a "green synthesis" for polyaniline that uses air or oxygen as the
oxidant and&lt;br/&gt;produces only water as a by-product. Students working on
this interdisciplinary project will gain skills in catalyst synthesis and
polymer synthesis and characterization.