* 0314293
* SGER:    Microorganisms in Sub-ice Sediments from The Western Antarctic Ice Sheet, Ice Stream C
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Brian Lanoil, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2004
* USD 75,000.00

Ice streams of the Western Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) are thought to have
unfrozen, water-saturated sediments at their base. Similar water-rock-ice
interfaces beneath Arctic and alpine glaciers have been demonstrated to house
abundant microbial communities which, through their metabolic activities, affect
the geochemistry of these environments. If microbial communities are present in
the sediments beneath the WAIS ice streams, they will have been isolated from
outside environmental influences for a minimum of 20,000 years. This projectwill
focus on the molecular characterization of microbes in a unique sediment core
collected from beneath Ice Stream C, WAIS (WAISC) with two main hypotheses: 1)
There is a unique microbial community present in the WAISC sediments, and 2) The
WAISC sediment microbial community is active at near in situ conditions. The
WAISC sediment microbes will be compared to microbes from other subglacial and
marine sedimentary systems and microbes with geochemically-relevant metabolic
activitie will be isolated. Work will be coordinated with other laboratories for
pore water chemistry and sediment physical parameters to define this unique
habitat. Resulting data should provide insight into microbial population
dynamics and survival mechanisms in this cold, dark, and isolated environment.
Furthermore, this study will expand our knowledge of microbial community
structure and function to include Antarctic subglacial environments and may
provide insights into possible roles of microbes during extreme "Snowball Earth"
events and astrobiology. This project will support the training of a
postdoctoral scholar and an undergraduate student in an interdisciplinary
research project. The PI will use concepts from this project in both an
introductory undergraduate course and a graduate level course. Data, images, and
other materials will be made available through a publicly available web site.