* 0314249
* Foundations of Bayesian Theory: Extensions and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Edi Karni, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2007
* USD 133,416.00

Since the beginning of the 20th century social scientists were interested in the
possibility of quantifying individual beliefs about the likely realization of
various events with probabilities. In addition to the obvious philosophical
interest this inquiry was intended to provide a behavioral foundations of
Bayesian statistics and of subjective expected utility theory that is often used
to model decision-making under uncertainty in economics. The failure of exiting
theories to attain the aforementioned goal motivated the development of a new
approach described in my work on the foundations of Bayesian theory. The
objective of this project is to extend the scope and to examine some
applications of this approach. The research involves the application of
mathematical analysis at two levels: For the envisioned extensions the method is
axiomatic and the expected results are representation theorems, namely, the
expression of individual preferences and beliefs, respectively, by utility
functions and probability measures. The applications involve mathematical
modeling of unemployment insurance with moral hazard and its analysis. The
objective is to compare the exiting results on optimal unemployment insurance,
recognizing that these results may be based on probabilities that may not
represent the unemployed beliefs about the likely success of their job-search
activities, to the optimal unemployment insurance program under the new theory.
The project will also address the issue of elicitation of probabilities that
express individual beliefs.

This research will highlight the theoretical and empirical importance of
correctly assessing individual beliefs for the purpose of designing incentive
contracts and public policies in which incentive issues are essential. It will
also extend the behavioral basis of the Bayesian methods used in statistical
analysis.