* 0314685
* Acquisition of a Raman Microscope for Education and Materials Research Relating to Artistic/Historic Works
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Karen Trentelman, The Detroit Institute of Arts
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 190,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a high quality Raman microscope for the
study of composition of materials and corrosion products for the purposes of
conservation and validation of works of artistic, historic and cultural
significance. The equipment will strengthen the on going scientific research and
education program at the Detroit Institute of Arts (DIA), in the Center for
Conservation, where the Scientific Research Laboratory conducts analysis and
scientific research into the composition, structure, characteristics, and
behavior of materials relating to works of art. This instrument will complement
other major instruments in the DIA's laboratories including x-ray diffraction
and fluorescence. This technique is non-destructive, molecular specific,
spatially resolved and highly versatile. Examples are the use of Raman
scattering to study the composition and symmetries of overcoatings, pigments,
and corrosion products. The technique will be used to analyze a wide range of
materials commonly found in works of art. These include pigments, dyes,
minerals, gems, metal corrosion products, binding media (gums, waxes, resins)
and organic materials such as ivory and wood. In addition, analyses often can be
performed in situ, thereby affording the opportunity to examine many works of
art, such as illuminated manuscripts, from which sampling is either impractical
or undesirable. Significant time on the system will be set aside for education
of students and visiting scientists.

The understanding of surface science and materials as related to artistic
materials is an area of growing interest. The laboratory conducts collaborative
research projects with scientists at university and industrial laboratories
throughout the Detroit area. The system will be used to train new conservators,
to educate conservators on what can be done, and to perform valuable studies on
important works. Initial research will be in three areas: (1) identification of
artists' materials; (2) study of metal corrosion products; and (3) study of
polymer degradation products. These studies may lead to improved means of
preservation through improved understanding of conditions and mechanisms
responsible for deterioration of art works. This acquisition will enhance the
education of undergraduates, pre-program interns, graduate students and post-
graduate fellows in chemistry, art conservation and conservation science. The
Detroit Institute of Arts is committed to educating and informing the public
sector about the scientific research and conservation activities of the Center
through gallery displays, publications; illustrated lectures and tours of the
facilities.