* 0314489
* Village Specialization, Trade and Warfare in Early Neolithic Belgium
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Lawrence Keeley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 222,709.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the relationship between
warfare and exchange among the first Early Neolithic farming communities to
appear in northeastern Belgium (c. 5000-4700 BC). During two field seasons, it
will focus on two adjoining 'settlement clusters' (c. 40 sites each) of the
Linienbandkeramik (LBK) culture in the Upper Geer and Yerne river valleys. These
clusters are distinguished from one another by location and the materials of
their ground stone 'shoe-last' adzes, a ubiquitous and distinctive LBK artifact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will ascertain the distribution of LBK
villages encircled by ditch-palisade fortifications in these clusters. As five
fortified villages have already been found along the northern limits of both
settlement clusters, this project will focus on villages in the centers of and
along the border between them. This information is crucial for determining who
the LBK villagers regarded as adversaries-Mesolithic foragers beyond the LBK
zone, other LBK settlement clusters or LBK villages within the same cluster--
and what, if any, commodities were exchanged with them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also investigate the kinds of commodities
exchanged between villages of the same cluster, between these two clusters and,
at greater distances, with other LBK clusters or Final Mesolithic foragers
beyond the LBK occupation zone. The commodities of interest are LBK ceramics,
Limburg ceramics (arguably made by Final Mesolithic foragers), flint blades,
grindstones and, when preserved, wild or agricultural plants. A principal goal
is to determine which commodities these ancient villagers exchanged with
'others' whom they regarded as hostile based upon the location of their
fortifications. Three theoretical propositions will be evaluated: 1) that
exchange and hostilities are mutually exclusive; 2) that exchanges and warfare
are closely linked; and 3) that only certain kinds of exchanges, especially in
commodities geographically restricted to one group, are linked to hostilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will be one of the first to employ innovative
geophysical surveying techniques ('remote sensing') for archaeological purposes
in this region. Specifically, the project will use Differential Magnetometer
(DM) and Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) surveys to locate fortification ditches
and household rubbish pits at selected Upper Geer and Yerne sites. The buried
features located by DM and GPR will be ground truthed by excavations to recover
artifacts, plant remains, pollen samples and datable materials. The artifacts
recovered will be later analyzed by a variety of techniques.e.g. SEM microscopy,
Energy Dispersive Spectra and X-ray Diffraction.to determine the sources of raw
materials and the locations of production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts this project include: 1) the doctoral research of two UIC graduate
students working on the project; 2) International collaboration with peers at
Belgium's Institute of Natural Sciences; and 3) the archaeological training of
undergrads from Belgian universities to be used as crew. This project will
evaluate interpretations regarding the social and economic contexts that
encourage or discourage warfare. It will also contribute to social scientific
studies of pre-capitalist exchange. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the
interaction between Mesolithics and Neolithics along a frontier, the interaction
of LBK villages and settlement clusters, and the influence of conflict on LBK
settlement patterns, this project will contribute significantly to our knowledge
of the first farming communities in Europe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;