* 0314218
* GOALI: Warm Forming Studies of Magnesium Alloys under Uniaxial and Biaxial Deformation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Raymond Decker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 01/31/2008
* USD 520,000.00

The project addresses the effects of composition, microstructure and processing
on the formability of Mg alloys for lightweight applications in transportation
industry. A modified deformation processing known as multiple
coining/corrugating and flattening (MCF) will be used to produce randomly-
oriented ultra-fine grains for improved forming characteristics, in particular
the increased strain-rate sensitivity at relatively low temperatures. A major
objective is to perform detailed analyses of microstructure, microtexture,
tensile flow response and biaxial forming behavior of Mg sheets. The evolution
of distributions in grain size and grain misorientation will be analyzed as
functions of processing steps and temperature. Particular attention will be paid
to deformation mechanisms including twinning and slip, and the kinetics of
dynamic recrystallization and grain growth. Quantitative relations between
microstructural parameters and stress- strain-strain rate response will be
sought on the basis of experimental results and existing theories, and optimum
formability paths will be delineated. The standard AZ31B alloy will be
considered along with a modified alloy by adding rare earth and transition
elements for improved resistance to corrosion and creep. Along with the
experimental studies, physically based constitutive relations will be used to
predict forming limit curves and thinning in biaxially deformed samples, for
comparison with experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort,
jointly shared by the University participants and collaborators, Daimler
Chrysler Corporation and Thixomat, Inc., considers two Mg alloys to explore
processing-microstructure-flow relations and their influence on formability
limit. The results of this fundamental study will define more clearly the
effects of composition, microstructure and processing on the formability of Mg
alloys that find applications in transportation and other industries where
lightweight materials are a prerequisite. The project involves researchers at
the university and the industrial
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;