* 0314367
* Workshop: Numerical Modeling of Earthquake Source Dynamics, Slovak Republic, August 31 through September 3, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Ralph Archuleta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2004
* USD 13,000.00

The NSF award (EAR-0314367) will provide partial travel support for researchers
to attend the workshop on "Numerical Modeling of Earthquake Source Dynamics" to
be held at the Smolenice Castle (near Bratislava), Slovak Republic, August 31 -
September 3, 2003.

The purpose of the workshop is to bring together the various researchers from
the United States, Asia and Europe who use numerical simulations to investigate
dynamics of the earthquake source, to communicate the state-of-the-art of the
earthquake dynamics research, to provide a unique opportunity for in-depth
discussions. The three days of talks and discussion will cover a full range of
topics related to earthquake dynamics: initial stress distributions on the
fault, nucleation of the rupture, rupture propagation, friction laws, rupture
arrests, stress drops and scaling, fault geometry, material heterogeneity, fault
interaction, energy budget and seismic radiation, numerical techniques,
simulating real earthquakes.

The Slovak Academy of Sciences and Comenius University will be hosts for this
international workshop. It is organized by a steering committee: Ralph
Archuleta, Chairman, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara,
California, USA; Michel Bouchon, Universite Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France;
Kojiro Irikura, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, Raul Madariaga, Ecole Normale
Superiere, Paris, France; Peter Moczo, Comenius University, Bratislava, and
Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.