* 0314898
* Milwaukee Mathematics Partnership:   Sharing in Leadership for Student Success
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2011
* Kimberly Farley, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2011
* USD 19,977,173.00

The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, the Milwaukee Public Schools, and the
Milwaukee Area Technical College comprise the Milwaukee Mathematics Partnership.
As a member of the Milwaukee Partnership Academy, a community-wide collaborative
PK-16 effort among school, university, union, government, business, and
community organizations, the Milwaukee Mathematics Partnership seeks to
substantially improve mathematics achievement for the 100,000 K-12 Milwaukee
Public Schools students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnership involves
mathematics faculty and mathematics educators in collaboration with PK-12
educators in strengthening district curricula, student assessment measures, and
re-designing pre-service and in-service teacher preparation focused on the needs
of an urban district. Through this Partnership, the Institutions of Higher
Education Mathematics Network, consisting of 2- and 4-year colleges and
universities, will be established to focus on the mathematical preparation and
continued growth of PK-12 teachers and to improve the transition of students to
post secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnership embraces four
major goals in order to improve student achievement:&lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive
Mathematics Framework: Implement and utilize the Comprehensive Mathematics
Framework to lead a collective vision of deep learning and quality teaching of
challenging mathematics across the Milwaukee Partnership. Strategies include
PK-12 student Learning Targets and Model Performance Assessments, alignment of
high school coursework with college expectations, and increased enrollment and
success in challenging mathematics courses, including Advanced Placement and
International Baccalaureate mathematics courses.&lt;br/&gt;Distributed
Leadership: Institute a distributed mathematics leadership model that engages
all partners and is centered on school-based professional learning communities.
Strategies include Math Teacher Leaders, school-based Learning Team, Principal
Mathematics Leadership endeavor, and district mathematics leadership;
&lt;br/&gt;Teacher Learning Continuum: Build and sustain the capacity of
teachers, from initial preparation through induction and professional growth, to
understand mathematics deeply and use that knowledge to improve student
learning. Strategies include the IHE Mathematics Network; Design Teams focused
on core mathematical preparation for all PK-8 teachers, an elementary
mathematics minor, and a secondary mathematics capstone course; teachers on
special assignment as Teachers-In-Residence at the university; teacher
recruitment; content-focused induction; and school-based professional learning
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Student Learning Continuum: Ensure all students, PK-16,
have access to, are prepared and supported for, and succeed in challenging
mathematics. Strategies include School Educational Plans, mathematics alignment
for the Tutoring and Family Literacy Initiative, and Transitioning to College
Mathematics effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the Partnership will
collect evidence of what is working, why, where, and for whom related to three
major domains: Student Learning, Teacher Learning, and Collective Vision and
Leadership for Mathematics. This includes measures of the degree to which a true
effective partnership was established and identification of the defining
attributes of such a partnership.&lt;br/&gt;