* 0314529
* Dynamical Systems in Parasite-Host and Structured Population Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Horst Thieme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 238,129.00

Thieme&lt;br/&gt; The investigator undertakes mathematical studies
of&lt;br/&gt;questions arising in ecology and population biology, focusing
on&lt;br/&gt;host-parasite systems and structured populations. With
their&lt;br/&gt;rapid turnover, parasitic populations are ideal objects to
study&lt;br/&gt;the principles of evolution; in turn, it is important
to&lt;br/&gt;understand these principles to control infectious
diseases&lt;br/&gt;effectively. Mathematical models and their analysis are
very&lt;br/&gt;much needed for a deeper understanding and as a
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;laboratory to devise control and management strategies. In
fact,&lt;br/&gt;many of the arguments on the adaptive dynamics of virulence
have&lt;br/&gt;become so complex that they can be more easily
formulated&lt;br/&gt;mathematically than verbally. While the health aspects
of&lt;br/&gt;parasite-host interactions are of immediate concern, their
impact&lt;br/&gt;on biological diversity may be as important. The mediation
of&lt;br/&gt;species coexistence through chaotic dynamics has gained a lot
of&lt;br/&gt;attention recently, but coexistence at equilibrium mediated
by&lt;br/&gt;parasites and by population structure may be far more
prominent.&lt;br/&gt;In the context of competition, coexistence, and evolution
in&lt;br/&gt;host-parasite systems, the investigator studies:&lt;br/&gt;
Coexistence and evolution of endophytic fungi,&lt;br/&gt; Parasite mediated
coexistence and competition, and&lt;br/&gt; Prey-predator-parasite
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;Using structured population models, he
studies:&lt;br/&gt; The evolution of parasite virulence in structured host
populations,&lt;br/&gt; Apparent Allee effects in structured predator-prey
systems, and&lt;br/&gt; The evolution of polymorphism in amphibians.&lt;br/&gt;
Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases and the danger&lt;br/&gt;of
bioterrorism have led to a renewed interest in host-parasite&lt;br/&gt;systems.
The fact that infectious diseases afflict not only&lt;br/&gt;humans and their
food sources (domestic animals and agronomic&lt;br/&gt;plants), but also natural
animal and plant populations, has&lt;br/&gt;directed attention to the important
and fascinating role of&lt;br/&gt;parasites in ecosystems and in the maintenance
of biological&lt;br/&gt;diversity. Studying mathematical host-parasite models
enhances&lt;br/&gt;our insight in evolution in general and in evolution of hosts
and&lt;br/&gt;parasites in particular (evolution of virulence, co-evolution
of&lt;br/&gt;hosts and parasites). These models help to design
disease&lt;br/&gt;control strategies that avoid parasite resistance and
decrease&lt;br/&gt;parasite virulence (virulence management). They also lead
to&lt;br/&gt;environmental management strategies that are compatible
with&lt;br/&gt;species preservation. They can be used as educational tools
in&lt;br/&gt;graduate and undergraduate instruction and for
effective&lt;br/&gt;communication with the scientific community, public
health&lt;br/&gt;officers, and an educated public
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;