* 0314656
* Government Institutions, Community and Citizen Participation: Can School Choice Build A Foundation for Cooperative Behavior?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Mark Schneider, 21st Century School Fund
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2006
* USD 365,324.00

This proposal focuses on schools as arenas in which parents and students can
develop the norms and expectations essential for cooperative behavior. The
research pays particular attention to the extent to which reorganizing schools
through the introduction of school choice, specifically charter schools, affects
such attitudes. The researchers argue that by analyzing how a change in the way
an important government service, in this case schooling, is organized and then
linking this institutional change to the attitudes parents hold toward each
other and toward teachers the research can address two fundamental
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Can government institutions build the
foundation for interpersonal trust,&lt;br/&gt; cooperation and participation in
the policy process?&lt;br/&gt;* And, if the answer is yes, is this effect domain
specific, limited to the schools, or are the effects more general, spilling over
into attitudes and behavior in other, broader, domains?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will expand an existing two wave panel study, by adding two more waves
of interviews of parents with children in either charter schools or traditional
public schools in Washington DC. With the addition of two more waves, the
researchers will have a data set that can be used to assess the value added of
charter schools to parents and students. More specifically, the research will be
able to address a set of fundamental questions:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;*Do some
relationships among stakeholders within the schools take time to
emerge?&lt;br/&gt;* Does it take time for patterns observed within the schools
to translate into other policy domains or politics in general?&lt;br/&gt;* Are
some of the patterns observed transient a irHawthorne-like effect of joining a
new school?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the research will also study how
choice changes the role of students, making them more central in the design of
education programs and in the functioning of the schools. The researchers argue
that by building stronger school communities can change the relationship among
students themselves, between students and parents, and between students and
teachers and administrators. The research will launch a new panel of students in
grades 7-12 in charter schools and in DC public schools, comparing how they
relate to their schools, their teachers, and other participants in their
education. And the research will see if the charter school experience affects
their behavior in school and in their larger community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is central to the debate over school reform, an item that is high on
the policy agenda of most states and the federal government. In addition, the
work is integral to the larger debate about the relationship between government
institutions, the creation of strong communities&lt;br/&gt;and better citizens,
and the role of government in nurturing social capital.&lt;br/&gt;