* 0314291
* Collaborative Research:  Goal systemic Effects in Self-Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Arie Kruglanski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/2007
* USD 120,000.00

The proposed research consists of 8 experimental studies designed to test a new,
cognitive, theory of motivation. The basic assumption of the theory is that
goals and means for their attainment are mentally represented, and in this sense
they constitute cognitive entities that can be cognitively activated. Our
preliminary research suggests that the degree to which goals are cognitively
associated with attainment means promotes goal commitment and the degree to
which goals bring other, competing, goals to mind detracts from goal commitment.
Goal commitment, in turn, determines the individuals' persistence and quality of
performance at various tasks. Four experiments are designed to explore those
aspects of our theory. Our preliminary research also indicates that individuals
may learn specific activation patterns between low level momentary goals
(referred to as temptations) in conflict with higher order, long term goals. An
adaptive pattern is one in which (1) activation (e.g. via sight) of a temptation
(say a fattening food for a dieter) immediately activates the superordinate goal
(dieting) with which the temptation is in conflict and (2) activation of the
superordinate goal (i.e., the concept of dieting) inhibits the mental activation
of the temptation. Similarly, a maladaptive activation pattern is one in which
(1) an activation of the superordinate goal (e.g. dieting, academic success)
brings to mind the temptation (e.g., fattening foods, television watching), and
(2) activation of the temptation inhibits the activation of the superordinate
goal. Four experiments are testing the implications of this analysis for
increasing the adaptiveness of people's activation patterns and examines the
effects this has on persons' ability to exercise functional self control, hence
increase their ability to resist temptations. &lt;br/&gt; The potential insights
from the present research have important implications for a variety of basic
psychological concerns. Goal commitment, a central variable in the proposed work
is pertinent to such issues as the ability to commit to close relationships, or
to succeed in one's chosen profession. Understanding the dynamics of commitment
may improve our ability to induce commitment to realistic goals, and to reduce
commitment to unattainable pursuits known to result in unhappiness and
frustration. Furthermore, understanding the dynamics of overcoming temptations
may increase our ability to train individuals in adaptive self control, and in
this sense contribute to their success and personal life satisfaction.
&lt;br/&gt;