* 0314410
* Gain and Recombination in InGaAsN and Their Impact on the Laser Output Behavior
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Carmen Menoni, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

The scientific objective of the proposed research is to investigate the dominant
recombination processes and the mechanisms that give rise to optical gain in
InGaAsN/GaAs heterostructures lasers, and determine their impact on the laser
output behavior. To accomplish this, the PI's will perform a comprehensive set
of experiments on optimized ridge waveguide structures that include carrier
lifetime, gain, gain recovery dynamics, and spontaneous emission measurement at
different bias and temperature conditions. They will complement these
investigations with optical spectroscopic studies of the heterostructure
materials that will reveal the salient features of the electronic structure
modifications upon nitrogen incorporation. The results from these experiments
will allow us to build a model of the gain, determine the carrier-current
density relations and thus develop a thorough understanding of the role of gain
and recombination in affecting the threshold current and external efficiency of
dilute nitride lasers. To complete these studies we also propose to assess the
high speed potential of dilute nitride lasers through investigations of the
intrinsic modulation bandwidth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research brings
together the CSU group whose strength is in the characterization of laser diodes
and their heterostructures, and the Sandia's groups specialists in the growth of
III-V nitrides and modeling of fundamental laser diode behavior respectively.
The synergy of these groups with complementary expertise, will create an
exciting intellectual exchange that will greatly benefit the education of the
graduate and undergraduate students participating in the project. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will offer outstanding opportunities for the
training of students at all levels. Graduate students will learn the arts of
device fabrication, and characterization using high frequency electronics,
optics and ultrafast techniques. They will also acquire in-depth understanding
of the material's optical and electronic properties and develop skills to
simulate basic laser diode behavior. Furthermore, the research will offer unique
opportunities for the development of leadership skills through participation in
conference presentations, manuscript preparation and mentoring activities.
Exciting learning opportunities will also be available for undergraduate
students who will take part in device fabrication efforts and in performing some
of the simpler device and material characterization experiments. In
undergraduate recruitment, Prof. Menoni will actively collaborate with the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (COAMP) and the College of
Engineering Women and Minorities Organization to attract talented students from
traditionally underrepresented minority groups in the science and engineering.
Basic research in laser diodes will also open up learning opportunities for K-12
students, who will be recruited from local high schools to participate in a
month-long summer research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;