* 0314305
* Climatic Variation and Disturbance Interactions in Subalpine Rocky Mountain Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Climatic Variation and Disturbance Interactions in Subalpine Rocky
Mountain Forests&lt;br/&gt;Veblen, Thomas T.&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado at
Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is expected to exacerbate
disturbances to forested landscape through impacts on frequency of fire and
insect outbreaks. This project will address the need for an improved
understanding of the spatial and temporal nature of such disturbances, the role
of climate variability on forest dynamics, and the significance of these
landscape legacies in altering forest susceptibility to future disturbance.
Specifically, this work will examine how forest disturbances vary in relation to
broad environmental gradients in southern Rocky Mountain forest ecosystems. Key
questions to be addressed in this research include: what climatic conditions are
conducive to fire and lethal insect outbreaks across topographic and broad
climatic gradients; how does topographic variability affect the nature and rate
of forest recovery following fire and insect outbreaks and future susceptibility
to disturbance; and how do landscape legacies resulting from major previous
disturbance by fire and insect outbreaks affect the subsequent frequency, spread
and severity of disturbances? This project will contribute new knowledge to how
disturbance processes in forested landscapes respond to climatic variation in
spatially heterogeneous environments. Methodologically, this research will
combine detailed tree-ring analyses of disturbance and climatic variation with
GIS-analyses of the spatial interactions of past disturbance events in relation
to topographic setting. This multi-scale empirical analysis will elucidate the
relative roles of fine- versus coarse-scale constraints on disturbance
processes. The results of the project will be of importance to forest resource
planning and management in National Parks and National Forests in Colorado. In
particular, legacies left in the landscape by prior disturbance by fire and
insect outbreaks need to be considered when planning for the spread and severity
of future disturbance events. &lt;br/&gt;