* 0314651
* Workshop on: Modern Mathematical/Physical Tools That May Lead To Improved Models in Subsurface Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2004
* USD 45,000.00

0314651 Cushman Historically the major advances, or radical paradigm shifts, in
subsurface hydrology have been the result of ideas or tools borrowed from other
disciplines. Among these ideas and tools are geostatistical data synthesis,
stochastic models, numerical solutions to PDE's, and generalized scaling and
coarse graining concepts.

Though significant progress has been made over the past few decades in modeling
subsurface flows and transport, we are a long way from being able to
quantitatively predict the movement of miscible and immiscible fluids and
colloids in the deeper subsurface (aquifers), and of water and dissolved
constituents in the near-surface (soils). Difficulties abound with theories of
multiphase flow, flow in swelling media, descriptions and ramifications of
spatial heterogeneity, hysteresis, chemical aging, microbial transport and
degradation, multiscale processes, and etc.

There are two purposes for the proposed workshop:

i. To bring together researchers from disparate disciplines (e.g., math,
physics, chemistry, engineering sciences) to discuss their approaches to related
problems in other fields of science, and allow them to interface with
hydrologists.

ii. To write a white paper for NSF-hydrology on modern tools and approaches
which have the potential to seriously advance hydrologic modeling.

It is anticipated that a wide variety of topics and approaches will be
discussed: Among these are chaos and nonlinear dynamics, homogenization, CTRW
and fractional approaches, stochastic dynamics, nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics, percolation, renormalization, projection operators, stochastic
perturbation theories, complexity theory, as well as many others. The conference
will not focus on numerical methods, but rather on novel approaches to describe
multiscale physics, chemistry and microbiology.