* 0314454
* 2003 Nuclear Chemistry Gordon Conference;  June 15-20, 2003;  New London, NH
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Christopher Lister, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 04/30/2004
* USD 5,000.00

The principal objective of the Gordon Research Conference on
Nuclear&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry is to provide the international community of
nuclear&lt;br/&gt;scientists with a unique forum in which the most recent
developments&lt;br/&gt;and results in this field can be presented, extensively
discussed&lt;br/&gt;and criticized. A prime objective of this conference is to
ensure&lt;br/&gt;that discussions are conducted in a manner that will invite
vigorous&lt;br/&gt;and open interactionsbetween scientists and provke new,
and&lt;br/&gt;sometimes speculative, ideas for future research Generous time
is&lt;br/&gt;allocated for such discussions and the site location and
conference&lt;br/&gt;activities successfully promote their occurrence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed goals require the participation of a
signifcant number&lt;br/&gt;of the leaders in this field. These include both
internationall&lt;br/&gt;recognized senior scientists from around the world and
the young and&lt;br/&gt;rising stars. The participation of younger scientists is
essential&lt;br/&gt;to address the future manpowwer needs of this rapidly
changing&lt;br/&gt;field. Therefore, bright and promising postdoctoral
researchers and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students have been specially selected for
participation in&lt;br/&gt;this conference and encouraged to present their
ideas. Their&lt;br/&gt;participation in this conference provides them with
unique and&lt;br/&gt;extensive access to the leaders in their field, exposes
them to new&lt;br/&gt;research opportunities and techniques and helps prepare
them for the&lt;br/&gt;leadership roles they will assume in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will examine various topics of
current interest in&lt;br/&gt;nuclear structure and reactions, including
unstable nuclei, phase&lt;br/&gt;transitions and critical point symmetries,
spectroscopy, mass&lt;br/&gt;measurements, and the use of radioactive ion
beams.&lt;br/&gt;