* 0314421
* Unconventional Liquid Crystals:  Design, Synthesis, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 462,000.00

This project addresses new concepts for liquid crystal science that have
fundamental and technological facets. It involves complicated organic synthesis
directed at producing extended oligo-acene structures to advance the field of
electronic materials. Acenes are electronically active materials, and producing
liquid crystals from these board-like materials has the potential to advance the
field of organic electronics by creating organized defect free materials with
high carrier mobilities for application in Field Effect Transistors (FETs). In
the area of catalysis, new fundamental principles will be advanced to
demonstrate that supramolecular chirality can be highly effective in producing
enantioselective reactions. The approach is very different from conventional
catalyst design that places chiral scaffolds about a catalytic active site.
Porous films will be generated that can be used as supported catalysts in the
near term and potentially as membranes for continuous processes. Continuous
processes are in many cases more efficient than batch processes and can thereby
lower the manufacturing costs of fine chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
area of liquid crystal science has high relevance to several very important
areas of technology. The most evident accomplishment of this field of science
and technology is the development of liquid crystal displays that have become
part of our everyday life. However, flat screen displays represent only a small
portion of the different types of liquid crystal structures and applications
that are possible. This research seeks to expand the use of the self-
organization properties of liquid crystals to produce novel electronic materials
for the formation of transistors and other interesting molecular electronic
devices. By designing self-organizing molecules new generations of transistors
can be developed that are inexpensive to produce and have high performance.
Liquid crystal structures will also be used to create new types of catalysts for
use in more efficient continuous processes for the production of new chemicals.
These types of methods can lower production costs and lead to more
environmentally friendly processes that require less solvent and generate fewer
emissions. A novel aspect of these materials is that they will involve the
design of supramolecular (beyond one molecule) structures to create the needed
interactions that will control the formation new chemical bonds. This project is
co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division.&lt;br/&gt;