* 0314148
* Role of Human Communities in the Evolution of Landforms, Climates and Biota: Archaeological Perspectives from Southeastern Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Timothy Matney, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 122,474.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Timothy Matney will lead
an international research team to the Diyarbakir province of southeastern Turkey
to conduct archaeological excavation and survey at the site of Ziyaret Tepe. Dr.
Matney's team consists of senior collaborators from universities in the US,
Britain, Germany, Finland, Denmark and Turkey. Ziyaret Tepe is located in the
upper Tigris River valley, a rich agricultural zone which has produced some of
the earliest evidence for cereal and animal domestication in the world. During
the Late Bronze and Iron Ages (c. 1300 - 600 BC), this area was annexed by the
kings of the Assyrian Empire, based in modern-day northern Iraq, who
subsequently established large urban centers in the valley. A land of modest
villages for millennia, the arrival of the Assyrian armies and colonists meant a
radical transformation of the region. The establishment of Assyrians frontier
cities, such as Ziyaret Tepe (ancient Tushhan), required the harnessing of
significant resources such as timber, grain and human labor. In addition,
Assyrian imperial demands from the homeland required large quantities of raw
materials, especially timber and metal ore, to be transshipped from the upper
Tigris River valley downstream to the Assyrian capital for consumption by royal
building projects, the Assyrian bureaucracy and the imperial army. Matney's
project aims to assess the impact of these demands on the geomorphology,
paleoclimates and plant and animal communities in the upper Tigris River valley.
His team includes an array of specialists (paleobotanists, faunal analysts,
geomophologists, soil micromorphologists, etc.) who will collect and analyze the
data from both the excavation of Ziyaret Tepe and a regional survey conducted
within a 10km radius of the site. This is the first comprehensive
geomorphological and archaeological survey to be conducted in this area and will
benefit many of the research teams working in the area. Much of this portion of
the upper Tigris River valley will be flooded by the construction of the Ilisu
hydroelectric dam (completion scheduled for 2014), so the evidence gathered by
Matney's team will salvage valuable information on the cultural heritage of the
region before destruction of the ancient record by modern economic development
schemes. The basic questions being addressed by Matney's study have implications
well beyond the academic discipline of archaeology. The economic, ecological,
social and political implications of imperial expansion and urbanization in the
late second and early first millennia BC are relevant data points for
discussions of modern phenomenon of globalization. The models developed and
tested for the Ziyaret Tepe project will inform scholars across a range of
disciplines on the long-term impact of urban lifeways and intensive resource
utilization on localized climates, natural and human ecosystems.