* 0314556
* Private Land Conservation Decisions: The Role of Information and Public Lands
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Heidi Albers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2006
* USD 320,001.00

Private land trusts play an increasingly important role in the provision of
environmental amenities and services in the U.S. Surprisingly little analysis of
their behavior exists, however. This project will characterize land trust
behavior with models and data, and identify policies that could encourage trusts
to conserve land in a manner that is most socially beneficial. The research will
examine the land conservation decisions of private land trusts, focusing on the
extent to which they consider the land conservation actions of other actors,
both public and private. The project will consist of two components of analysis
that inform each other, one empirical and one modeling. The empirical work will
use econometric techniques to examine actual private-public land conservation
interactions in each of three data-rich states (California, Massachusetts, and
Illinois) that have important differences in their ecology, conservation goals,
and amounts of privately and publicly conserved land. The modeling work will
construct and analyze a spatially-explicit simulation model of the land
conservation decisions made by diverse land trusts and public actors,
characterize the resulting pattern of conservation, and explore policy options.

These analyses will increase understanding of how private land trusts, which
provide so many environmental benefits, make decisions. From the foundation of
data-based models, the project will inform policy by: determining the extent to
which land trusts make decisions based on information about other land
conservation actions; examining the impact of information exchange and
coordination among diverse land trusts and between trusts and government; and
identifying the role of government protected lands in encouraging ("crowding
in") or discouraging ("crowding out") private land conservation. The research
will be particularly useful in considering two different types of policy. First,
the analysis will determine a role for government in disseminating ecological
and land use information. Second, the analysis will identify situations in which
strategic land purchases and the promotion of coordinated actions among public
and private groups are policies that increase the private provision of
environmental services. Adding these policies to the portfolio of current land
conservation policies could decrease the costs of achieving a more desirable
level of land conservation and environmental benefits. This research is
supported under the FY 2002 NSF/EPA Decision Making for Valuation and
Environmental Policy (DMVEP) special competition.