* 0315311
* New molecules and methods to study the biasing of dendrimer conformation -- their effect on electronic encapsulation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Christopher Gorman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 390,000.00

Through the synthesis of new types of dendrimer architectures, the relationship
between primary structural elements in the dendrimer and its conformation in
solution will be assessed. The effects of these architectures on encapsulation
as evidenced by changes in electron transfer rate and/or redox potential will be
assayed. The advantages of film electrochemistry in studying dendrimer
encapsulation will be defined. Finally, the ability of a dendrimer film to
shield the core from solvent to differing degrees will be studied as a function
of dendrimer generation, type of dendrimer film, counterion identity, and
solvent nature. Control of electron transfer is a central theme in biology and
is a rapidly emerging concern in the new field of nanometer-scale electronics.
With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Christopher B. Gorman, of the Department of Chemistry at North Carolina State
University, is exploring the design and synthesis of large, branched molecules
("dendrimers") which bear in their cores substructures which allow him to
elucidate the molecular features that influence the relative rate and driving
force for electron transfer reactions. While addressing fundamental questions
about how a non-conducting molecular shell governs electron transfer rates,
Professor Gorman is also gaining insight into the electron transfer processes
central to both biochemical function and electronic devices. In addition to
providing a broad, interdisciplinary research experience for all students
involved in these studies, including collaborations with engineering groups,
Professor Gorman participates in a number of programs encouraging the
participation in research by members of historically under-represented groups.