* 0315695
* WMU Design Center for K-12 Math &amp; Science Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Edmund Tsang, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2007
* USD 416,144.00

The College of Engineering and Applied Sciences (CEAS) and the College of
Education (COE), Western Michigan University (WMU), were awarded a planning
grant from the NSF Bridges for Engineering Education program in August 2002 to
build collaboration between the two colleges. This proposal leverages this
partnership to create a Design Center for K-12 Mathematics and Science Learning
for CEAS and COE students to continue collaboration throughout the four years of
undergraduate learning. Students will experience professional practice in
design, teamwork, communication, and leadership skills, and will produce
exemplary instructional "hardware" and "software" to support the needs and
specifications of K-12 mathematics and science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will provide a structure and an environment for
engineering and technology students to develop and grow through design courses.
The collaborative activities between students and faculty from CEAS and COE will
result in a Center that supports K-12 teachers and WMU pre-service education
students to bring the excitement of engineering and technology into teaching
mathematics and science. By exposing engineering and technology students early
in the first year to the joys of creation through design and hands-on
experimentation in ENGR 101, and a summer design institute for high-school
juniors, they can be recruited and retained in the programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The community service nature of the Center will motivate students,
particularly females and ethnic minorities, to remain in engineering and
technology. About 51% of Kalamazoo Public Schools students are ethnic
minorities, who are traditionally underrepresented in the study of college-level
mathematics, science, and engineering disciplines. Two of the project service
sites are the Boys and Girls Club and the Northeast Academy, a charter school
serving primarily students from low-income families. About 400 WMU students per
year participate in volunteer activities through the Student Volunteers Office,
with 50% coming from the COE. The Center can add value to the services of these
education student volunteers by partnering them with engineering students to
develop and implement after-school activities at these two sites to stimulate
interest in mathematics and sciences. This project will also initiate new
collaborations between WMU faculty, students, and the local community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;