* 0315336
* Elemental, Micro, Ultra Trace Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* James Holcombe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2007
* USD 555,000.00

Professor James Holcombe of the University of Texas Austin is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program for research on microanalytical trace
elemental analysis. Specifically, two areas are addressed: electrothermal
vaporization (ETV) sample introduction into an inductively coupled mass
spectrometer (ICPMS) and cold atom atomic absorption solution spectrometry
(CAAASS). The idea is to develop analytical methods where the complexity of the
matrix will not interfere with the analysis. ETV-ICPMS employs microsamples and
places no sample introduction restrictions on the matrix, i.e., samples with
high levels of dissolved salts, slurries and solids can all be used without
dilution or digestion. Sample throughput rates, transport efficiencies and
plasma loading (because of the complex matrix) are problems that are addressed.
A low power, graphite-based filament system is being developed in lieu of the
classical tube design or metal filament vaporizer. Insuring reproducible
transport efficiency of the aerosol from the ETV to the ICP is the motivation
behind the use of a microporous graphite tube and methodologies to center the
aerosol in the gas flowing to the ICP. The thermal ramp of the ETV provides a
crude chromatographic (thermal) separation device to inexpensively assist in
discerning and circumventing interferences as well as optimizing the
instantaneous signal to noise ratio. Although the proof-of-concept for ETV-ICP
time-of-flight mass spectrometry has been demonstrated, this work focuses on the
full implications and limitations of the method. Fundamental studies of aerosol
dispersion as well as use of mixed gas plasma are also proposed. CAAASS is a
novel means of generating atoms at room temperature in solution that was first
demonstrated in Sturgeon's laboratory as a tool for sample introduction into an
ICP. Holcombe's laboratory will investigate the fundamentals of these very
interesting phenomena with the application goal of using the approach for
elemental analysis via diode laser atomic absorption in a microchip.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elemental analysis remains a cornerstone in modern
research and development. In the biological world, its use range from basic
determination of cofactor concentrations to pharmokinetic evaluations of drugs
(e.g. platinum in anticarcinogens). Because of their toxicity, many metals
remain the focus of bioaccumulations. Water, soil and air analysis remains
active since these are often the recirculating source of pollution and show
impacts at exceedingly low levels. Basic geological sciences also rely on metals
as tracers. While many viable approaches exist for basic ultratrace elemental
detection, techniques for dealing with microsamples contained within a complex
matrix consumes thousands of hours of effort to design methods, many of which
are unique and useful only for the particular application. This research
attempts to provide the broader research community with a tool that will most
cost-effectively permit research to advance in a number of scientific and
medical areas.&lt;br/&gt;