* 0315607
* REVSYS: Taxonomic Revision in the Russulaceae, Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Steven Miller, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 221,642.00

Species in the genera Lactarius and Russula are closely related genera of
mushrooms found in symbiotic association with the roots of forest trees, an
association known as mycorrhizal. They are important dietary elements for
insects and larger animals and many species are harvested worldwide for human
consumption and as an important commodity. The number of named species worldwide
is large, approximately 2000 in Russula and 1200 in Lactarius, and it is a
taxonomically troublesome group for those doing studies of forestry, soil
communities, biodiversity, or ethnobotany. The primary goals of the proposed
research by Dr. Steven Miller at the University of Wyoming and his colleagues
are to make it easier to identify these mushrooms and to document the species
that occur in critical tropical forests. To do so, they will expand an existing
website to include a web-based identification key with links to a digital image
library, provide a centralized location where a reference set of digital images
of taxa and characters can be directly observed and compared, create a web-based
searchable database of validly published names and citations, and expand the on-
line literature database. They will also survey and identify the Russula and
Lactarius mushrooms found in the Dominican Republic and Belize, Malaysia, and
the Cameroons of Africa, areas little explored yet for fungal diversity. This
research is possible because it represents a strong international collaboration
between experts from the United States, Europe and Australia. The importance of
this research is that it will result in new and more accessible knowledge on
identification of these mushrooms, which in turn will provide new avenues of
exploration for forestry, ecology, biodiversity and ethnobotany. This will
result in greater knowledge and understanding of these important mushrooms in
both tropical and temperate forests before massive deforestation results in
their likely extinction.