* 0315430
* Collaborative Research: Does Escape From Natural Enemies Contribute to Invasiveness of Introduced Plants? A Test of the Evolution of Increased Competitive Ability Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Gretchen Meyer, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 153,606.00

Invasive, exotic plants are currently a major threat to natural areas because
they can spread through communities and replace native vegetation. Invasive
species are believed to be second only to habitat loss in terms of their impact
on native diversity, but the mechanisms that allow plants to become invasive are
still poorly understood. We propose to investigate the mechanisms promoting
invasiveness in Solidago gigantea, a species native to North America and an
invasive exotic in Europe. We plan to test the Evolution of Increased
Competitive Ability (EICA) hypothesis, which holds that because specialized
natural enemies may be absent from the introduced range, exotic plants may
evolve to invest less in anti-herbivore defenses and thereby gain a competitive
advantage over native plants. In a series of experiments, we will compare
European and US goldenrods in terms of their defensive chemistry, their
performance in the presence and absence of herbivores, and their ability to
support growth of both a specialist and a generalist insect. The EICA hypothesis
predicts that European goldenrods should invest less in secondary compounds, and
therefore should support better insect performance and have a growth advantage
in the absence of herbivores. If tolerance to herbivory, or the ability to
recover following herbivore damage, has associated fitness costs as suggested by
some recent studies, then European goldenrods would also be expected to have
reduced abilities to compensate for damage, compared to US goldenrods.