* 0315337
* Photodissociation in a Quadrupole Ion Trap
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* Alan Marchand, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2007
* USD 470,000.00

Professor Jennifer Brodbelt of the University of Texas Austin will work with
Professor Alan Marchand of the University of North Texas on a project in
bioanalytical chemistry supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program. This project aims to study and improve photodissociation methods in the
quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer for analysis of peptides and proteins. The
approach will be to complex the analyte species with metal ions and/or organic
ligands that will more effectively absorb photons from the photodissociation
laser and thus transfer sufficient energy to the analyte for fragmentation.
Optimization of photodissociation will also be explored for high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis. The proposed work combines the expertise
of Professor Broadbelt in mass spectrometry (MS) and ion chemistry, and
Professor Marchand in synthesis and macrocyclic chemistry. Prof. Brodbelt's
group has published extensively on the two building blocks of the proposed
research-first, photodissociation of organic and biological compounds, and
second, enhancement of ion activation (collision-induced dissociation) through
complex formation. The present work brings these two lines of research together,
and extends them to potential applications involving HPLC-MS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HPLC-MS analysis of peptides and proteins is an important
tool for proteomics, but would benefit from the improved ion activation
techniques explored here. The collaboration with Prof. Marchand, whose group
will synthesize novel ligands for complexation, allows cross training that will
be valuable for students in both the analytical chemistry and organic chemistry
groups.&lt;br/&gt;