* 0315961
* Coordinated Studies of the Reaction Dynamics for Isolated and Solvated Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Brooks Pate, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 405,645.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Brooks Pate of the University of Virginia will
investigate the reaction dynamics of isolated molecules and the way that
solvation changes this intrinsic behavior. A new experimental design for
ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy will be developed. By combining state-of-the-
art experimental techniques for gas and solution phase molecular spectroscopy,
this work bridges two of the major fields of physical chemistry: intramolecular
dynamics and solution chemistry. A major part of the project is to examine how
the solvent affects intramolecular vibrational coherence imparted to the system
by a laser pulse. These experiments will test the ability to manipulate the
vibrational motion and structure of isolated molecules through infrared (IR)
pulse sequences. With experiments conducted in solution it will be possible to
determine whether the coherence required for quantum manipulation is preserved.
A second goal of the project is the development of a new spectrometer for
measuring reaction kinetics using dynamical rotational spectroscopy
(DRS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumental development parts of this project
will broadly impact several areas of science and technology, such as
applications in the field of combustion kinetics, new approaches to measuring
the kinetics of molecular geometry change, and new tools to study the ability to
manipulate molecular properties through control of the quantum dynamics. This
work has potential applications in the fields of biophysical chemistry and
nanoscience. Students who participate in this research will gain valuable
experience in the design, construction and testing of new measurement equipment.
The students will also receive strong training in the fundamental concepts of
both time-domain and frequency-domain spectroscopy that will allow them to
appreciate the relative strengths of these complementary techniques.&lt;br/&gt;