* 0315194
* Collaborative Research:  Three-Dimensional Analysis of Dental Microwear in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Christopher Brown, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 05/31/2008
* USD 69,893.00

This project will develop a new, improved way to reconstruct the diets of past
humans and fossil animals using microscopic use-wear on their teeth. Recent
studies of living primates have shown associations between diet and patterns of
dental microwear. Microscopic use-wear has been found on the teeth of past
peoples and a broad range of extinct animals. Conventional approaches to
analyzing this wear have involved imaging tooth wear surfaces by scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), followed by counting and measuring individual wear
features on resulting photomicrographs. This approach has not been ideal,
because the SEM does not provide a true representation of tooth surfaces in
three dimensions, and because identification and measurement of individual
features is time-consuming, subjective and subject to high interobserver error.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent developments of white light confocal microscopy
and scale sensitive fractal analyses obviate these problems, promising a more
objective, repeatable, 3D characterization of dental microwear. The instrument
provides 3D coordinates representing surfaces at a resolution equivalent to that
used by most SEM microwear studies. Fractal analyses provide objective,
repeatable quantitative characterization of surfaces. A recent Major Research
Instrumentation grant (NSF BCS-0215830) has allowed us to purchase a white light
confocal microscope with scale sensitive fractal analysis software. This
proposal requests funds to adapt this technology for dental microwear analysis,
and to establish a baseline series of 3D microwear patterns for living primates
with known diets. This baseline will allow us to infer diets of past peoples and
extinct animals using microwear patterns on fossil teeth. This new approach will
eliminate major sources of error, and increase power to resolve differences
between species. Moreover, rapid surface characterization will allow examination
of large samples to assess variation within species and to make finer
distinctions between species. Further, because results are repeatable, it will
allow direct comparisons of data between researchers, promising a better
understanding of the lives of our distant ancestors, and other fossil species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as the SEM and quantification advanced microwear
studies 25 years ago, so too will confocal microscopy and metrological analyses
today. As with other scientific endeavors, the history of dental microwear
studies shows a feedback loop between research and technological innovation.
This repeatable, automated procedure will allow researchers to share data and
stimulate new uses of this technology. Our data for the extant baseline series
will be available on-line for all those interested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be coordinated from the University of Arkansas, and will involve
training and collaboration between students in Arkansas, Massachusetts, Maryland
and Pennsylvania. This project will support cutting edge research in the state
of Arkansas and bring a scientific research experience to students who are often
first generation college attendees. It will include technology training that
will prepare students from this geographically underrepresented group for
technology sector jobs. &lt;br/&gt;