* 0315934
* Probing Speciation and Structure of Cd(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II) with Multidentate Chelating Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Deborah Bebout, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 12/31/2007
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Deborah Bebout, Chemistry Department, College of William and Mary, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division for research into the chemistry of Cd(II), Hg(II) and Pb(II)
with multidentate chelating ligands. The speciation of Cd(II), Hg(II), and
Pb(II) complexes that model thermodynamically stable heavy metal coordination
environments in physiological environments will be investigated in solution by
NMR. Conditions for slow exchange on the chemical shift and coupling constant
time scales will be investigated with each metal-ligand pair. X-ray structures
and solid state NMR properties of selected complexes will be determined. The
solution- and solid-state NMR parameters will be correlated with structural
features for the development of structure-function relationships that can be
used to describe the behavior of these metal ions in biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of intense study, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the biological behavior of heavy metal ions are still
largely unknown. Since heavy metals are toxic, persistent, and accumulate in
ecosystems, an understanding of relevant heavy metal binding motifs is of
fundamental importance. Unfortunately, in natural systems heavy metals have
affinity for numerous binding agents. This study will systematize the behavior
of cadmium, mercury, and lead in systems that mimic those found in nature. The
results will provide basic information that will aid in the understanding of how
these metal ions react in the environment and in living systems. The project
will involve undergraduates and masters level students. A number of these will
be women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;