* 0315660
* Control of Drosophila (Fruit Fly) neural development and sexual behavior by the retained gene
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael McKeown, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 326,335.00

The relationship among behaviors, genes, neurons and neural function is of
interest to many people. Analysis of these interconnections involves choosing a
system amenable to study at multiple levels. The behaviors must be complicated
enough to be interesting, but still simple enough that progress can be made at
the level of nerves and genes. The behavioral system must have a significant
genetic component, and the organism must be tractable for classical and modern
genetic and molecular genetic analysis. Courtship and mating behavior in
Drosophila is one such system. Males and females have distinct sets of sexual
behaviors, with well-defined courtship rituals involving both set behavioral
patterns and variations based on interactions between individuals. In addition,
appropriate behavior involves input and appropriate processing of visual,
auditory, and olfactory information. Sexual differentiation and behavior are
under genetic control. The upstream genes in the regulatory cascade are well
characterized. This project focuses on the role of the retained gene in the
control of behavior and neural development. Retained-like genes are present in
vertebrates. Females lacking retained function resist normal male courtship and
generate male-like courtship of other females. Male behaviors are normal.
Retained is expressed in small numbers of nerves in the brain and in the
thoracic and abdominal portions of the central nervous system, as well as in the
photoreceptors of the eyes. The projection pattern of retained-expressing nerves
is altered in mutant animals. Results from these studies will determine which
portions of the retained-expressing nervous system contribute to various aspects
of behavior, thus mapping the nerves and the connections within the brain
involved in these behaviors and sub-behaviors, and will determine the regulatory
and neuronal linkages between retained and other genes involved in sexual
behavior and differentiation. This renders critical information on complexity
for generation of this and other behaviors. This project synergizes with the
Leadership Alliance (a national research opportunity program for
underrepresented students) to bring new students into biological science
research area.