* 0315072
* RUI: Functional Analysis of the C. elegans Winged-Helix Transcription Factor, LIN-31
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Leilani Miller, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 342,400.00

0315072&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIN-31 protein, a member of
the winged-helix family of transcription factors, is required for the proper
specification of vulval cell fates during C. elegans development. This protein
is believed to play two roles during development: (1) to promote vulval cell
fates (when phosphorylated by the signal transduction protein MAP kinase) and
(2) to promote non-vulval cell fates (when heterodimerized with another
transcription factor, LIN-1). This project aims to further investigate LIN-31's
role in cell fate specification during vulval development by continuing a
functional analysis of this multifaceted protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Specific Aims of this proposal are (1) Functional Analysis of the Winged Helix
Transcription Factor LIN-31 (site-directed mutagenesis experiments will assign
functions to different regions of the LIN-31 protein), (2) Identification of
LIN- 31::LIN-1 Heterodimerization Elements (co-immunoprecipitation experiments
will be used to determine if the acidic region of the LIN-31 protein is required
for heterodimerization with the LIN-1 protein, a known heterodimerization
partner), and (3) Identification of High-Affinity LIN-31 Binding Sequences (a
sequential selection technique will be used to identify oligonucleotides that
bind the LIN-31 DNA binding domain with high affinity--those sequences will then
be used to identify actual targets of the LIN-31 transcription
factor).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project is to
provide a better understanding of how gene regulation controls development by
advancing our knowledge of a transcription factor at the end of a signaling
cascade that determines cell fates. In addition, by identifying potential
targets of this transcription factor, the experiments described in this proposal
will also illuminate a part of the C. elegans vulval cell fate pathway that is
not well understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this project
include significant contributions to teaching, training and learning.
Undergraduate students will be an integral part of the project, involvement of
the P.I. in research will enhance her teaching, and training of a Teaching Post-
Doc will provide critical training in education and research, in addition to
enhancing the evolving "community of science scholars" at SCU. Furthermore, of
the 23 undergraduate students who have thus far conducted research in the P.I.'s
laboratory, 17 (74%) were women, most of which have gone on to post-graduate
programs. These numbers indicate established success in recruiting and educating
members of underrepresented groups. SCU also has a significant Latino
population, from which research students will continue to be
recruited.&lt;br/&gt;