* 0315670
* Acquisition of Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for Magnetic Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Harsh Chopra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 110,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) for
magnetic materials research and education at SUNY at Buffalo. The VSM equipment
is fully integrated and automated with high sensitivity. Current research
projects making use of the new equipment cover a broad range of magnetic
materials: giant magnetoresistance spin valves, exchange anisotropy films,
magneto-optical multilayers, giant magnetostriction thin films and multilayers,
magnetic shape memory alloy bulk, thin films, and multilayers, and materials for
ballistic magnetoresistance. These projects are of fundamental interest from the
viewpoint of the physics of magnetism, spin dependent electron transport and
spintronics. Research on these materials has broad technological applications in
the areas of ultra-high density data storage devices, magnetic sensors, optical
storage systems, and transducers for microsystems. This instrument will enhance
the broad goals of the university in nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of this basic tool for
routine magnetic characterization of materials at the university will provide
opportunities for research and also student training, education, and outreach
activities. The new VSM will also enhance collaborative research. Faculty are
active in student training, education, and outreach activities, with the
involvement of minorities and women. Continuing and expanding upon previous
activities, current efforts involve hands-on training for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. Outreach activities include a five-week
summer apprentice program for minorities and women students (typically 14-18)
from Buffalo-area inner city high schools, and laboratory experience for
undergraduates. Participating students will benefit from the VSM by learning to
use and understand the magnetic behavior of materials. In addition, other
researchers from SUNY-Buffalo pursuing research and education in magnetic
materials will have access to the use of the new equipment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;