* 0315903
* Survey of Anchialine Cave Fauna of the Bahama Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Thomas Iliffe, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

Anchialine (marine groundwater) caves of the Bahamas are inhabited by a diverse
but relatively unstudied fauna, offering considerable opportunity for discovery
of many new and ecologically significant organisms from potentially endangered
environments. Anchialine caves can be classified as extreme habitats due to
their total lack of light, limited food supply, low dissolved oxygen and unique
biogeochemical characteristics. The isolated nature of anchialine caves provides
long-term climatic and environmental stability unprecedented in other habitats,
with the possible exception of the deep sea. As such, many cave organisms are
primitive "living fossil" species that could provide insight into the origins,
evolution and dispersal of marine life. A series of diving-based expeditions
will explore and investigate the biodiversity of anchialine caves within the
Bahama Islands. The primary objective of this study is to identify and describe
the endemic, cave-limited fauna, particularly focusing on crustaceans. An
estimated 95% of Bahamian caves are biologically unstudied, while 40% of known
species have only been collected from single caves. Secondary objectives are to:
1) obtain specimens for genetic, microscopic, pharmacological and culture
investigations; 2) locate, explore and survey previously unstudied anchialine
cave systems; 3) establish chemical and physical profiles of cave water columns;
4) provide opportunities for US and Bahamian graduate and undergraduate
students; and 5) develop collaborative research and conservation projects with
public and governmental agencies. Since these habitats are only accessible to
scientists having a thorough knowledge of highly specialized cave diving
techniques, fundamental information on the composition of anchialine fauna is
lacking. Thus, this project will apply specialized diving techniques to access
an otherwise unknown habitat. Specimens will be collected using nets and traps,
while accompanying water properties will be measured electronically.
Identifications will be carried out by collaborating experts. &lt;br/&gt;This
project should result in the discovery and description of many new and highly
significant invertebrates, particularly crustaceans, from anchialine caves in
the Bahamas archipelago and will examine threatened, but still mostly unknown
cave-adapted animals, including primitive living fossils. Documentation of their
existence and significance will help policy makers decide what steps are
reasonable and appropriate to manage these populations and karst habitats in
general. Preliminary NSF-funded studies have discovered a diverse, endemic,
cave-adapted fauna including new genera, families and orders of crustaceans, but
only a tiny fraction of caves have been studied and much remains to be done.
Much of the work will be done by graduate students who will be trained in
collecting and sorting techniques as well as cave and scientific diving
procedures. A Bahamian graduate student will also assist with field work and
other aspects of the project. Collected data, photographs and video will be made
globally accessible on the project website at www.cavebiology.org. The PI's
research has been featured in 6 TV documentary films and he is regularly invited
to present talks at diving and other public forums. The PI has a strong record
of timely presentation and publication of his work.&lt;br/&gt;