* 0315227
* Transferred genes and endosymbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Sidney Pierce, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 581,000.00

Transferred genes and endosymbiosis&lt;br/&gt;Sidney K
Pierce&lt;br/&gt;University of South Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
transfer of functional genes between two organisms is the objective of gene
transfer therapy and the basis of genetic modification technology. Gene transfer
is also the theoretical foundation of the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria
and chloroplasts, is an important mechanism of evolution amongst prokaryotes and
has even been proposed as a major force in early biochemical evolution. Research
on gene transfer has included attempts to insert corrected genes to offset the
presence of defective genes to improve or cure various human diseases or to
change particular characteristics of crop plants, livestock or cell cultures by
transferring a novel or altered gene into host DNA. Much of this research has
involved the mechanical transfer of the gene of interest into the host cell, but
lately transfers using viral vectors have been developed. In eukaryotic systems,
most research has been focused on the mechanism of gene transfer between DNA
containing organelles and the nuclear genome, particularly from mitochondria in
higher plants. In spite of the significant progress that has been made, there is
only a little information about naturally occurring mechanisms of transfer of
genes between multicellular organisms. Virtually all information to date has
come from studies of transfers where at least one of the organisms is
prokaryotic. Discovering the mechanisms underlying the successful transfer of a
gene, as well as incorporation and expression of a foreign gene into a host cell
is essential to understanding both the process, as well as evolution, in
general. However, a major difficulty to studying gene transfer mechanisms is
finding a naturally occurring system where an obvious, successful, gene transfer
event has occurred.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators appears to have found two cases
where functional genes have been transferred between two organisms from two
eukaryotic kingdoms. Furthermore, the suspect genes are transmitted to
subsequent generations in the host cell lineage. This discovery came from a long
term investigation of a chloroplast symbiosis, an intriguing phenomenon in which
chloroplasts, usually from a specific species of alga, are engulfed by an animal
(or protistan) cell and continue to photosynthesize inside the host cell for a
period of time. We have been investigating such an association using two species
of ascoglossan sea slugs Elysia chlorotica and Elysia crispata. Using both
pharmacological and molecular techniques we have shown that at least one
chloroplast protein, fucoxanthin-chlorophyll binding protein (FCP) is
synthesized while the plastid resides in the cytoplasm of the slug cell and we
have found the FCP gene sequence in slug genomic DNA using southern blot
analysis. We have also developed similar evidence for several other plastid
proteins. These discoveries have led us to the hypothesis that genes coding for
chloroplast proteins have been transferred from the alga into the animal cell
genome. If the hypothesis is correct, transmission of genes between
multicellular species may be an important evolutionary mechanism and the sea
slugs will provide an excellent model system for determining the mechanisms
underlying the transfer of functional genes between multicellular organisms, as
well as explaining the endosymbiotic origin of cellular organelles. So, the
specific aims of this proposal are to determine the nature of the gene transfer
between these two multicellular species and begin to determine the possible
mechanism. Our experiments will rely on the resolving power of molecular biology
and electron microscopy to determine the nature of the molecular and cell
biology of the plastid-slug association. Comparisons between the two species of
slugs should add important information to the results.&lt;br/&gt;