* 0315434
* Perception and Action Systems in High-Level Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Arthur Glenberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* ping li
* 07/31/2007
* USD 779,001.00

Language conveys meaning but how so? At first the answer seems simple: One
person talks while the other listens, and then they exchange roles.
Understanding seems to boil down to the listener knowing the meaning of the
spoken words plus some rules of grammar. But that is not the whole story. To
understand language, people bring to bear memories of related interactions with
objects in their world and with other people. It is as though they imagine,
consciously or unconsciously, the situations described within the conversation-
successful understanding is more closely tied to successful imagination than to
grammatical analysis. With NSF-support, Dr. Arthur Glenberg will investigate
these characteristics of language and imagination. For example, to understand
the sentence "The strong wind caused the sailboat to capsize" may require a form
of imagination in which an imagined wind exerts enough force to tip over the
boat. This form of imagination may invoke the same processes of mind that would
understand the perception of a sailboat capsized by a strong wind. Dr. Glenberg
explores such possibilities using a newly developed procedure in which people
press a lever while reading sentences that imply force in the opposite or same
direction. The action of pressing makes it easier to read sentences that entail
force in the same direction, or harder to read for forces in the opposite
direction. This is interpreted as evidence that the same mental process is
tapped in language and perception. Additional research examines the application
of these ideas to languages other than English and to performance in non-
linguistic domains such as mathematics. Broader impacts of this research are
used to guide the design of reading remediation technologies and the creation of
new types of educational tools.