* 0315209
* Solvent Effects in Electron-Driven Chemistry of Adsorbed Halogenated Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Theodore Madey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2008
* USD 357,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0315209&lt;br/&gt;Madey/Rutgers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Madey and
his coworkers in the Rutgers University Department of Physics and Astronomy are
examining electron driven chemistry of halogenated molecules adsorbed on
surfaces and in thin films of water, ammonia, and other species. Emphasis on the
role of coadsorbed solvent molecules on mechanisms of reaction and rates of
reaction are being examined. Time of flight electron stimulated desorption ion
angular distribution (TOF-ESDIAD) measurements are used to characterized the
electron stimulated desorption and dissociation processes for halogenated
molecules in the presence of polar and non-polar solvent species in the
condensed thin films. Fundamental mechanisms by which the coadsorbate influences
electron induced reactions are examined. Information from these studies is
useful for understanding mechanisms of ozone depletion and environmental
remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical reaction processes driven by
electron irradiation are the focus of the research of Professor Madey and his
coworkers. By measuring the angular distribution of ion products of electron
irradiation of thin films and surfaces, information about the mechanisms of
desorption and decomposition of adsorbed halogen containing species is obtained.
This information is important in developing an understanding of environmental
and atmospheric chemical processes involving halogen containing molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;