* 0315809
* Acquisition of an Optical Image Furnace for Single Crystal Growth, Materials Research, and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* John Neumeier, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 142,723.00

This grant provides funds for the purchase of an Optical Image Furnace (OIF)
designed for highly controlled single crystal growth. Research in novel
transition metal oxides, piezoelectric materials, thin-film growth, and optical
materials will be immediately impacted by this acquisition. The furnace will be
used to synthesize single crystals of novel materials at the forefront of
science thereby allowing a determination of fundamental behavior of new
materials. This acquisition permits the evaluation of anisotropies, a search for
new thin-film substrates, and improvement of the performance of materials used
in resonant optical, spectral hole burning, and piezoelectric applications. The
Principal Investigator (PI) has extensive experience using an OIF and the
existing infrastructure at MSU compliments this acquisition as well. The PI
collaborates extensively, and the single crystals grown at MSU will be made
available to other scientists. A number of new uses for the OIF are discussed.
It is expected that anticipated close interaction with Scientific Materials
Corporation, a local company, will lead to new advances in single crystal
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activity are
significant. The OIF offers the following educational advantages: (1) the PI
will train a number of senior scientists in use of the device; (2) it will be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate research projects enabling students
to grow their own single crystals; and (3) it will be used for class laboratory
projects in undergraduate and graduate condensed matter physics allowing
students to grow, characterize, and orient single crystals in classes normally
devoid of laboratory work. The furnace will be utilized for single crystal
growth projects in the summer REU program, which targets Native Americans. It
will enhance the current infrastructure at MSU, plant the seeds for strong
partnerships with local companies, and provide a new user facility in the
Northwestern USA, expanding the technological infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;