* 0315090
* U.S.-Japan Joint  Seminar: Space Solar Power Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Tatsuo Itoh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

03150990&lt;br/&gt;Itoh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on space
solar power systems to be held in Kyoto, Japan from July 3-4, 2003. The co-
organizers are Professor Tatsuo Itoh at the University of California, Los
Angeles and Professor Hiroshi Matsumoto at Kyoto University in Japan. The
meeting will bring together research scientists from the U.S. and Japan, two
countries where important and exciting progress in this area of science is being
undertaken. The Space Solar Power Satellite (SSPS) project is a technology for
renewable sources of energy obtained by collecting the solar power in space,
transforming its energy into a high power microwave beam that is then directed
to the surface of the earth. On the ground this directed microwave beam is
rectified into DC power for delivery, storage and other use. Japan has also
created Solar Power Satellite projects both among industries and universities.
They have also been looking into various aspects of the SSPS, such as solar
cells, large scale space structures, microwave generation and transmission,
ground based rectennas, robotics, electrical propulsion, attitude control,
system design and operations, environmental effects, and economic impacts. These
study elements include both practical implementation issues and scientific basic
research issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the
best scientists to participate. The development of sustainable, renewable energy
supplies is an area where both the U.S. and Japan clearly have a very strong
common interest. Both countries are interested in developing alternatives to oil
and nuclear power. In addition, power beaming will require some international
agreements on the use of spectrum space between the countries to make it
possible. The seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve graduate
students as both participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with
Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own
work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the
seminar the organizers plan to provide conference proceedings on their UCLA
Microwave Electronics Laboratory Web page. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;