* 0315060
* North Cascades and Olympic Science Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2012
* Brad Smith, Western Washington University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,801,025.00

The North Cascades and Olympic Science Partnership (NCOSP) is a targeted Math
and Science Partnership involving Western Washington University, Everett
Community College, Northwest Indian College, Skagit Valley College, Whatcom
Community College, and 26 predominately rural school districts seeking to
improve science teaching and learning in both K-12 and higher education through
a focus on science education in grades 3-10. University scientists, supported by
curriculum and assessment reform specialists and master teachers, are creating,
implementing, and exploring innovative content and education courses for future
teachers and K-12 professional development models (both on-campus and building-
based) in the context of reform curricula. The Partnership Districts are
planning science programs, identifying and selecting research-based curriculum
materials aligned with state and national standards, creating a materials
support system to provide classroom ready materials, implementing classroom-
based assessments, preparing teachers to guide students in inquiry-centered
science instruction, and increasing administrative and community understanding
of the core curriculum.

Key components of the NCOSP include strategic planning to align curriculum to
standards, adoption of reform curriculum to enable students to succeed in
challenging courses, engaging superintendents and guidance counselors in
community support, and Principal Support. The Partnership is implementing a
three year Teacher Leadership Academy to produce a Teacher Leadership Cadre
consisting of building-based and district-level Teacher Leaders and university-
based Teachers on Special Assignments (TOSAs) who work as peers with science
faculty in designing the Teacher Leadership Academy, providing professional
development for District Leaders, reforming science methods courses, and
designing a science course sequence for elementary teachers. District partners
attend LASER Curriculum Showcases to assist in curriculum adoption decisions and
LASER Specialized Symposia are offered for principals, guidance counselors and
community members to generate support from key stakeholders. Principals
participate with Teacher Leaders in Teacher Leadership Academies. Preservice
reform is focusing on introductory science courses targeted for elementary
teachers and the alignment of preservice science curriculum with the needs of
K-12 districts, strengthening both science content and pedagogical knowledge and
the connections to reform curriculum used in the partner school districts. The
partner higher education institutions are implementing a common standards-based
yearlong undergraduate science course sequence for future elementary teachers.
Teacher preparation programs include field experiences in classrooms with
Teacher Leaders who are implementing research-based curricula. Teacher leaders
serve as mentors for student teachers and novice teachers. Teacher recruitment
strategies include scholarship support, future teacher clubs, and high school
teaching academies. A multidisciplinary group of science faculty, postdoctoral
fellows, and graduate students is conducting research on the goals of the
project, ultimately examining the impact of science faculty on curriculum
selection and implementation, teacher practice, and student learning. The
project expects to impact 72,000 students in grades 3 -12, 2,500 preservice
students, and 1,140 inservice teachers.