* 0315303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ritual Use of Checham Ha Cave, Belize: A Study of Changes in Ritual Practice Over Time Using GIS
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Ezra B. Zubrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The study of ritual in the archaeological record is a relatively new line of
inquiry that is undergoing theoretical and methodological development. Under the
supervision of Dr. Ezra Zubrow, Holley Moyes will analyze ritual deposits and
sediment profiles from Chechem Ha, an ancient Maya ceremonial cave located in
western Belize, Central America. The project seeks to understand changes in
ritual practice over time within the cave and to correlate these changes with
local and regional histories. This information is vital in understanding the
nature of cave ritual and its relationship to broader social, political, and
economic systems. Ultimately, the study will contribute to a growing body
knowledge that seeks to explain the function of ritual in social systems and the
relationship of ritual to ideology and power.

Chechem Ha is an important site for several reasons. Firstly, the cave is
unlooted. Although it has been opened for tourism, features and modifications
are still intact and sub-floor deposits are in good condition. Also, ritual use
of the cave spans the entire history of local occupation in the area. An early
radiocarbon date from test excavations showed that the cave is contemporaneous
with the earliest Maya occupations in Belize. Additionally the site contains a
number of specialty usage areas including a ritual sweatbath. A small stela
surrounded by a stone circle is located in a chamber deep within the cave as
well.

Preliminary analyses have indicated that different areas of the cave were used
at different time periods. This suggests that rituals conducted within the cave
changed over time. The project will assess these changes by evaluating: 1)
spatial components of the periodicity of use, 2) frequency of usage both locally
(activity loci) and globally (cave system), 3) feature construction/cave
modification and 4) the artifact assemblage. Use-frequency will be studied using
microstratigraphic analyses. Charcoal from torches used by the ancient Maya to
light the cave will be employed as a proxy for the amount of utilization.
Feature placement, modifications to the cave, and the artifact assemblage will
be correlated with these data to create a model of cave use that spans the
cultural history of the site. Results of the study will be displayed and
analyzed using a geographical information system (GIS). This way, it will be
possible to envision the way that the cave looked at different time periods.
Because events occurring in the cave will be well dated, it will be possible to
tie cave ritual to local and regional histories.

Work at Chechem Ha Cave impacts a broad community. The cave functions not only
as a major archaeological find of great antiquity, but also as an important site
for archaeological tourism in Belize. Archaeological inquiry contributes to the
Belizean goals of economic development via tourism by enhancing knowledge and
interest in archaeological sites. Research conducted at the site will be
disseminated not just to a professional community of archaeologists, but also to
the general public by means of the internet, the Belizean Department of
Archaeology, local tour guides, local schools and museums, and tourist
brochures.