* 0315717
* Physiological Genomics and Signal Transduction in the Ovary
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Kathleen Eyster, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 478,818.00

The cells of a multicellular organism must communicate with each other in order
to coordinate and integrate the functions of the organism such as metabolism,
growth, and reproduction. The language of this communication is chemical; cells
secrete chemicals that activate a cascade of reactions inside their target
cells. These cascades of reactions are called signal transduction pathways
because the extracellular signal is changed, that is, transduced, into an
intracellular signal. Cells must integrate signals from multiple chemicals;
signal transduction pathways interact intimately with each other to coordinate
this integration. This project will examine the interaction and integration of
signal transduction pathways in cells of the rat corpus luteum. The corpus
luteum, an endocrine tissue of the ovary, is an ideal model for these studies
because it undergoes a developmental cycle of growth, function, and regression
over a period of weeks. The hypothesis for this project is that the spread of
signal into multiple signal transduction pathways in the corpus luteum will vary
with stage of development and with changes in hormone exposure. The tools of
proteomics (two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Western blot, and mass
spectrometry) and genomics (DNA microarrays) will be used to analyze the genes
and proteins of the interactions of signal transduction pathways in the rat
ovary. &lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed with this project will be applicable
to studies of the interactions of signal transduction pathways in tissues other
than the ovaries. The data from this project will be presented at national
meetings and published in peerreviewed journals. Seminars on genomics and
proteomics will be presented at undergraduate institutions in the region.
Teaching resource information papers will be created and distributed at the
presentations. The goal will be to engage undergraduate students in discussions
about these cutting-edge technologies and to encourage students to participate
in research. &lt;br/&gt;