* 0315219
* Behavior of fluids in complex environments
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Arun Yethiraj, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 08/31/2006
* USD 354,000.00

Professor Arun Yethiraj, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, performs
research on the behavior of fluids in complex environments. Particular emphasis
is on developing computational models that enable investigation of vesicle
transport in living cells and protein separation in gels. The research depends
on an array of theoretical methods that include statistical mechanics, liquid-
state theory and computer simulation. The simulations rely on Monte Carlo and
molecular dynamical techniques. A strong cooperation with an experimental group
is underway to achieve direct comparison with measured results. A strong
outreach element, which aims to increase retention of undergraduate students is
closely coupled to the research objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Separation of
similar proteins is often achieved by taking advantage of small differences in
adsorption and transport through a medium such as a gel or polymer solution.
Similar physical interactions mediate the dynamics of proteins and dynamics in
crowded living cells. The optimal computational approach to modeling such
effects remains a challenge and requires the focused deployment of many
theoretical techniques, such as statistical mechanics and liquid-state theory,
coupled to the computational molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo methods. This
research extends techniques that are traditionally used for modeling polymers in
solution to similar problems that are biologically relevant. Such simulations
may enhance our understanding of how chemical processes enable signal delivery
to the nervous system and the endocrine system. More traditional technologies,
such as oil recovery, will be impacted by this work. A substantial undergraduate
outreach program is included in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;