* 0315946
* EF: Ecological Genetics of Host-Specific Species Formation
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Starmer, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 387,749.00

Ecological Genetics of Host-Specific Species Formation&lt;br/&gt;William T.
Starmer and Scott E. Erdman&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the research is to integrate
knowledge of the ecology and genetics of microorganisms in a single system to
understand the mechanisms responsible for formation of new species. The project
will focus on fungal speciation mechanisms and target two closely related yeast
species that live in different types of columnar cacti in the Sonoran Desert.
The two yeasts, within the Pichia amethionina complex, only live in rotting
stems of cacti and have close ecological associations with other cactus-specific
yeasts and drosophila. The two cactus types (Stenocereus and Pachycereus) differ
from one another in their stem chemistry. Earlier investigations have
demonstrated that an abundant natural product in the form of a triterpene
glycoside is found only in Stenocereus species and inhibits growth of one of the
yeast species, thus preventing it from growing in that cactus. Genetic studies
have shown the inhibition to be due to at least one gene difference between the
two cactus dwelling yeast species. A genome-wide knockout library of the common
baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisae is being employed by this project to
identify and study candidate genes that may be identical to the cactus-yeast
genes responsible for the species diversification in the Pichia amethionina
complex. In general, identification of candidate genes, in the whole genome,
provides information on potential physiological function when challenged with
the host chemicals and thus an overview of potential cellular effects
experienced by the yeast in the natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are four phases of the research: 1) Catalog all genes that can provide
resistance to the triterpene glycosides. This work will be done using modern
yeast genetic tools and knowledge of the genomics of S. cerevisae. 2) Determine
which genes in the catalog can confer resistance in the cactus-yeast. This work
will utilize insertional mutagenesis and expression vectors as tools. 3)
Determine which genes that can confer resistance actually do confer resistance
in nature. This work will use field surveys and standard laboratory genetic
crosses to find the actual genes responsible. 4) Discover the ecological reasons
(limits and constraints) that restrict the possible solutions to the actual
solutions found in nature. Ecological experimentation in the laboratory using
cactus tissue, drosophila, and associated yeasts will be used to find the
connection between the ecology and genetics responsible for the actual solution
and diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be significant to our
understanding of fundamental processes involved in the formation of new species.
Detailed molecular mechanisms in relation to ecological constraints will provide
a unique view of how microorganisms adapt to novel and exotic chemicals in their
natural environment and why some genetic solutions are employed more frequently
or with preference relative to others.&lt;br/&gt;