* 0315293
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Functional Specialization in Local Government: The Politics of Water Districts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Bruce Cain, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2005
* USD 9,300.00

This dissertation research support project asks whether isolating a public
function within a specialized policy arena affects the strategies and incentives
of political actors and influences policy outcomes. Looking at the proliferation
of special districts in American local governance, the Ph.D. student argues that
arena specification and multiplication produce a layering of decision-making
institutions, and that developers and other interested stakeholders enjoy a
procedural advantage in this kind of layered system. Groups with a concentrated
stake in policy outcomes will use electoral and lobbying strategies to capture
specialized venues. They then have an incentive to venue shop and shift
multidimensional disputes into the arenas that will deliver more favorable
decisions. Groups interested in more diffuse public benefits will follow an
investment strategy that focuses their resources on general purpose venues where
monitoring and information costs are lower and they can participate in multiple
issues. As more policy issues are resolved in special district venues,
concentrated benefits will win out over diffuse public aims. The capture of
special districts by interested stakeholders should affect distributional
patterns in service provision and long-term patterns of metropolitan
development. The dissertation focuses specifically on water districts in testing
hypotheses about the policy consequences of local government structure. It
addresses three empirical research questions: First, do water districts make
different policy choices, with benefits for different interests, than cities and
counties that provide water service? Second, to what extent have land use
disputes shifted into water district venues, and do the character of controversy
and the policy outcomes differ from those in general purpose government venues?
Third, what are the consequences of water district governance for the growth and
development of metropolitan areas over time? The student applies multiple
methods in answering these questions. Using datasets from the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the American Water Works Association, the student
undertakes statistical analyses of the revenue and expenditure policies of water
utilities to test whether special districts systematically favor different user
groups and prioritize different objectives than municipal water suppliers. The
student also will conduct interview-based case studies in four metropolitan
areas to examine the effects of institutional arrangements governing water on
the character and content of policy making in disputes over intergovernmental
cooperation and approval of new evelopment. Finally, spatial time-series
statistical techniques will be used to examine the rates and patterns of
development in the same metropolitan areas. The dissertation's empirical results
have broader benefits to society by demonstrating the linkage between water
provision and land use and explaining the adoption of conservation and growth
control measures.

