* 0315225
* Plant Iron Nutrition in Calcareous Soils: Are Arbuscular Mycorrhizas a Help or a Hindrance?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* David Janos, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2007
* USD 242,391.00

Plant iron nutrition in calcareous soils: are arbuscular mycorrhizas a help or a
hindrance?&lt;br/&gt;David P. Janos&lt;br/&gt;University of
Miami&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants, iron plays an important role in
chlorophyll synthesis, and iron-deficient plants display yellow leaves, reduced
photosynthesis, and limited growth. Iron deficiency is most likely to be found
in plants growing upon the approximately 20% of world soils that are rich in
calcium, because their high pH and presence of large amounts of calcium
carbonate restrict iron availability. Although native plant species of
calcareous soils may be adapted to low iron availability, crop species and non-
native trees often show serious iron deficiency on calcareous
soils.&lt;br/&gt;In natural vegetation, most plant species ensure their supply
of mineral nutrients, especially those that are relatively immobile in soil such
as phosphorus, zinc, and copper, by associating with generally beneficial root-
inhabiting fungi. Absorptive rootlets colonized by these fungi are called
"mycorrhizas", and their most prevalent type is designated "arbuscular" after
fungus structures formed within root cortical cells. Although iron too is
immobile in soil, the role of arbuscular mycorrhizas (AM) in plant iron
nutrition is ambiguous. Prior studies have reported either negative, none, or
beneficial effects of AM on iron acquisition depending upon soil pH,
temperature, and nutrient availability.&lt;br/&gt;Resolution of the role of AM
in plant iron nutrition may come from consideration of glomalin, a protein that
can contain up to 8.8% iron by dry weight, and which recently has been
discovered to be produced copiously by AM fungi. Whether iron can disassociate
easily from the protein to become available to plants, or whether iron is
sequestered unavailable to plants is not known. The general objective of this
research is to determine if glomalin sequesters sufficient iron in a calcareous
soil to adversely affect plant species intolerant of low
iron.&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims of the research are: 1) to isolate AM fungus
species from calcareous soils, to screen them for glomalin production, and to
determine if iron availability influences glomalin production, 2) to compare
high- versus low-glomalin AM fungus species effects on the growth of two iron-
sensitive, fruit tree species, Lychee (Litchi chinensis) and Star fruit
(Averrhoa carambola), and 3) to examine whether or not AM fungi and glomalin
inhibit the establishment of native Slash pine (Pinus eliottii) - which forms a
different type of mycorrhiza - in calcareous soil under native broadleaf
vegetation in South Florida.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will isolate species of
AM fungi from local soils, will compare them for glomalin production under
uniform conditions, and will examine if different concentrations of differing
iron sources affect glomalin production. Two high and two low glomalin-producing
AM fungus species will be tested for their ability to affect the iron nutrition
of Lychee and Star fruit plants. Finally, non-mycorrhizal Slash pine seedlings
will be planted in the field in containers designed to allow or to exclude AM
fungus colonization to see if they are inhibited.&lt;br/&gt;The plant species to
be investigated are economically important with Lychee and Star fruit accounting
for the 3rd and 9th most extensive acreages of tropical fruit in South Florida,
and Slash pine being an important fiber source. Overall, the research will
resolve ambiguity concerning arbuscular mycorrhiza effects on plant iron
nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;