* 0315745
* RUI:  Transition-Metal Templated Radical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Jeffrey Byers, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal addresses the feasibility of using radical processes to carry out
molecular transformations on several classes of organometallic complexes,
leading to the development of synthetic methodology to carry out transformations
that would otherwise prove difficult, if not impossible, using known reactions.
Benzene, normally unreactive toward simple alkyl radicals, will be activated
towards alkyl radical attack through complexation with transition metals,
leading to new methods for elaborating this simple substance into more complex
and useful materials. A systematic study of the radical reactions of
cyclobutadieneiron tricarbonyl, will provide new means of incorporating
cyclobutadiene in organic molecules in order to take advantage of its high
reactivity.

Organic molecules bearing an unpaired electron ("radicals") are frequently very
reactive. However, they do not react in a useful manner with certain types of
molecules, precluding the use of such reactions to assist in the synthesis of
more complex structures. With the support of a Research at Undergraduate
Institutions award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
Professor Jeffrey H. Byers, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at
Middlebury College, is exploring the feasibility of using interactions with
metal ions to facilitate such transformations. Benzene, one of the most common
feedstock chemicals, is normally unreactive with simple alkyl radicals. New
methods for activating benzene towards alkyl radical attack through use of its
complexes with transition metals will be explored, leading to new methods for
elaborating this very simple substance into more complex and useful materials.
Cyclobutadiene is so unstable that it only exists in the free state under the
most exotic of conditions. It has been known to exist in a stable and readily
handled form upon complexation with iron tricarbonyl. While this molecule has
piqued the curiosity of organic chemists for over 35 years, it has been used
only sparingly in complex synthesis, in part due to the lack of methods for its
subsequent elaboration into more complex and useful substances. By examining the
radical reactions of cyclobutadieneiron tricarbonyl, Professor Byers, working
with a team of undergraduate research students, will explore new means of
incorporating cyclobutadiene in organic molecules in order to take advantage of
its high reactivity. Since transition metal-catalyzed and radical processes are
of exceptional importance to the chemical industry, this work could open up new
avenues for the efficient generation of complex molecules of broad applicability
and importance.