* 0315976
* CONFERENCE: Support of Student Attendees at the Eleventh International Conference on Narrow Gap Semiconductors being held in Buffalo, NY, June 16-20, 2003.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2003
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 10/31/2003
* USD 3,500.00

We are seeking financial support for the Eleventh International Conference on
Narrow Gap Semiconductors (NGS-11), which will be held in Buffalo, New York,
June 16 - 20, 2003 on the campus of the University at Buffalo, the State
University of New York (SUNY). Specifically, we would like to request $3,500 to
support student attendance at NGS-11. We will strongly encourage the
participation of talented young students from under-represented groups such as
women, minorities, and the disabled.

The United States has not hosted a NGS Conference since 1995 and it will be very
good to bring back this major international conference to this country to expose
our researchers to frontier research in this area. Previous NGS Conferences were
held in Dallas, U.S.A. (1970), Nice, France (1973), Warsaw, Poland (1977), Linz,
Austria (1981), Gaithersburg, U.S.A. (1989), Southampton, U.K. (1992), Santa Fe,
U.S.A. (1995), Shanghai, China (1997), Berlin, Germany (1999), and Kanazawa,
Japan (2001).

This conference will bring together experts to discuss recent advances and
discoveries in the science and technology of narrow gap semiconductors and low
frequency excitations in semiconductors. Materials systems of primary interest
are: 6.1 A III-V semiconductors (InAs, GaSb, AlSb and their alloys), InSb-based
alloys and heterostructures (e.g., InSb, InAlSb, InAsSb), ferromagnetic narrow-
gap III-V semiconductors (e.g., InMnAs, GaMnSb), II-VI narrow-gap semiconductors
(e.g., HgCdTe), II-VI/III-V heterostructures such as CdMnSe/InAs, lead salt (IV-
VI) materials and heterostructures (e.g., PbSe, PbTe, PbSe/PbEuSe, PbTe/PbEuTe).

In addition to crystal growth/fabrication methods and studies, the program will
also cover a broad range of physical phenomena and device applications,
including: spin-related effects, infrared sources/detectors, gigahertz and
terahertz phenomena and devices, hybrid structures combining semiconductors with
superconductors or ferromagnetic metals, mesoscopic phenomena, hot carrier
transport, quantum Hall effect, intersubband transitions, and Landau level
spectroscopy.

The Organizing and Program Committee consists of members who have strong on-
going research programs on narrow gap semiconductors. Invited speakers will
include many of the best researchers in this field, both from fundamental and
applied research areas, including experimentalists and theorists. In addition,
Prof. Emmanuel I. Rashba (University at Buffalo, SUNY) and Prof. Herbert Kroemer
(University of California, Santa Barbara), two distinguished physicists in this
area, have agreed to give the plenary talks of the Conference.

During this five-day conference, we plan to have about 15 invited talks and 60
contributed talks as well as approximately 100 posters. We anticipate
approximately 200 participants. There will be no parallel sessions. The
Conference does not have any time overlap with other conferences devoted to
similar topics, and we expect that all the key speakers will be able to come.
The requested funding of $3,500 will be used entirely for supporting student
participants: partial transportation for selected graduate students. We plan to
select seven students with an average support of $500 per student. The students'
reports will be included in the final report.