* 0315794
* Acquisition of and Student Training for Low Temperature STM for Analysis/Fabrication of Single Site Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Ivan Schuller, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 333,465.00

This grant supports the purchase of a low temperature scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) that will be used for investigations of defects and bonding
sites in electronic and sensor materials. The low temperature STM provides a
zero drift environment in which isolated molecules do not diffuse. In this
quiet, stationary environment, the local electronic structure of single defects
or bonding sites can be determined using current-voltage (dI/dV) measurements.
The specific systems that will be studied with this instrument include: (a)
defects at the semiconductor/gate oxide interface; (b) polysilole-based nanowire
sensors; (c) halogen reactions with aluminum; (d) mixed, asymmetric metal
phthalocyanine-based chemical sensors; and (e) fabrication of ordered arrays of
single macromolecular assemblies. With the advent of commercial software (VASP)
for calculating the electronic structures of molecules on surfaces, low
temperature STM and STS studies can be directly compared to both simulated STM
images and the partial density of states on single atoms. This comparison
provides critical insights into the control of electronic structure on surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will have impact on a broad audience at
the university. (a) The San Diego Fellowship program for entering graduate
students: UCSD is donating 3 months of support for 4 entering graduate students.
These fellowships will be used to support graduate students to increase the
diversity of the chemistry and physics graduate programs. (b) Undergraduate
research: Undergraduate students will be involved in the proposed research via
the Howard Hughes Undergraduate Enrichment Program (HHUEP) and the UCSD Office
of Academic Enrichment. (c) UCSD-TV and webcasts: Lectures that are appropriate
for high school and college students will be recorded for both broadcast and
webcast by the UCSD-TV education outreach program. (d) Teacher training: The
funds support one high school science teacher per summer to work in a research
laboratory at UCSD. The teacher will have the opportunity to learn how to use
the telemetry system developed at the UCSD National Center for Microscopy and
Imaging Research (NCMIR). The NCMIR facilities house an electron microscope that
can be remotely controlled via the web, enabling teachers and students to use
the SEM directly from their classrooms. (e) Industrial collaborations: The low
temperature STM will be used in collaborative research projects that focus on
device and sensor development and involve Motorola, Microsense, and IBM.
&lt;br/&gt;