* 0315330
* Influence of Cholesterol on Phase Behavior and Nonrandom Mixing of Membrane Components
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Gerald Feigenson, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2008
* USD 898,307.00

The goal of this project is to study the thermodynamic basis for nonrandom
mixing in lipid bilayers that model biomembranes. The project has four main
conceptual elements: (i) 3-component bilayer lipid mixtures serve as models for
the outer and the inner leaflets of mammalian plasma membranes. These
3-component mixtures are sufficiently complex to model real biomembranes, yet
are chemically well-defined; (ii) Several independent, complementary methods are
used to thoroughly map and characterize the compositional phase behavior of
these model membranes; (iii) Real biomembranes are asymmetric: model bilayers
that are also asymmetric will be studied in order to bridge the gap between the
chemically-simple models and real biomembranes; (iv) Behavior of the plasma
membranes of living cells, including the nature membrane rafts, will be
investigated by the methods developed in the model systems and analyzed in terms
of the phase diagrams obtained for the model systems. Experimentally, this work
involves large data sets of fluorescence resonance energy transfer and perylene
excimer/monomer measurements to find the lipid phase boundaries and the
partition behavior of fluorescent probes. Confocal fluorescence microscopy will
be used to visualize and identify coexisting phases. New procedures will be
developed in order to prepare asymmetric lipid bilayers.

Cholesterol is the single most abundant lipid species in mammalian plasma
membranes. Nonetheless, the way cholesterol interacts with neighboring membrane
molecules has remained obscure. Cholesterol is known to mix nonrandomly with
other membrane lipids, and yet in most cases a clear understanding is missing
for the lateral distribution of cholesterol, and the way cholesterol influences
the lateral distribution of other membrane components. A current picture of
nonrandom mixing in biomembranes, the "raft model" of cholesterol-rich patches
floating within a cholesterol-poor bilayer, is likely to be improved by this
research project. In addition, in order to promote scientific education and
training, a group of undergraduate students will receive lectures in lipid
physical chemistry and fluorescence spectroscopy, followed by systematic
training in lipid analytical chemistry, lipid organic synthesis, and
spectroscopic and microscope techniques, which they will then use in their
assigned independent research.

