* 0315963
* PBI: All Catfish  Species (SILURIFORMES) -- Phase 1 of an Inventory of the Otophysi
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Lawrence Page, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2009
* USD 4,745,087.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Larry Page, Florida Museum of Natural History,
Drs. John Lundberg and Mark Sabaj, Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
Dr. Carl Ferraris, California Academy of Sciences, Dr. Jon Armbruster, Auburn
University, and Dr. John Friel, Cornell University, to inventory and describe
the global diversity of catfishes. Catfishes are an extremely diverse,
ecologically significant, and commercially important group of fishes. The group
presently contains 2,734 recognized species, or one of every four species of
freshwater fish. However, catfishes are most diverse in the least-explored parts
of the world, and the actual number of catfish species is probably between 3,600
and 4,500. A team of 201 participants from 31 countries, including 57 students,
has been assembled to discover and describe all undescribed species of catfishes
within a five-year period. Products of the ALL CATFISH SPECIES INVENTORY will
include a completed taxonomy with identification guides and regional checklists
of species, studies of higher-level relationships and an improved predictive
classification, large samples of fishes from poorly collected regions added to
institutional collections, and a website (http://clade.acnatsci.org/allcatfish)
for the dissemination of information to scientists, educators, policy makers,
and the general public. The project also will result in the education and
professional training of many of the next generation of fish systematists.
&lt;br/&gt; Degradation of freshwater ecosystems is severe in many parts of the
world, and aquatic species are among the most endangered. At the same time,
catfishes have huge economic value and are fished around the world for human
consumption, recreation, and the pet trade. Worldwide capture of freshwater and
marine catfishes in 2000 exceeded 500,000 metric tons. Conservation biologists
and fisheries managers depend on accurate identifications and distributional
information for prioritizing areas for protection and for making informed
management policies. Knowing all species and higher-level relationships in a
group as diverse and widespread as catfishes will offer unprecedented
opportunities for aquatic ecosystem management and protection, and research in
evolution, ecology and conservation biology. &lt;br/&gt;