* 0315684
*  A New Class of Pseudouridine Synthases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Arun Malhotra, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2007
* USD 369,965.00

Pseudouridine is the most common modified nucleoside in RNA, and evidence for
pseudouridine synthases, the enzymes that make pseudouridine from uridine, have
been found in the most ancient of organisms. Currently, no organism is known
without putative pseudouridine synthases. Up to now, all pseudouridine synthases
could be grouped into four families, three of which are closely related by amino
acid sequence homology, and one which is more loosely related. The principal
investigator of this project recently discovered a novel class of pseudouridine
synthases with no amino acid sequence homology to the previously known ones.
There are so far 59 members of this class distributed among all phyla including
ancient organisms. Only one of these 59 proteins had a previously known
function. The E. coli representative (TruD) of this new class will be studied by
the following three approaches.&lt;br/&gt;(1) Since the amino acid sequence of
TruD bears no relationship to known pseudouridine synthases, three of which have
had their crystal structures determined, determination of the structure of TruD
and a TruD-substrate complex by X-ray crystallography will be done in order to
directly determine how the enzyme folds and how the active site is constructed
using an alternative set of amino acids from that in conventional pseudouridine
synthases.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Determination of the sequence and secondary structure
requirements of the tRNA or tRNA fragment substrate for TruD in solution will be
done by making mutant versions of the substrate and analyzing for pseudouridine
formation and for complex formation with the synthase. These results will
complement the static structural information to be obtained from the X-ray
structure of TruD-substrate complexes.&lt;br/&gt;(3) The functional role of TruD
and its product, pseudouridine 13 in tRNA, will be addressed using genetic and
physiological experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project
provides an outstanding opportunity for training graduate students in
multidisciplinary research involving genetics, biochemistry and crystallography.
The project will use this opportunity creatively in research training at
different levels.