* 0315888
* RUI:  G Protein-Coupled Receptor Kinase 2:  Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Rachel Sterne-Marr, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 09/30/2008
* USD 335,211.00

Individual cells of the body communicate with each other via hormones and
neurotransmitters that are produced by one cell and then act on a target cell.
The interaction of the hormone or neurotransmitter with a specific receptor sets
off a signaling cascade within the cell. An essential mediator is a molecule
called a G protein that interacts with both receptor and downstream signaling
molecules leading to a response that is specific to the cell type. For example,
when we are frightened, adrenalin is released into the bloodstream and it acts
on target cells in the heart resulting in an increase in heart-rate. The
appropriate intensity and duration of the signal are so important that multiple
mechanisms have evolved which modulate such a signal. One mechanism of signal
modulation involves hormone-induced inactivation of the receptor by a specific
protein called G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2). Thus, GRK2 blocks the
signal initiated by adrenalin and allows the cell to return to a basal state so
that it can appropriately respond to the environment. Although GRK2 was first
identified by its ability to modulate signaling by the adrenalin receptor, it is
now known that GRK2 regulates many receptors, called G protein-coupled
receptors, and these receptors in fact represent the largest class of proteins
in the human genome. Furthermore, in addition to altering the receptor, GRK2
also binds the G protein. Thus, GRK2 "multi-tasks" to regulate hormone
signaling. The goal of this project is to understand how GRK2 carries out
hormone-stimulated functions such as inactivation of the receptor and
interaction with the G protein. Since the shape of GRK2 is known in atomic
detail, public databases and the literature can be used to predict, for example,
how GRK2 interacts with receptors. The next step is to use molecular biological
techniques to substitute individual amino acids to assess which portions of GRK2
are important for receptor interaction. &lt;br/&gt; These studies will not only
provide insight into the mechanism of receptor regulation by GRK2 but also
define a mechanism of activation for this novel family of proteins. Defining
receptor recognition sites will ultimately lead to the rational design of GRK2
inhibitors that may have therapeutic value. This project will be carried out at
a predominantly undergraduate institution and will allow many students to
participate in modern structural, molecular and cellular research. Extensive
collaborations with investigators at research-intensive universities will ensure
the infusion of the latest technology and this will be reflected in the cell
biology, molecular biology and biochemistry curricula at this small liberal arts
college. The principal investigator will maintain a strong record of engaging
undergraduates in research (especially those from under-represented groups), and
producing career scientists. &lt;br/&gt;