* 0315469
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Historical Inference in the Emberizinae (Aves: Passeriformes) Using a Complete Species-Level Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Klicka, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 89,947.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott Lanyon and Dr. Keith Barker at the
University of Minnesota, Dr. Kevin Burns at San Diego State University, Dr. John
Klicka at the University of Nevada-Las Vegas, and Dr. Irby Lovette at Cornell
University to examine DNA sequences from over 800 bird species. These species
(including blackbirds, tanagers, warblers, and sparrows) are among the best
studied birds in the world and yet evolutionary relationships within this group
remain controversial or in some cases completely unknown. The investigators will
examine DNA sequence data from nearly all of the 824 species in this diverse
group which represents nearly one-tenth of modern bird species. The resulting
piece of the tree-of-life will provide information that will be essential to
future studies of the morphologies, behaviors, and distributions of western
hemisphere songbirds. This increase in our knowledge of the origins of bird
diversity will also be of importance to general studies of the biodiversity of
the western hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species in this group of birds are
ecologically and economically important, and understanding the group's history
will stimulate and inform future research and management. This group includes
everything from important crop pests to critically endangered species.
Furthermore, these birds represent a huge percentage of the diversity enjoyed by
everyone from backyard feeder enthusiasts to serious birders. Birding is one of
the fastest growing leisure-time activities in the United States with 70.4
million participants and in excess of $14 billion dollars in related
expenditures annually. This project, focused as it is on many of the most common
and easily observed bird species in the US, represents an ideal opportunity to
engage the public in a discussion about the Tree of Life. The participating
institutions will generate such discussions through their existing education
programs that communicate the importance and relevance of current research to
the community at large. &lt;br/&gt;