* 0315510
* RUI:     Enhancing Undergraduate Chemical Education Through Research:     The Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Unusual Carbenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Dasan Thamattoor, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Carbene-like products obtained from nitrogen-containing precursors may in fact
come from the excited state of the precursors themselves. In addition, many
nitrogenous precursors can be hazardous to handle or may simply not be
synthetically available to generate carbenes of interest - e.g., a convenient
and widely applicable method of generating a-hydroxycarbenes is currently
unavailable. This proposal describes an undergraduate-oriented research program
designed to study unusual carbenes generated from various cyclopropanated
aromatics instead of conventional sources such as diazo compounds and
diazirines. These non-nitrogenous precursors provide a safe, viable, and
alternative route to carbene generation. Specific projects include the
investigation a-hydroxycarbenes and novel heterocyclopropylcarbenes (including
oxiranyl- and aziridinyl carbenes) and the generation of a-ketocarbenes to
address key mechanistic issues in Wolff rearrangement processes. Electron spin
resonance spectroscopy, time-resolved laser flash photolysis, and advanced
computational methods will be brought to bear on the investigations as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With this Research at Undergraduate Institutions
Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research of
Professor Dasan M. Thamattoor, of the Department of Chemistry at Colby College.
Professor Thamattoor and his students are exploring, via theory and wet
chemistry, the preparation, structure, and reactivity of unusual electron-
deficient species known as carbenes. These unusual species play central roles in
a wide variety of chemical processes, and development of a detailed
understanding of their structure and reaction chemistry will lead to the
development of better predictive tools for the control of chemical reactivity.
Whereas other routes to some of the targeted carbenes are known, Professor
Thamattoor's studies address serious questions about the structure and
reactivity of the carbenes generated via these other routes, and in addition
offer promise for the generation of new, previously unavailable carbenes.
Through a partnership with the Maine Research Internships for Teachers and
Students (MERITS) program, Professor Thamattoor will enhance the educational
experience provided by this research program by including high school teachers
and students.