* 0315377
* Collaborative Research: Developmental and Receiver-Dependent Costs of Avian Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Stephen Nowicki, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 334,474.00

Collaborative research: Developmental and receiver-dependent costs of avian
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Nowicki &amp; William A.
Searcy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in the study of animal
communication is why signals provide reliable information, especially in cases
where the signaler has different interests from the receiver. Theory suggests
that signals may be reliable if they are in some way costly. The proposed
research applies this theory to a well studied signaling system,
birdsong.&lt;br/&gt; Female songbirds use male song to judge the quality of
prospective mates. The "nutritional stress hypothesis" proposes that the costs
of song development produce a reliable link between a male's song and his
quality as a mate. Because song development is costly, any male experiencing an
early stress such as food shortage will produce both poor song and a poor
overall phenotype, making song quality a reliable measure of overall quality.
Previous work has shown that early nutritional stress has a negative impact on
the development of the brain areas that control song, on the ability of males to
learn songs, and on other aspects of adult phenotype such as body size. The
proposed research will extend this work in three ways. First, it will test
whether early nutritional stress affects a male's vocal performance, that is his
ability to sing songs that are physically challenging to produce. Second, the
research will test whether early stress affects the quality of the immune system
of adult birds, a trait that should be of special interest to females. Third,
the research will ask whether early stress also affects the development of song
preferences in females.&lt;br/&gt; Song also serves as an aggressive signal
between competing males. In this context, signal reliability may be maintained
by costs imposed by the aggressive response of receivers. Signals can reliably
predict escalation if those signals also elicit the most aggressive response by
receivers. Previous work shows that "soft songs" (songs produced very quietly)
reliably predict aggression on the part of the signaler. The proposed research
will test whether soft song also is likely to provoke an aggressive response
from receivers, as theory suggests. Second, research will test whether soft song
reduces the ability of third party individuals to gain information from an
interaction. Third, the proposed research will investigate how patterns of
signal matching contribute to signaling in aggressive interactions.&lt;br/&gt;
The proposed research integrates theory and data concerning animal signaling
systems and mate choice with testable hypotheses about the development of brain
and behavior. This area has proven to be an effective platform for recruiting
and training women and minority scientists, and for disseminating the process of
how science is done to the general public. An interactive website will be
developed to allow students in grades 6-12 to simulate playback and learning
experiments with songbirds.&lt;br/&gt;