* 0316002
* Development of Methods for Rapid Proteomic Analysis Using Accurate Mass Measurement
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* I. Jonathan Amster, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2007
* USD 405,000.00

Professor Jonathan Amster of the University of Georgia is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to develop new methods for
quantitatively analyzing changes in protein expression in biological systems.
The goal is to be able to analyze all proteins in a mixture simultaneously, thus
providing a substantial reduction in analysis time and effort. Mixtures of
proteins will be enzymatically digested, separated by liquid chromatography and
analyzed by high resolution mass spectrometry. Proteins in the original mixture
will be identified from their proteolytic fragments by using the accurate mass
data. "Mass defect labeling" is being invented as a way to increase the
specificity of the assignment. The mass defect tags shift the peptide mass to a
"clear" region of the m/z plot where they can be easily distinguished from
nearby untagged peaks. Several novel reagents are proposed and are being
synthesized as part of the project. Additional experiments will explore the use
of endogenous labeling with a stable isotope in concert with the use of mass
defects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work represents a high throughput approach to
the analysis of the proteome, meaning the library of proteins expressed by an
organism. In addition, the work will impact other arenas of mass spectrometry
including environmental and biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;