* 0316785
* Biochemical Compatibility In Sinorhizobium-Medicago Symbiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Kirby Hayes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2007
* USD 365,000.00

Molecular signaling is essential for the establishment of legume-rhizobia
symbiosis, and specific structural features of signal molecules may determine
symbiotic compatibility. This project focuses on ecotype-strain compatibility in
Medicago truncatula-Sinorhizobium meliloti interactions. Wild-type S. meliloti
strains NRG185 and NRG34 infect M. truncatula ecotype A17 (compatible), but fail
to establish nitrogen-fixing nodules on ecotype A20 at 28 days post infection
(incompatible), and the phenotypes are reversed with S. meliloti strains NRG247
and Rm41. Previous research showed that compatible infection is dependent on
bacterial extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) production, suggesting that
different ecotypes of M. truncatula have different structural requirements for
oligosaccharide activity, and a correlation between EPS oligosaccharide
structure and the host specificity of the bacterial strain was identified. The
primary objective of the project is to determine the structural requirements for
EPS oligosaccharide activity in the compatible infection of M. truncatula A17
versus A20 (i.e., to determine the structural basis for compatibility in each
host plant), which will be accomplished by extensive purification and analysis
of the oligosaccharides produced by strains NRG185 and Rm41. The purified
oligosaccharides will then be applied to "rescue" experiments with EPS mutants
and incompatible strains, to determine structure/function relationships in
compatible interactions. Finally, the EPS (exo) gene cluster from strains NRG185
and Rm41 will be cloned and sequenced for comparison, and strains producing
heterologous EPS will be constructed for compatibility analyses. M. truncatula
is the subject of a genomic project for the study of plant-microbe interactions,
so the identification of specific signal-molecules can be followed by an
analysis (at the genetic level) of the plant response to compatible and
incompatible infection. The project also includes elements that broaden the
impact of the work: First, undergraduates and rural Indiana high school students
will participate in the research (the plant assays), and summer workshops will
be held to introduce urban high school students to research at Purdue. Second,
the three year study will coincide with a program to build an NMR facility in
the Purdue University School of Agriculture (NMR is the principal tool for
oligosaccharide structural analysis), which will result in educational and
research benefits for students and researchers throughout the School. Third, the
results of the project will be disseminated in a website, which will have links
to relevant biochemical information and structural features of the plants and
bacteria.

Nitrogen deficiency is a prime limitation to the growth of agricultural plants
in the field; however, legumes, such as soybean and alfalfa, form a symbiotic
association with specific bacteria that results in the production of utilizable
nitrogen compounds. More than 200 million metric tons of "fixed" nitrogen are
added to the earth's agricultural fields each year from this process. Plant-
microbe symbiosis involves considerable developmental regulation and molecular
signals control the progress of the association: First, bacterial compounds
induce the development of small appendages (nodules) on the roots of the host
plants, and then the nodules are occupied by the bacteria via a complex
infection process, which is promoted by distinct bacterial products. This
project involves a study of the bacterial signal molecules that are required for
the early stages of infection, and the results should provide insight into
general mechanisms in bacterial infection.

