* 0316896
* Molecular Dynamics and Monte Carlo Simulations of Classical and Quantum Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Bruce Berne, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2006
* USD 810,000.00

Professor Bruce Berne is supported by the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to perform research in the area of molecular dynamics and
Monte Carlo simulations of classical and quantum systems. Efforts are
concentrated on developing accurate polarizable force fields that determine how
various aqueous solutions effect chemical reactions, solvation dynamics,
spectral line shapes and energy transfer from both classical and quantum-
mechanical viewpoints. Implementation will be accomplished by combining the
principle of electronegativity equalization and the dipole polarizability model.
Parallel to this work will be the continued improvement of the maximum entropy
method. Specific problems being addressed with these techniques include
simulation of ionic liquids, molecular overlayers on solid surfaces, and
hydrophobicity.

Ionic liquids represent a class of environmentally friendly solvents that can
eventually replace many of the chemically aggressive counterparts currently used
in industrial processes. Biologically relevant processes are different in vivo
due to the interaction between the biomolecules and the aqueous solution. A
theoretical problem, common to the computational description of environmentally
friendly solvents and biomolecular processes, is the need to efficiently and
accurately describe electrostatic interactions between the molecules of primary
interest and the solvent that contains these molecules. Work supported here
addresses the underlying theoretical and algorithmic questions associated with
solvation energetics and simultaneously tests the resulting polarizable force
fields on green solvents and other systems of technological interest.

