* 0316466
* Single Molecule Spectroscopy Studies of the Nanoscale Properties of Microporous/Mesoporous Silicate Films Prepared by the Sol-Gel Process
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Daniel Higgins, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2007
* USD 307,000.00

Professors Daniel Higgins and Maryanne Collinson of Kansas State University are
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to study microporous
silicate thin films prepared using the sol-gel process using single molecule
spectroscopy. These include inorganic silicates, organically modified silicates
(ORMOSILS) and silicate films containing surfactant-templated mesopores. These
materials are being used to develop new catalytic supports, chemical sensors,
and chemical separations media. Important film properties to be explored include
local diffusion rates of entrapped molecules, the local pH and site-specific
variations in the pKa's of acidic surface groups, such as silanols, and
intrinsic local polarity of the silicate matrix. Time- and frequency-resolved
optical work utilizing pH-sensitive flurophores is a key approach. These studies
will also allow the exploration of phase separation of inorganic and organic-
rich domains. Single molecule methods are required in these studies because the
materials are highly heterogeneous, and averaging over sites as in bulk
spectroscopy does not allow one to quantify types of similar
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This impact of this work lies in materials
chemistry, chemical separation, catalysis, and sensor development.
Characterization of the chemical sites within the material can lead to more
rugged and better performing materials. Applications include environmental
engineering and energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;