* 0316836
* Reactions of Highly Excited Molecules:  From Supercollisions to Super-reactions?
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Amy Mullin, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2006
* USD 417,600.00

Amy Mullin of Boston University is supported by the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to carry out studies aimed at elucidating the behavior and
underlying principles that govern collisional and reactive processes of highly
excited polyatomic molecules in the gas phase. Experimental studies will use
pulsed UV nanosecond absorption, followed by rapid radiationless decay, to
prepare highly vibrationally excited benzene-like molecules with internal
energies ranging from 15,000 to 45,000 wavenumbers. High-resolution transient
infrared absorption probing will be employed to monitor energy gain in collision
partners or the appearance of reaction products. Project plans are to (1)
investigate the energy dependence of collisional relaxation in excited azulene,
(2) discover how internal energy content in relatively small excited molecules
such as carbon disulfide influences collisional quenching dynamics, (3) explore
how electrostatic interactions influence collisional relaxation of high-energy
molecules by measuring energy gain in ammonia, (4) investigate the role of
internal energy on hydrogen and deuterium abstraction reactions of high-energy
molecules, (5) determine the ways in which exchange reactions of high-energy
molecules compete with collisional energy transfer in water and deuterated water
baths, and (6) perform classical trajectory calculations to aid in interpreting
the experimental findings.

Activated molecules play important roles in chemistry and biochemistry at almost
every level. Molecules containing large amounts of energy are usually the most
reactive species and hence are among the most important for determining the
chemistry of thermal environments. This situation is especially true for high
temperature processes involved in atmospheric, plasma, and combustion chemistry.
The fundamental insights to be gained in this research may lead to cleaner, more
efficient, and safer applications in these areas. Along with the education of
graduate students, this project gives undergraduates and high school students
important opportunities to participate directly in the state-of-the-art
scientific research.