* 0316418
* RUI: Body Size, Limb Posture and Muscle Strain During Terrestrial Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Gary Gillis, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 201,486.00

RUI: Body Size, Limb Posture and Muscle Strain During Terrestrial
Locomotion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gary B. Gillis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mount
Holyoke College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quadrupedal mammals that differ greatly in
size generally adopt distinct limb postures during locomotion. Small animals use
a crouched posture with their limbs held more flexed while large animals use a
more upright posture with their limbs held relatively straight. Despite our
understanding of this scaling of limb configuration, we know little about how
such postural differences influence the actions of homologous limb muscles in
animals of varying size. Indeed, we have little appreciation for the in vivo
behavior of quadrupedal mammalian limb muscles more generally; for no animal are
actions of a hip, knee and ankle extensor well understood for any gait. The
proposed work involves studying patterns of length change and activation in
major hindlimb muscles of select mammalian species that differ widely in size.
Two experimental approaches will be used to explore how body size and limb
posture affect limb muscle function during locomotion. First, using
sonomicrometry and electromyography, strain and activation patterns will be
measured and compared among limb muscles of multiple rodent species ranging in
size over three orders of magnitude (mice to capybara). Data will be used to
test the general hypothesis that homologous muscles function differently in
closely related animals that differ in size and limb posture. In the second
approach, limb posture, muscle architecture and patterns of muscle strain and
activation will be characterized in several mammal species over ontogeny. This
approach will address whether changes in size that occur during growth influence
limb muscles in a manner similar to size differences that have evolved among
various mammalian species. Together, these distinct approaches will (1) provide
critical insight into how muscles throughout the mammalian hindlimb operate in
vivo during locomotion and (2) will help clarify the importance of animal size
in shaping the actions of individual limb muscles both through ontogeny and
across phylogeny. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will also have the broader impact
of fostering research opportunities for talented young women interested in the
biological sciences. The PI works at a single-gender institution and two
students each year will collaborate on the projects, learning valuable research
skills, presenting results from their work at national meetings, and co-
authoring papers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;