* 0316194
* Bimodal Hybrid Zones: Understanding Evolutionary Stasis in the Allonemobius fasciatus-A. socius Hybrid Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Daniel Howard, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 348,000.00

0316194&lt;br/&gt;Howard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ground crickets, Allonemobius
fasciatus and A. socius, are abundant in the eastern United States and form a
hybrid zone (an area where two species overlap in distribution, mate, and
produce hybrids) that has become an important model system for population
geneticists. Over the next five years, populations near and within the zone will
be monitored through collections and genetic analyses. Previous work has
demonstrated that the distributions of A. fasciatus and A. socius are based on a
coupling between genotype and temperature. Thus, the position of the hybrid zone
should track environmental change as a kind of genetic thermometer. By combining
geographic information system (GIS) technology, environmental data, and long-
term genetic data a rigorous model of the species-environment relationship will
be constructed. This model will provide new insights into the impact of climatic
change on the distribution of insect populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work represents a pioneering effort to combine GIS with the study of
hybrid zones. The approach will exploit the unique nature of hybrid zones, which
typically occur at the edge of species ranges and hence are highly sensitive to
environmental perturbations, to gain insight into environmental change and the
relationship between genotype and environment. It is also noteworthy that this
project will help train scientists at a Hispanic-serving university.&lt;br/&gt;