* 0316205
* A Model for Species Interactions: Costs and Benefits of Linked Herbivory/pollination in Datura Wrightii and Manduca Sexta
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Goggy Davidowitz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 474,000.00

A model for species interactions: Costs and benefits of Linked
herbivory/pollination in Datura wrightii and Manduca sexta&lt;br/&gt;Bronstein,
Judith L.&lt;br/&gt;University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mutualisms
(reciprocally beneficial interactions between species) are critical components
of biological systems, yet have received little experimental study. This project
will take a physiologically-based field and laboratory approach to studying the
costs, benefits, and reciprocal net effects of interactions between the common
hawkmoth (Manduca sexta) and the plant upon which it primarily depends in
Arizona (Datura wrightii). Like certain other generalist Lepidoptera, M. sexta
acts as both a primary pollinator and a damaging herbivore of the same plant
species. This study will identify and quantify costs and benefits of the
interaction to both partners, via observational and experimental studies. These
data will allow exploration of the link between the benefit of pollination and
the cost of herbivory experienced by the plant, and the cross-link between the
cost of herbivory to the plant and the benefit of consumption to the insect. In
establishing the energetic and fitness relationships between Datura and Manduca,
this study will both suggest and facilitate future quantitative investigations
into mutualisms, the most poorly understood species interaction. Furthermore,
these studies will shed light on the general problem of how pollination and
herbivory interact to regulate plant fitness, as well as on the physiological
ecology of desert plants and animals. This project represents a collaboration
among three researchers with distinct backgrounds and areas of expertise, and
will foster novel interdisciplinary approaches cutting across plant and animal
biology. Manduca sexta is a major agricultural pest, so the results of this
project should have significant applied value as well. Undergraduates employed
in this project will be recruited from a program at the University of Arizona
that actively encourages research opportunities for under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;