* 0316014
* Peptide Conformation Studies with Vibrational Spectroscopy and Site Selective Isotopic Labeling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Timothy Keiderling, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 377,000.00

This project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, deals with peptide conformations, energetics, and dynamics
of protein structure and folding. Most oligopeptides are quite flexible and
thereby inhibit conventional structural analyses, especially under conditions
where one structure is changing into another, such as folding. To overcome these
difficulties Keiderling will conduct a research program to place the
interpretation of infrared (IR), Raman, vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) and
Raman optical activity, as well as time-dependent Raman and IR spectra
experiments on a solid foundation. To this end he will (a) employ isotopically
labeled systems to give the vibrational spectra resolved, site-specific
character, and (b) develop a more reliable interpretative basis for the
vibrational spectral intensity band shapes measured in peptides. The
experimental efforts will be aided by DFT augmented Gaussian 98 calculations to
obtain spectral parameters for computational modeling of the spectra. Most
experimental and computational efforts will focus on beta-hairpin and beta-sheet
modeling. Peptides of different lengths with various beta-turn stabilizing
residues will be studied while thermally unfolded and refolded. The overall goal
of the work is the development of enhanced structural biology tools, both
experimental and theoretical, and obtain a basic understanding of folding
energetics, capable of addressing broad biophysical needs. This research will be
conducted with students and postdoctoral research associates. They will thereby
acquire skills and training in one of the fast developing forefront areas of
contemporary bio-physical chemistry, in preparation for advanced studies or
employment in the scientific/technological sectors of our economy.