* 0316631
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral and Neuroendocrine Variation in Mammalian Mating Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2007
* Jerry Wolff, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2007
* USD 241,727.00

Behavioral and neuroendocrine variation in mammalian mating
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jerry O. Wolff and Steven M.
Phelps&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine
individual and geographic variation in the expression of receptors for the
hormone vasopressin, which affects monogamous mating in male prairie voles
(Microtus ochrogaster). Vasopressin receptors affect affiliative and paternal
behavior in males; this dual role may allow females to choose good fathers as
mates. Preliminary evidence suggests that monogamous traits such as affiliation
and paternal care are more common in a population of voles from Illinois and
less common in voles from Tennessee. A series of field and laboratory
experiments will be conducted on voles from these two locations to determine how
vasopressin receptors affect individual differences in male fidelity,
affiliation and paternal care. Experiments will also determine if females can
assess differences in male affiliative behavior and select mates based on
paternal characteristics. In addition to examining individual mate preferences,
field experiments will be conducted to determine if this trait ultimately
affects juvenile survival and population growth rates. This will be the first
study to combine data at the level of gene expression, individual behaviors,
mating system, field demography and population variation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;