* 0316331
* From Water To Land: Salamanders as a Model for Understanding the Evolution of Tetrapod Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Miriam Ashley-Ross, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 199,688.00

From our perspective as humans, one of the most important events in vertebrate
history was the evolution of the tetrapod limb. Only after the lobed fins of
some Sarcopterygian fishes had been modified into limbs could the tetrapods
(four-footed animals, including amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals) begin
to occupy terrestrial habitats. Undergraduate textbooks typically present a
scenario where limbs evolved specifically to facilitate terrestrial locomotion.
However, fossil evidence indicates that this notion is incorrect, and that the
earliest tetrapods, though possessing appendages that were recognizable as limbs
rather than fins, were fully aquatic organisms. The logical conclusion is that
the tetrapod limb evolved for underwater locomotion. Little is known about
aquatic locomotion involving the limbs compared to what is known about the
involvement of the axial musculoskeletal system. Among the living tetrapod
groups, salamanders most closely approach the body form and posture of primitive
tetrapods. Therefore, they are the most appropriate choice for a model group
with which to investigate this question. Terrestrial and underwater locomotion
using the limbs, swimming, and the transition between swimming and walking will
be examined in representative species of several salamander families. The
techniques to be used include high-speed video recording to quantify limb
movements, electromyography to examine the patterns of muscle activation, and
histochemical assays to quantify the composition of locomotor muscles. The
results of this research will yield insight into how the same anatomical
structures function in different environments and, more generally, into the
evolution of vertebrate gait patterns and the neural control of this major mode
of locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;