* 0316994
* The Effect of Ant Nests on Plant Nutrition and Selection for Extrafloral Nectaries
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Diane Wagner, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Extrafloral nectaries (EFNs) are organs located on leaves and stems of plants;
they secrete sugars and amino acids. Currently, the only well-accepted
hypothesis for the evolution and maintenance of EFNs is that they lure predatory
arthropods, especially ants, onto plant tissues and thereby reduce the damage
caused by herbivores. Evidence supporting this explanation for EFNs is mixed,
however. The goal of this study is to test an alternative hypothesis, the
nutrition hypothesis, for the evolution and maintenance of the trait. In the
North American shrub, Acacia constricta, EFNs appear to encourage ants to nest
within the rooting zone of the plant, where ants can enhance soil mineral
nutrient concentrations and may increase plant fitness. Some acacia individuals
have ant nests at the base and others do not. Nests under acacia are dynamic,
forming anew each summer. Previous work at the study site has demonstrated that
ant nest soils are enriched in nutrients that frequently limit plant
reproduction. The proposed research uses field and laboratory experiments to
test the relative importance of nutrition and protection to correlates of
fitness for A. constricta. The research also tests whether enhanced plant
nutrition, provided by ant nests, feeds back to the ants through the production
of high-quality food rewards. Results from this research will contribute
important insights to a model system used in the evolutionary ecology of plant-
herbivore interactions. The project also will contribute more generally to the
role that ants play in nutrient distribution and accumulation in arid and semi-
arid ecosystems. The project will provide training for a Ph.D. student and
several undergraduates in the laboratory and greenhouse (University of Alaska
Fairbanks) and in the field (Southwestern Research Station, Arizona). Special
effort will be made to recruit native and rural undergraduates who have never
had the opportunity to travel outside the state of Alaska. The project will
broaden the view of ecology students by introducing them to a new biome with
high biodiversity, structured by climatic challenges unlike those of their home
state.