* 0316102
* Regulation of Tracheal Fusion
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Stephen Crews, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 420,000.00

0316102&lt;br/&gt;Crews&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-branched tubular organs,
including the insect trachea, derive from repeated groups of precursor cells
that migrate and fuse together. This process involves cell movement,
recognition, adhesion, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and formation of adhesive
junctions. Mediating this process are specialized cells that can mediate
discrete events, such as branching and fusion. The long-term goals of this
project are to investigate the molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie
Drosophila tracheal fusion, and understand how transcriptional regulatory
proteins mediate this process. The proposed research involves studying the
molecular genetics of the Drosophila dysfusion bHLH-PAS gene, which mediates
tracheal fusion events. The aims of the project involve: (1) generating
dysfusion mutants, (2) carrying out genetic and cellular experiments to
investigate the precise role of dysfusion in controlling tracheal fusion and
transcription, (3) exploring the biochemistry, genetics, and developmental
consequences of Dysfusion interactions with other bHLH-PAS proteins, and (4)
initial analysis of the roles of dysfusion in other cell types. Together these
approaches will advance understanding of how regulatory proteins work
collectively to carry-out complex developmental and cellular events. Given: (1)
the functional similarities between insect tracheal development and (2) the
formation of other vertebrate multi-branched tissues, and the high degree of
conservation among invertebrate and vertebrate bHLH-PAS proteins, this work has
broad significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major component of the proposed
research is educational. Funds will be used to support training of postdoctoral
fellows, graduates students, and undergraduates. Strong emphasis is placed on
undergraduate training. The projects are designed to provide a multidisciplinary
learning experience for each student, and each project involves training in
genetics, cell biology, and molecular biology. One applied aspect of this work
concerns the application of this research to the agricultural industry regarding
the generation of more efficacious agents for pest control.&lt;br/&gt;