* 0316949
* ASPB Conference: Mechanisms of Genetic Variation in Snowbird, Utah from October 22-26, 2003
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steve R. Rodermel
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

This conference on plant genetics is the first of an annual series of
specialized meetings to be sponsored by the American Society of Plant Biology.
The focus of this conference will be on the nature and mechanisms of genetic
variation in plants and their relationship to the evolution of plant form and
function, as well as on plant speciation and crop domestication. Concepts of
these processes have grown dramatically in recent years as genomic sequencing
efforts for several model and crop plant species have advanced. The conference
will bring together speakers working on different organisms, and on different
aspects and approaches to the problem, with the aim of achieving a synthesis of
understanding to stimulate discussion and further research. Approximately 250
participants are expected. The secluded setting and schedule are designed to
facilitate ongoing interaction between the presenters and attendees. All meals
will be on-site and the speakers will remain in attendance throughout the entire
conference. Afternoons will be free for recreation, informal discussions and
other activities. Participation by graduate students and young postdoctoral
fellows is strongly encouraged. Discounted rates for registration and
accommodation will be supported by this award. Organizers for this year's
conference are Dr. Venkatesan Sundaresan of the University of California at
Davis and Dr. Rich Jorgensen of the University of Arizona. Further information
is available at the conference website,
http://www.aspb.org/meetings/pg-2003/index.cfm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;