* 0316495
* PBI: Phytophagous Insects as a Model Group for Documenting Planetary Biodiversity (Insecta: Heteroptera: Miridae: Orthotylinae, Phylinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2011
* Gerasimos Cassis, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,976,104.00

ABSTRACT: DEB-0316495 PLANT BUG PLANETARY BIODIVESITY INVENTORY

A grant has been awarded to Drs Randall Schuh and Gerasimos Cassis at the
American Museum of Natural History and their colleagues to conduct a global
study of plant-feeding insects in the true bug family Miridae. The work will
bring together biodiversity information on a world-wide group of insects
important in agriculture and as biodiversity indicators. Materials for the
project will consist of approximately 5300 species represented by 550,000
specimens currently lodged in the world's major natural history museums and an
additional 100,000 specimens acquired as a result of project-funded field work.
New materials will be collected primarily in the southern hemisphere because
that part of the world is the least well known, but nonetheless, by every
indication, shows tremendous species diversity. Potential findings of the
project are the description of more than 1000 species new to science, the
documentation of approximately 4000 host plants, and the documentation of
distributional patterns within the group on a global basis.

The broader impacts of this study will include the development of international
partnerships including the USA, Australia, Canada, China, Japan, Russia, and
South Africa. Three postdoctoral investigators and six PhD students will be
trained in techniques relevant to systematic biology in the 21st Century . Each
of these individuals will receive substantial international exposure through
field work, in museums, and at professional meetings. Scientific results will be
disseminated through a project website which will include interactive mapping of
distributions, interactive identification keys, a digital library of literature
pertaining to the study group, as well as other research and information tools.
Project results and concepts will be made available to the general public via a
traveling exhibit to be shown at the American Museum of Natural History in New
York and the Australian Museum, Sydney. In conjunction with creation of the
exhibit, specialized web materials for use as educational aids, will be
developed. The project is co-funded by NSF's Office of International Science and
Engineering.