* 0316800
* LTREB:  Long-term Study of Bottlenose Dolphin Life History and Social Ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Janet Mann, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 08/31/2009
* USD 355,654.00

LTREB: Long-term study of bottlenose dolphin life history and social
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;Janet Mann and Richard Connor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottlenose
dolphins are best known to the public through popular media and shows in
aquaria. The Shark Bay Dolphin Project, the second longest running wild dolphin
project worldwide presents a complex picture of dolphin life, including a long
nursing period (3-6 years), delayed reproduction (12+ years), foraging and
possibly other "traditions" that are passed down from mother to offspring, and
hierarchical multi-level adult male alliances. Only the great apes have shown
comparable behavioral, social, and cognitive complexity. Although the research
site is in Shark Bay, Australia, the long-term project data are maintained at
Georgetown University; over a dozen international investigators contribute to
the project annually. With the LTREB, a database manager will create,
coordinate, update, and preserve the project database so that it can be accessed
by researchers. The long-term data currently contain over 10,000 sightings of
dolphin groups over the last 20 years involving over 900 dolphins. Of those,
over 300 have been individually tracked in detail for thousands of additional
hours. The core feature of the Shark Bay Dolphin Project- detailed knowledge of
individual life history, behavior, genetics, and ecology- not only serves as the
basis for important theoretical insights on why dolphins have large brains, a
long juvenile period and complex social system, but also attracts public
interest and commitment to wildlife education and conservation
(www.monkeymiadolphins.org). &lt;br/&gt;