* 0316516
* Deciphering Mechanisms of Speciation Among Host-Symbiont Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Michele Nishiguchi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 417,009.00

The mutualistic association between sepiolid squids (Mollusca: Cephalopoda) and
their luminous bacterial symbionts (Genus Vibrio) provides a versatile model
system to study population biology and speciation among animal-bacterial
partnerships. Although the squid light organs are open to the seawater, only two
Vibrio species stay inside the organ, indicating adaptation and evolution of
specificity. Using state-of-the-art techniques involving fluorescent microscopy,
molecular biology, and gene expression, this project will examine whether
environmental processes or the squid hosts determine the architecture of these
interactions. Central to this study will be determining how different the squid-
Vibrio pairs are among geographically isolated populations. A key element of
this proposal is the several international and collaborative efforts that have
been established by the Nishiguchi laboratory for this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Results from this proposal will be shared (through
publications, meetings, web sites, courses) with both the research and public
communities. This study will provide unique research opportunities for students,
building on programs for under-represented minorities at New Mexico State
University. NMSU is the only Carnegie I research institution ranked by the
National Science Foundation as one that serves significant numbers of two ethnic
minority student populations, Hispanics and Native Americans. This research will
lead to a better understanding of speciation and evolution of bacterial-animal
relationships and provide information about the transmission of bacteria in the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;