* 0316261
* Cellular Basis of Learning in the Mammalian Cortex: Role of Postsynaptic Glutamate Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Elizabeth Quinlan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John S. de Belle
* 07/31/2007
* USD 299,972.00

The ability of the nervous system to learn and remember ultimately depends on
the changes in the strength of synapses, the points of contact between
individual nerve cells. The majority of research on memory formation has focused
on early time points during the encoding of a memory, when the change in
synaptic strength is first induced. Therefore, little is known about the
mechanisms by which memories are retained over the lifetime of an organism. This
obstacle can be overcome by using a multi-disciplinary approach to studying the
molecular basis of olfactory discrimination learning in rodents. Olfaction is
the primary sensory modality in the rat, and rats quickly learn to associate
odor with reward. Olfactory discrimination is a robust animal learning paradigm
that results in activation of a large population of synapses in the piriform
cortex, thereby offering an invaluable opportunity to combine behavioral,
electrophysiological and biochemical methods to study the cellular mechanisms of
learning. Olfactory discrimniation learning will be used to test the hypothesis
that synapses in the piriform cortex become less "plastic" after learning. The
proposed experiments merge the research efforts of two laboratories in very
different geographical/political environments. It is predicted that the data
gleaned from these experiments have a wide readership, and will help to build
bridges between the fields of behavioral neuroscience, synaptic physiology,
molecular and cell biology. In addition it will focus research attention on a
very important aspect of memory processes, memory retention, which has been
previously ignored.