* 0316248
* Assignment and Structural Characterization of Uniformly Labeled Proteins by Solid State NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Ann McDermott, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2006
* USD 477,914.00

In this project the PI will develop new solid state NMR methods to study protein
structure. In the previous grant period, the PI has largely completed the site-
specific NMR resonance assignments for microcrystalline human Ubiquitin,
providing proof of principle for the first stage in denovo structure
determination by solid state NMR. In this project, the PI will confirm the
existing assignments, and locate signals for the mobile portions. With the
recent availability of high magnetic field strengths, her group intends to
attempt more challenging and biologically interesting targets; two additional
proteins would be assigned as solid phase precipitates: Calmodulin and
Triosephosphate Isomerase. Finally, the PI will determine the 3D structure of
Ubiquitin based on solid-state NMR data, utilizing several sources of
experimental data. Torsional constraints are available from the chemical shifts
themselves, which will be analyzed using statistical databases from solution NMR
as well as from computed shifts. Hydrogen bond correlations will be measured via
N-H...C correlations. Tertiary contacts will be measured using spin diffusion as
well as selective recoupling experiments. Structures would be calculated using
commercially available software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While structural genomics
proceeds apace, many important non-soluble proteins are not readily
characterized; the PI's laboratory will attempt characterization of some of the
non-soluble targets when the methods are established through this work. The PI
is involved with collaborations with several academic and industrial labs that
will facilitate transfer of the information obtained through this research. The
core effort, however, is the training of outstanding graduate students. High
school and undergraduate students will be trained and exposed to structural
biology and magnetic resonance in the PI's laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;