* 0316519
* RUI-Collaborative Research: Developmental Bases of Body Plan Diversity within the Phylum Cnidaria--A Comparison of Polyp and Medusa Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Daniel Martinez, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 152,177.00

Martinez 0316519

Data from taxa which arose early within the Metazoa are critical for
understanding the origin and early evolution of animal developmental processes.
The phylum Cnidaria is notable not only for its basal position within the
Metazoa, but also for having life cycle stages with strikingly different
organizations. In many cnidarian species, the sessile polyp stage is followed by
formation of the morphologically very different free-swimming medusa stage.
While the developmental biology of the polyp stage has received a substantial
amount of attention, less is known about the development of the medusa stage.
The relative lack of information about medusa development is unfortunate in part
because sensory organs are present almost exclusively in the medusa stage, with
eyes present only in medusae. To make clear the full implications of cnidarian
development for early animal evolution, the similarities and differences between
polyp and medusa development should be characterized. In addition, the phylum
provides an unusual opportunity to study the bases of major differences in body
organization without the need to compare organisms from distantly related
taxonomic groups. The proposed research will take advantage of information on
polyp development to address questions about developmental differences between
the polyp and medusa stages. One hypothesis to be tested is that early
development of the oral end of the polyp and the medusa is similar but that
specification of the aboral end differs. Expression of selected genes will be
compared in developing polyps and medusae of Podocoryna carnea. Genes to be
examined include members of the Wnt, Emx, FoxA, and NK-2 families. Developing
medusae will be treated with reagents targeting specific signaling pathways.
Grafting will be used to determine developmental properties of specific regions
of the developing medusa.

A strength of the project is the benefits it offers the undergraduate students
involved. These relate in part to the fact that proposed research involves a
collaboration of two PIs at undergraduate institutions. During the summers, the
two PIs and undergraduates from both colleges will work together as a single
research group. This arrangement will give students the intellectual excitement
of working in a relatively large, focused research group. A second benefit of
this work for undergraduate research students is that it illustrates the overlap
between diverse areas of biology, including developmental biology, evolutionary
biology, systematics, and invertebrate zoology.

