* 0316553
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Renewable Energy for Herb Drying
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Mohammed Fadali, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0316553 Fadali

Description: This award supports a joint research project between Dr. M. Sami
Fadali, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada
and Dr. Faten H. Fahmy, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan a
comprehensive study of herb dryers in the Sinai Peninsula, including dryer
types, layouts of solar collectors and PV panels. They will also define the mode
of operation and determine the suitable control strategy for switching between
different energy resources to fulfill drying requirements. They will also
consider various options, conduct a mathematical model study, and design an
optimum drying system for the local conditions for different herbs and plants.
The Sinai Peninsula is home to a wide variety of valuable medicinal herbs in
remote agricultural production areas. There is a strong need for the
preservation of these valuable herbs during harvest, storage, and transport.
This must be accomplished using relatively simple and economical technologies.
Dryers offer the best solution to this problem, especially because solar energy
potential is very high in the Sinai Peninsula.

Scope: The broader impact of this project is the tremendous economical impact on
the Sinai. It will reduce post-harvest losses and transportation costs, expand
the agricultural areas for herbs, and create new jobs. This may lead to the
establishment of new communities in the Sinai with obvious benefits to the
economy and population distribution of Egypt. It will also provide valuable
medicinal herbs for markets in the United States and elsewhere. The Sinai
presents a special eco/system, and it likely certains herbs and plants not found
elsewhere. The surveying of these resources, and the design of an optimum drying
system, using the local energy sources - sun and perhaps biomass - will help
with the economy of the region. It will result in the reduction of waste caused
by the primitive drying systems, and will improve the quantity and quality of
the products. There will be a number of new varieties discovered. The project
could open the way to tackle similar and potentially useful agro/industrial
processing and automation control.