* 0316508
* Evolution of Life Cycles and Host Associations and the Historical Biogeography of Aphids (Subfamily Aphidinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* David Teulon, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 11/30/2005
* USD 55,228.00

Aphids are insects that tap plant sap as a sole food source. As a consequence
of their feeding mode, aphids have sedentary life styles and often build up very
large populations. Many aphids in the lineage Aphidinae have specialized in
feeding on plant hosts that are important agricultural crops and horticultural
species (e.g., many grain crops and fruit trees). Thus, several Aphidinae
constitute significant agricultural pests, some quite devastating. Some species
also have evolved complicated life cycles that incorporate obligate, seasonal
migrations between unrelated plant hosts (for example, between a fruit tree and
a grain) over several clonal generations. Aphidinae are also exceptionally
species-rich in the northern hemisphere, with only ~1% of the 2500 species
native to the southern hemisphere. Several compelling questions concerning the
biodiversity, biogeography, and host-plant evolution in this group remain
unanswered, however, because relationships among the component species-which
could be used to address these questions-are not well understood. This project
aims to initiate the study of relationships among Aphidinae aphids, in order to
answer questions such as: despite their high biodiversity in the northern
hemisphere, did Aphidinae originate in the southern hemisphere? How have host-
plant relationships changed through time, and how have these shifts impacted
species diversifications? Have complicated life cycles originated multiple times
in Aphidinae history? We will collect data from external morphological features
and from gene sequences to reconstruct relationships among Aphidinae
species.&lt;br/&gt; This project will support a graduate student for one year,
and will build international collaborations between scientists in the U.S,
Canada, New Zealand, China, Argentina, and Europe. Increased insights into
morphology of aphids may help in future classification schemes. An improved
understanding of Aphidinae relationships may also assist with future biocontrol
efforts, informing the selection of appropriate biocontrol
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;