* 0316004
* Collaborative Research: Independent Evolutionary Origins of Tetrodotoxin Resistance as a Test of the Geographic Mosaic of Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Edmund Brodie, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/2006
* USD 266,729.00

The proposed research will investigate the role of geographic structure in
determining patterns of coevolutionary interaction and the dynamics of arms-
races. It has been difficult in the past to disentangle biogeographic structure
itself from the environmental differences among populations because study
systems cannot be replicated within the same geographic range. The arms race
between garter snakes of the genus Thamnophis and toxic newts of the genus
Taricha provides a unique opportunity to explore this problem because new
evidence indicates multiple independent evolutionary origins of the traits
critical to the interaction. The proposed research will determine the broad-
scale geographic patterns of variation in tetrodotoxin toxicity and sodium
channel resistance in regions where multiple species of garter snakes and newts
occur. If geography and/or prey phenotypes are most important in determining
coevolutionary trajectories, sympatric populations of garter snakes will show
matched levels of resistance. If differences in the selective environment or
species interactions are paramount, then sympatric populations of predators will
have unmatched levels of resistance. By surveying diet composition in sympatric
predators and the degree of phenotype matching between each predator and prey
species, the investigators can further determine the general factors influencing
mismatches among sympatric predators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Revealing the
fundamental aspects of coevolution is critical to furthering our understanding
of all biological interactions, whether they occur between humans and pathogens,
disease and antibiotics, or predators and prey. This project explores basic
elements of the coevolutionary process that impact all systems. The proposed
funding will directly support the training of two graduate students as research
assistants as well as numerous other graduate and undergraduate students that
are involved with the project at all levels. The snake-newt arms race has
developed as a popular paradigm for understanding coevolution through outreach
education (on recent PBS-TV, popular press, and a coming exhibit in the
Wonderlab children's science museum in Bloomington, IN).&lt;br/&gt;