* 0316370
* Juvenile Hormone Reception in Male Pine Bark Beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Christopher Keeling, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/2006
* USD 338,920.00

Juvenile hormone (JH) is critical for the development and sexual maturation of
insects and other invertebrates. The mechanism(s) of JH signaling remains
unknown due to the chemical properties of the molecule, the complexity of the
processes it regulates, and the difficulty of identifying primary responder
genes. The investigators will examine JH signaling in pine bark beetles, which
have a devastating impact on US forests. The anterior midguts of adult male pine
engraver beetles, Ips pini, produce large amounts of pheromone when the beetles
are treated with JH. JH stimulates expression of genes in the mevalonate
pathway, providing a simple and robust tool to monitor JH regulation. An
expressed sequence tag (EST) database and cDNA microarrays of genes expressed in
pheromone-biosynthetic midguts will be mined to identify genes that respond
quickly to JH treatment. Rapid responders will in turn be used to screen a
genomic library in order to isolate 5' flanking regions of mevalonate pathway
genes, as well as others that react to JH. Putative JH-response elements are
most likely located in this region of the genes, and will be identified by
bioinformatic analyses. The investigators will also study the biochemistry and
effects of JH on identified genes using short-term in vitro cultures of midgut
cells. This work will fill a significant gap in JH research by bringing JH
studies to the Coleoptera, an order that has otherwise been overlooked. In
addition to providing new knowledge about JH signaling and pheromone
biosynthesis, the investigators will uncover new molecular targets that may be
used to manage these significant forestry pests. Students and postdoctoral
fellows involved in the research will receive training in biochemistry,
molecular biology, genomics and bioinformatics.