* 0316747
* Hormonal Coordination of Growth and Reproductive Cycles in a Crustacean:  Ecdysteroid and Retinoid Receptors.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* David Durica, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 320,000.00

Crustaceans are a group of ecologically and commercially important organisms
that continue to grow in size during the reproductive adult stages. Little is
known about the exact physiological control mechanisms that allow these animals
to switch back and forth between reproductive activity and somatic growth
activity - both of which are physiologically demanding processes. Previous work
in the laboratories of the principal investigators indicates that the hormonal
coordination of growth and reproduction is under the control of the same steroid
hormones - the ecdysteroids. This study continues the ongoing program of
characterization of the patterns and functions of circulating hormones and the
expression and characterization of the receptors for those hormones. The long-
term objective is to define how a common hormonal signal can simultaneously
influence a variety of discrete physiological programs. Further, a better
understanding of how the same steroid hormone (s) control both male and female
reproduction plus the shedding of the shell will contribute a great deal to
improve the commercial raising of lobsters, shrimps, and crabs. This project
will also provide training and educational opportunities for students.