* 0316033
*  Extremophile Research: Theory and Techniques Workshop and Symposium to be held at the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, Summer 2003
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Harold Schreier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for the "Extremophile Research: Theory
and Techniques Workshop and Symposium" to be held at the Center of Marine
Biotechnology (COMB), University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute. This four-
day workshop and symposium has been offered annually since 1997 at COMB
facilities in the Columbus Center, Baltimore, MD. NSF support will enable the
COMB to conduct the workshop and symposium from July 21 to July 24, 2003The
"Extremophile Research: Theory and Techniques Workshop and Symposium" includes a
three-day intensive laboratory workshop and a one-day symposium. The one-day
symposium brings experts from various areas of extremophile research together to
discuss the current state of knowledge on growth, ecology, biochemistry and
genetics of hyperthermophiles, extreme halophiles and anaerobic methanogens. The
three-day laboratory workshop includes lectures, blocks of hands-on experiments,
and demonstrations focusing on specialized techniques used to study these groups
of microorganisms. NSF support provides scholarships to facilitate the
attendance of faculty from small colleges and universities who will introduce
these approaches into their teaching curricula, as well as post-doctoral and
graduate students who are interested in working in areas of extremophile
research. &lt;br/&gt;