* 0316323
* Chiral Conflict Leads to a New Relationship Between Temperature and Optical Activity
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2009
* Mark Green, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 534,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division and
the Polymer Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professors Mark Green
at Polytechnic University of New York will continue a research program to
develop new ways to control the relationship between temperature and the optical
properties of liquid crystals that arise from the competition between
structurally different enantiomers to control the helical sense of a polymer. A
material consistent with the liquid crystal properties noted above will be
obtained by synthesis of a helical forming polymer with a pair of randomly
dispersed pendant groups that are enantiomerically highly enriched but of
different structure and which are competing to control the helical sense of the
polymer. This arises from the fact that the temperature dependence for the free
energy term favoring one or the other helical sense differs for each of the
chiral groups. Based on statistical physical theory it can be shown that the
proportion of the competing chiral groups, determined by synthesis, fixes the
temperature at which the helical senses are equally populated. Formation of
lyotropic liquid crystals from such polymers yields a series of materials in
which a nematic phase will be formed at a unique predetermined temperature while
above and below this temperature cholesteric phases of opposite sense will arise
with tightening pitch as the temperature deviates from the nematic temperature.
Experiments are proposed to yield new kinds of information on intramolecular
chiral interactions in the polymer and intermolecular chiral interactions in the
derived liquid crystal. Moreover, the recent observation that cholesteric
lyotropic liquid crystals with incorporated dyes of appropriate fluorescence
characteristics give rise to lasing, opens the possibility of producing lasers
with unprecedented temperature dependent and circular polarization properties. .
The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division and
the Polymer Program in the Division of Materials Research supports Professor
Mark Green at Polytechnic University of New York who will attempt to extend
basic findings in polyisocyanates to a variety of helical forming polymers
including polyacetylenes, peptides and peptide nucleic acids. This will involve
the interdisciplinary training of graduate students, which will involve
stereochemistry, polymer chemistry, liquid crystals and optics. The results may
lead to unique ideas and even devices for measuring temperature, a property that
is fundamental to all technology and life. The beautiful colors arising from the
temperature dependent liquid crystals have been shown to intrigue elementary
school students so Professor Green is planning to approach organizations such as
museums to present explanatory demonstrations. The work will involve
collaborations with a start-up company in New Jersey, a government laboratory,
with scientists in other academic institutions and also in Japan.