* 0316518
* Biodiversity of Aquatic Phage
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 363,880.00

Phage, viruses that kill bacteria, are the most abundant biological entities on
the planet. They have major influences on global carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous cycling. By killing specific bacterial hosts, phage help maintain
microbial diversity and they are major conduits of genetic exchange.
Additionally, phage are major sources of economically important enzymes for
industrial and biotech applications. Despite their importance to global ecology,
almost nothing is known about phage biodiversity or biogeography because less
than 1% of them can be cultured. Therefore, environmental phage communities are
one of the largest unexplored reservoirs of sequence diversity on the planet.
This project will utilize genomic sequencing to examine the diversity and
distribution of uncultured phage in all of the world's major aquatic
environments. The types of phage present within an environment, as well as the
population structure (i.e., the number of different phage genomes present and
their relative abundances) will be determined. The global distribution of
specific phage sequences will be examined in order to assess the extent of phage
movement between environments; gene transfer among phage will also be explored.
This work will lead to the identification of the world's most common phage types
and produce population models of phage in major aquatic systems. In turn, this
knowledge will allow for better predictions about how the environment will
respond to global climate changes. Comparing phage populations from different
aquatic environments will lead to new paradigms about the factors that govern
the biogeographical distributions and ecology of environmental phage. In
addition, results from this project will be used to evaluate and expand upon
current phage taxonomy systems, which are of great value to the scientific
community. Enzymes of interest to biotech industries will also be identified and
characterized during this project. Finally, this research will result in the
sequencing of complete genomes of biologically important uncultured phage from
aquatic environments. Undergraduate and graduate students, including a number of
underrepresented minorities, will receive training during the course of these
studies.