* 0316078
* Control of the Supramolecular Assembly Behavior of Fullerene-Based Surfactants
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Shuiqin Zhou, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2008
* USD 433,925.00

This proposal aims to understand the rules of supramolecular assembly of
amphiphilic fullerene surfactants in different environments to regulate the
size, shape, and nanostructures of fullrene aggregates for envisioned
applications in advanced technologies and biomedications. Target systems include
(1) the self-assembly of fullerene surfactants in water normal phase; (2) the
water-induced self-assembly of fullrene surfactants in oil phase (e.g.,
toluene); and (3) the induced supramolecular assembly of fullerene surfactants
by a constraint of oppositely charged hydrogel network chains. The objective of
the first two systems will be to correlate the fundamental properties of the
self-assembled fullerene colloidal dispersions with the unique molecular
configuration of fullerene surfactants (e.g, molecular tailoring of the
hydrophilic side chains on a very rigid, extremely hydrophobic fullerene ball)
as well as the water/oil ratios. Six surfactants with a systematic variety on
the molecular properties of the hydrophilic side chains will be studied, in
terms of charge location, charge number, charge surface area, hydrophilic
polyethylene glycol (PEG) chain spacer length and number. The goal of the third
system will be to develop a new method to fabricate crystal-like long-range
highly ordered supramolecular assembly of fullerene surfactants by the
constraints of oppositely charged polymer hydrogel network chains. Three
fullerene surfactants with different PEG chain spacer length and PEG side chain
number will be investigated to examine the supramolecular assembly behavior
under the constraints of different gel network chain properties, including chain
flexibility, charge density and cross-linking density.

C60 fullerene and its derivatives have been intensively explored for potential
electronic, optical, and biomedical materials due to their unique photophysical
and electrochemical properties, HIV enzyme inhibition ability, and low toxicity.
However, the low solubility of fullerenes in polar media and the difficult
control of their aggregation states have been the major obstacles to fabricate
new materials from fullerenes for advanced applications. With the support of the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Shuiqin Zhou, of the
Department of Chemistry at CUNY College at Staten Island, is exploring the
factors controlling the aggregation of fullerenes. The successful accomplishment
of this study will (1) permit material scientists to predictably design well-
defined nanostructures in relation to material functions from the self-assembly
of fullerene surfactants by tailoring the molecular property of hydrophilic side
chain appendages and tuning the water/oil ratios as well as the specific
constraining environments; (2) add new basic knowledge to the scope of general
colloidal science through a fundamental understanding of the supramolecular
assembly of fullerene surfactants with a distinct molecular configuration (e.g.,
a rigid, shape-constrained, hydrophobic ball); and (3) enhance the research
activities and pedagogy for participant graduate and undergraduate students
through a training on literature study, experimental design, operation of
advanced instruments and computer data processing.