* 0316232
* Mechanisms of Action in Engineered Isoforms of the Diiron Toluene-4-Monooxygenase Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Brian Fox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,010,274.00

Toluene 4-monooxygenase (T4MO) enzyme complex in naturally occurring microbes
participates in the metabolism of toluene and can also catalyze the degradation
of priority pollutants such as trichloroethylene and chloroform. The natural
diiron enzyme complex and highly active mutated isoforms created in previous
project period will be studied. The overall objective of this research is to
increase our understanding of oxidation catalysis, with a specific focus on
determining the origin of high regiospecificity observed in a physiologically
relevant aromatic hydroxylation reaction. The experimental goals are to
determine the interplay between substrate, active site, and oxidant leading to
this highly desirable catalytic outcome. Steady-state and transient kinetic
methods will be used to determine intramolecular isotope effects and deuterium
shift/retention patterns in studies of the mechanism of aromatic hydroxylation.
Alkane "radical clocks" will be studied in combination with 18O2 and 18OH2
labeling of products to study the mechanism of alkane hydroxylation. Rapid-
mix/quench methods will be used to study fast reaction intermediates.
Multinuclear, multidimensional NMR methods will be used to study protein
interactions.

Broader Impacts: The project will be undertaken as an interdisciplinary effort
involving personnel with advanced training in biochemistry, biophysics, and
chemistry. Collaborative interactions involve researchers at both the graduate
and undergraduate institutions. These interactions enhance the vigor of the
research and teaching efforts of all participants, increase opportunities for
diversified training of individuals at each institution, and expand the impact
of this program to a national scope. The training of postdoctoral research
associates and graduate research assistants will be an integral aspect in the
execution of the proposed research. Moreover, this will continue a well-
established tradition of the involvement of undergraduates, women, and members
of underrepresented groups.