* 0317011
* Rational Design of Supramolecular Assemblies via Incommensurate Geometries and Coordination Number
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Kenneth Raymond, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 06/30/2006
* USD 405,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Kenneth N Raymond of the University of California at
Berkeley to design, synthesize and evaluate high-symmetry, nanometer scale
molecular clusters. The clusters are designed to be self-assembled from a number
of small and simple, identical subunits. Modeling studies will focus on making
clusters with cavities much larger than a cubic nanometer. The work will address
the trade-off between loss of stability in host/guest formation due to the
hydrophobic cavity of the cluster as compared to expanding the ease of access to
the interior to allow more rapid guest exchange. New designs will include
icosahedra and clusters with positive as well as negative charges (changing the
host/guest preference characteristics). The broad areas of supramolecular
properties under investigation include calorimetric quantification of
thermodynamic quantities, kinetic studies of self-assembly, supramolecular
chirality, guest-host interactions and electron and molecular transport. Among
questions to be addressed is whether guest molecules enter the supramolecular
cavity through an opening made by a the dissociation of a ligand forming the
cavity or whether the guest molecule squeezes in through a seam in the host
structure. Modeling studies suggest that exit of the guest probably occurs
through a cooperative distortion, rather than partial dissociation, of the
cluster. Because of trigonal propeller chirality at the metal vertices and
mechanical linkage between the metal vertices, the clusters are homochiral,
resolvable and retain their chirality even when components of the cluster are
replaced. Clusters will be prepared with guest interiors that are much more
enantiomerically selective. Other goals are the attachment of clusters to solid
supports and the preparation of switchable clusters whose host/guest properties
can be altered either electrochemically or photochemically. Clusters with
varying oxidation state metal ion vertices can act as electron carriers through
as many as nine different redox states. Non-labile higher oxidation state
clusters will be prepared from the more labile lower oxidation state complexes
by oxidation to a less labile state.

The ability to do chemistry inside designed, chiral, nanometer sized flasks
opens promising applications that may improve chemical separations and selective
chemical reactivity. Students will be trained in supramolecular design,
synthesis, characterization, and supramolecular reaction mechanisms.

