* 0317653
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Recovery of Sodium Hydroxide from Black Liquor Effluents of Paper Mill
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Harrison Cooper, Bountiful Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 27,000.00

0317653 Cooper

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project between Dr.
Harrison Cooper, President, Bountiful Applied Research Corporation, Bountiful,
Utah and Dr. El-Sayed Abdel-Aal, Central Metallurgical Research and Development
Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt. The PIs will pursue an investigation of a new
lignin precipitation process based on adding water-soluble surface-active
polymers into black liquor and acidifying the sample by adding phosphoric acid.
The use of these polymers is likely to facilitate the separation of lignin from
liquor by producing an easily separable coagulant. The PIs will consider
defluorination of phosphoric acid enabling recovery of P-rich lignin material
for use in animal feeds.

Scope: The project will develop a method to treat black liquors and diminish
toxic extractives thus making the residual liquor more amenable to biological
treatment. High value by-products will be usable as soil amendments and
fertilizers. Applications of the treatment and recovery process will improve
pulp mill profitability. The ability to process non-wood black liquor can lead
to utilization of fibers such as grass straw, kenaf and arundo donax in the
United States of America. The potential of developing a process that
economically matches small scale pulping operations in underdeveloped areas will
greatly enhance regional economics and substantially reduce the environmental
impact of these facilities. Dr. Abdel-Aal has a long experience in the lignin
separation process, while Dr. Cooper has particular experience in the
application of engineering processes into viable solutions to environmental
problems. The two will be supported by advisors from the CMRDI and the
University of Florida in the course of the project. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.