* 0317858
* ADVANCE Leadership Award:  Collaborative Research: Women in Cognitive Science
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Suparna Rajaram, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2008
* USD 78,670.00

Women in Cognitive Science (WICS) is an organization created by the Co-PIs of
this proposal in 2001 and is affiliated with the Psychonomic Society. The goal
of WICS is to enhance the success of women scientists who are pursuing careers
in cognitive science, experimental psychology, and cognitive neuroscience. The
proposal describes a program which aims to sustain and extend WICS. The planned
activities have the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;* to organize its structure
more formally,&lt;br/&gt;* to sustain its presence, &lt;br/&gt;* to engage the
participation of other senior women cognitive scientists in its
leadership,&lt;br/&gt;* to plan events to take place around the yearly meeting
of the Psychonomic Society,&lt;br/&gt;* to create a set of ongoing programs that
will promote the advancement of all women in the field,&lt;br/&gt;* to ensure
the recognition and representation of senior women, and &lt;br/&gt;* to address
the needs of younger women facing the challenges of negotiating the initial
stages of beginning a career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program proposed
addresses both of NSF.s impact criteria. It encourages the participation of
young scientists in professional meetings, promotes the mentoring and
professional development of women and minorities, and aims to increase the
visibility of senior women cognitive scientists who have been historically
underrepresented in positions of leadership. &lt;br/&gt;