* 0317037
* RUI: Genomic Analysis of Metabolic Regulation in Caulobacter
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Craig Stephens, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2007
* USD 359,512.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Craig Stephens of Santa Clara University to
study the strategies bacteria use to coordinate their metabolism and growth in
response to nutrients available in their environment. Some microbes thrive in
habitats with very low nutrient levels, having evolved very efficient ways to
scavenge food from their surroundings. The freshwater bacterium Caulobacter
crescentus is typical of such microbes. Caulobacter, a non-pathogenic freshwater
microbe, has been studied intensively because of its distinctive life cycle.
Caulobacter cells alternate between a mobile, non-dividing cell (the "swarmer")
and a stationary cell (the "stalked" cell) that attaches to solid surfaces and
reproduces. This organism is unique among bacteria in that cells at a specific
stage of the cell cycle (swarmer cells) can be isolated and studied as they
proceed through the remainder of the cell cycle, developing into stalked cells
and reproducing. Dr. Stephens and his laboratory group will examine
physiological and genetic regulatory strategies that enable Caulobacter to
survive and thrive at low nutrient levels, and will collaborate with scientists
at Stanford and Harvard Universities to use microarray technology (capable of
measuring the activity of thousands of genes simultaneously) to understand how
Caulobacter controls its metabolism as it progresses through its life cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are designed to help us understand how
microbes control genes during growth and reproduction, how they acquire
nutrients when there is very little food available, and how these processes
intersect. Many marine, freshwater, and terrestrial habitats have very low
nutrient levels, and microorganisms are generally the dominant life forms in
such habitats. Understanding the behavior of these microbes is important for
understanding nutrient cycling, the effects of pollution, and the potential for
bioremediation. At a more basic level, regulatory networks controlling the
bacterial cell cycle are poorly understood, and how they interact with central
metabolism is essentially a black box. Exploration of this field may identify
new paradigms for cellular systems engineering, and help identify new targets
for antimcrobial drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;