* 0317141
* Control of Reproductive Function in Diverse Habitats
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* John Wingfield, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John S. de Belle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

This proposal will investigate the environmental control of breeding in
populations of "crowned sparrows" of the genus Zonotrichia. Key populations have
been identified in Arctic, mid-latitudes and equatorial regions that express the
full spectrum of extreme inflexibility of timing (Arctic) to varying degrees of
flexibility and asynchrony at mid-latitudes and equatorial regions. Field
experiments will determine how flexible breeding seasons are within each
habitat. Particular emphasis will be placed on how social interactions within
and between sexes contribute to the synchronization and temporal organization of
the breeding cycle. Parallel laboratory experiments will explore further how
environmental signals such as change in day length, temperature, food and water
interact with social cues to regulate neuroendocrine and endocrine secretions
that orchestrate reproductive function. Of particular importance are
investigations of novel peptides in the hypothalamus that may provide pathways
for these environmental signals. The results will have practical applications
for how vertebrates may respond to global change in the near future, and will
provide unique insight on how environmental control mechanisms evolved. Some
populations may be able to adjust, whereas others may not, possibly indicating
where future conservation efforts should be focused. The project will provide a
framework for education at undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as for
outreach to an ongoing project with a local high school.