* 0317514
* Catalysis with Molecular Nanoreactors: Dendrimers and other Highly Branched Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Jean M. J. Frechet, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 766,000.00

During the last few decades, tremendous progress has been made in the field of
catalysis in part due to its important role in the economically and ecologically
sound production of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Research in the field of
catalysis is typically divided into two areas, namely homogenous and
heterogeneous. While the former offers the unique advantage of well-defined
catalytic sites that can systematically be optimized, the latter is of great
industrial importance due to the inherent retention of the catalysts, which
facilitates product separation. In recent years, functional polymers carrying
catalytically active sites have emerged that combine the advantages of both
homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. In particular, polymeric macromolecules
with a highly branched, globular architectures, such as dendrimers, have shown
promise for application as true nanoscale "molecular reactors" to affect
specific chemical tranformations withing a well-controlled environment. A
research program utilizing dendritic and other highly branched polymer
architectures for the design of new catalyst systems is proposed. In each
instance, a reactive functionality with catalytic activity is placed at the core
or the interior of a globular dendritic structure so that the unique properties
offered by dendritic encapsulation may be fully realized. Dendritic
encapsulation, can afford several advantages such as: (i) reactive species
essential for catalysis are isolated from each other preventing mutal
deactivation; (ii) the reactivity of the catalytic site can be tuned, either
directly at the catalytic site, or via its surrounding microenvironment; (iii)
the catalyst solubility can be altered by peripheral modification; (iv) the
microenviroment of the catalytic site my provide not only enhanced activity but
also additional functions such as transport of substrate and product; (v) the
potential for positive cooperative interactions between multiple catalytically
active subunits. Such properties, resulting from dendritic encapsulation, are
frequently found in natural enzymatic systems and are employed to high efficacy,
but they generally cannot be incorporated simultaneouly in classical artificial
homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysts. The knowldege to be gelaned from the
proposed investigations will have two-fold importance, both to further increase
our understanding of the fundamental principles regarding catalysis with a
specialized and somewhat unusual class of synthetic polymers and to uncover
leads for development of superior, fully synthetic, catalysts that rival
naturally occurring enzymes. This impact of this research will be felt not only
on the production of chemical and pharmaceutical products but also in our
environment as better, more effective, ecologically friendly, and recyclable
catalysts will be discovered. In one possible implementation, a series of
dendrimer catalysts may be used to carry out multistep tranformations in a
single medium in much the same way as several enzymes carry out complex
tranformations in succession within the same overall environment.