* 0317691
* Campaign Finance Reform
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Thomas Stratmann, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2006
* USD 118,574.00

Campaign finance reform is a vigorously debated issue in virtually every U.S.
election, both congressional and presidential. Some claim large amounts of
campaign spending turn political races into fund-raising contests biased in
favor of incumbents, while others argue that unrestricted spending may be the
only way for challengers to even the playing field. To date, scant evidence
exists regarding the effects of campaign finance restrictions on election
outcomes. Whether stricter regulations amount to incumbency protection laws, or
whether they help challengers to compete remain an unanswered empirical
question. Although federal campaign finance laws have changed very little until
the recent 2002 legislation, state campaign finance laws exhibit sufficient
variation across states and over time. Changes in state-level regulations
implemented over the past twenty years have the potential to provide insight
into the effects of campaign finance regulation on vote shares and the closeness
of elections, and also provide a natural testing ground for theoretical campaign
finance models. Despite this, no systematic study of the effects of state-level
campaign finance rules on electoral outcomes has been undertaken. This research
project represents the first systematic study that comprehensively examines the
effects of state-level campaign finance rules over the past twenty years. This
study examines the effect of state campaign contribution law changes the
competitiveness of state House elections between 1980 and 2002. This research
project addresses the fact that changes in laws are not exogenous, and thus uses
an instrumental variable technique to address the potential endogeneity of
campaign contribution law changes. Thereby it identifies a causal effect of
contribution limits and provides answers to long-standing questions as to how
campaign finance laws affect