* 0317832
* Holocene Marine Climate Evolution and Variability from Multi-Proxy Analyses of High Resolution Shelf Cores in the Northern North Atlantic (West of 20W)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Anne Jennings, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 403,447.00

This award will enable researchers to use a multi-proxy approach to evaluate
environmental variability from sites capturing the dynamics between the Arctic
and Atlantic environment. The goal of the research is to determine the range,
trends, and nature of climate variability in the region during the Holocene. The
broad geographic extent of the research strategy is designed to allow evaluation
of the influences and complexities of different components of the climate
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Holocene paleoclimate records of centennial
temporal resolution will be produced from four long sediment cores recovered in
1999 in contrasting hydrographic settings. The sites include cores from the
Labrador Shelf, the Southwest Iceland margin, the North Iceland shelf, and the
East Greenland shelf. The sites were exposed to ice-sheet/ocean interactions
during the final deglaciation phases of the Laurentide, Greenland, and Iceland
ice sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such research would help provide an improved
understanding of the dramatic environmental changes being observed in the Arctic
today (i.e., marked retreat and thinning of the sea-ice cover and melting and
thinning of the Greenland Ice Sheet, increased discharge of the Russian rivers).
Whether these current changes are within the range of natural variability, or
are unprecedented, can be evaluated by the data preserved in sediment cores and
comparing them to a spectrum of cryosphere-ocean interactions in the northern
North Atlantic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, this research on high latitude
continental margins opens a promising new archive of past climatic variability.
The research has broader implications in areas of education and international
research co-operation as it will provide a graduate student with a unique
opportunity to actively pursue magnesium/calcium temperature calibrations for
water temperatures less than 10degrees-Celsius. Successful development of this
proxy would be a significant contribution to the field of paleoclimatology.