* 0317138
* Interrogation and Manipulation of Coherences in Superfluid Helium
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Vartkess Apkarian, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 12/31/2006
* USD 342,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Apkarian will conduct an experimental
research program aimed at fundamental studies of bulk superfluid helium (He-II).
The general goals are to investigate microscopic implications of the system,
principally its quantum collective dynamics in order to manipulate coherences
through multilinear spectroscopy. Superfluid helium streams were recently
developed as the carrier fluid in a universal molecule injector, but their
properties are not yet sufficiently understood. The properties of the neat
stream, namely of a suddenly expanded Bose condensate, are of fundamental and
practical interest. The streams will be characterized as a function of the
pulsed expansion conditions, such as reservoir temperature, pressure, pulse
length, and nozzle design. Light scattering will be used to characterize
transitions from droplet to continuous flow; interferometric imaging will be
used to quantify density and divergence of the stream; and second harmonic
generation will be use to characterize ordered vorticity. Molecular impurities
entrained in the stream will be studied spectroscopically. Among additional
studies there will be investigations of stream-embedded hydrogen molecules by
means of time/frequency resolved CARS spectroscopy, and the coherent rotations
of hydrogen will be used to investigate the size dependent liquid-solid
transition of hydrogen clusters and the possible superfluidity of these
clusters. Graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdoctorate
researchers will gain valuable experience through participation in this
research, which involves cryogenic engineering, optical engineering, and modern
laser techniques, as well as the use of techniques involved in molecular
manipulations at 1 K. Nearly all core areas of the sciences, both classical and
quantum mechanical, will be used in this research, with the result that the
participants will have an unusually rich learning and training experience.
&lt;br/&gt;