* 0317170
* Functional Interlocked Macromolecules and Interpenetrating Supramolecular Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* James Stoddart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2007
* USD 680,000.00

The focus of this research involves the bottom-up fabrication of mechanically
interlocked polymers starting with a preorganization step, where monomers are
brought together by noncovalent forces, followed by a "fixing" step that links
the monomers covalently or covalently and mechanically, to form the polymers.
The construction of both the supramolecular and mechanically interlocked
polymers depends on the hydrogen bonding and other interactions that occur
between a secondary dialkylammonium ion center and a crown ether with at least
[24] crown-8 constitution to bring the recognition units together in an
interpenetrating manner. Both photochemistry and dynamic covalent chemistry will
be used to assist in the formation of the interlocked polymers. The use of
reversible bond formation in the polymerization step will allow for the
production of the most thermodynamically stable polymer.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Dr. J. Fraser Stoddart of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at the University of California-Los Angeles. Dr. Stoddart will
focus his work on using noncovalent synthesis to create supramolecular polymers
and employ supramolecular assistance to covalent synthesis to construct
mechanically interlocked polymers. In a broader sense, understanding the
formation of these polymers will lead to the development of new and unique
polymeric materials and will give insight into the fabrication of nanoscale
materials containing dynamic covalent and mechanical bonds. The project also
provides an excellent venue for the interdisciplinary training of undergraduate,
graduate and postgraduate students.