* 0317930
* Field Investigation of the Influence of Bed Texture on Aeolian Saltation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Steven Namikas, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2008
* USD 139,970.00

The transport of sediment by wind is a key component of environmental problems
ranging from soil erosion and contaminant transport, to dust storms and
desertification. This research will evaluate a new hypothesis regarding the
basic mechanics of the process of wind-blown sediment transport. Most wind-blown
particles larger than dust are moved in a process known as saltation - a series
of hops or bounces along the ground. Theoretical models of saltation have long
been based on the fundamental assumption that increasing wind speeds cause
particles to bounce higher and farther, resulting in the well-documented
increase in the rate of transport. However, transport models based on this
assumption have proven unable to consistently produce accurate predictions.
Preliminary research has indicated that the underlying conceptualization of
saltation may be in error - particles do not bounce higher and farther with
increasing wind speed, rather, the size of the bounce appears to be limited by
the inertia of the bed sediments. The increased kinetic energy of saltating
particles under stronger winds is transferred to the bed sediments, causing
ejection of additional grains into saltation and thereby increasing the rate of
transport. This study will test this hypothesis, and quantify the influence of
bed grain-size on the dimensions of saltation hops. A field experiment will be
conducted in which sediment traps will be employed to measure the proportions of
sediment moving at various elevations above the bed and various horizontal
distances. These traps will be installed downwind of artificial beds composed of
sediments that have been sieved into narrow grain-size ranges. It is expected
that grains bouncing off beds of large particles will hop higher and farther
than those bouncing off beds of finer material, and that hop dimensions will be
largely independent of wind speed. Numerical modeling will be used to
reconstruct the distribution of saltation hops needed to generate the measured
variations in transport, and to quantify how hop dimensions change as a function
of the bed grain-size. These findings will be used to construct a new
theoretical model of the saltation process that will directly incorporate the
influence of bed grain-sizes as documented in this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research critically examines a fundamental
component of the current scientific view of wind-blown sediment transport. It is
likely to alter the prevailing view of how the process works, and the results
will potentially be applicable to sediment transport in other environments.
There are many environmental hazards associated with wind-blown particulates,
and enhanced understanding of saltation will contribute to understanding and
effective management of these problems. Although dusts 'float' in suspension and
are not directly transported by saltation, it is generally accepted that the
impacts of saltating grains are responsible for dislodging and ejecting fines.
Hence, improved understanding of saltation will contribute to improvement in
modeling emissions of substances ranging from topsoil, nutrients and toxic
metals to the chemical contaminants and microorganisms that often attach to fine
particles. From an economic standpoint, the National Research Council recently
published an estimate of off-site costs associated with wind-blown sediment,
which in the western U.S. alone exceed $1 billion per year. Improved
understanding of the processes involved will aid in mitigating these problems
and reducing their economic impact. This research will also provide educational
opportunities and research experience for several graduate students who will
participate in the project, and help to foster the development of the newly
formed Geomorphic Process Laboratory, a multi-university initiative aimed at
applying geomorphic knowledge to solve environmental problems.&lt;br/&gt;