* 0317137
* Collaborative Research: Food-Chain Length in Streams-Testing the Role of Ecosystem Size, Resource Availability and Disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 304,129.00

Collaborative Research: Food-Chain Length in Streams-Testing the Role of
Ecosystem Size, Resource Availability and Disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;Sabo, John
L.&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;A critical determinant of
community structure and ecosystem function is food-chain length, a measure of
the number of times energy and materials are transferred from the bottom to the
top of a food web. Food-chain length affects community structure by altering
trophic interactions, influences ecosystem functions, and, in part, determines
the concentration of contaminants in top predators, including many fish that
humans eat. Food-chain length is also strongly affected by human activities
through, e.g., harvesting activities and habitat fragmentation. Despite the
central place of food-chain length in ecology, relatively little is known about
the factors controlling this fundamental food web property. This project focuses
on how ecosystem size, resource availability and disturbance govern food-chain
length in food webs found in river ecosystems. To address this question, the
project will compare data collected from 40+ rivers across North America, using
existing data sets as well as making new field measurements and applying stable
isotope techniques to estimate food-chain length. A deeper understanding of
food-chain length in streams will help elucidate the complex linkages between
ongoing and accelerating human environmental changes on important societal
concerns such as contaminant concentrations, biodiversity, and carbon cycling.
This project will support the collaboration of three new faculty members during
the crucial early phase of their careers, train a postdoctoral fellow, one
graduate student, and several undergraduates in cross-disciplinary research, and
conduct a hands on K-12 outreach effort in local high schools using stream food
webs as a tool for representing ecological complexity and for teaching an
appreciation of the importance of biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;