* 0317924
* Updating and Cleaning ICPSR's State Legislative Election Returns Data and a Study of State Legislative Redistricting
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Berry, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2007
* USD 208,331.00

Research on American legislative elections focuses predominantly on Congress,
with far less attention given to state legislatures. This is unfortunate because
the large number of state legislative elections, the variation across states in
the character of legislative bodies and election rules, and the increased
importance of states and state legislatures in policy making in the U.S. make
state legislative elections especially well suited for testing theories about
the nature of elections. Probably the greatest impediment to such research is
the lack of readily accessible data about elections in the fifty states. Part I
of the ICPSR data set, State Legislative Election Returns in the United States,
1968-1989 overcomes this obstacle, as it contains, among other things, a range
of political and election outcome measures for each candidate running in every
state legislative general election during the period. However, scholars have
been unable to fully exploit these data because, for candidates for whom there
are multiple observations, the name recorded frequently varies across
observations (e.g. with and without a middle initial, with and without nickname,
typographical errors). These errors make it impossible to reliably trace a
particular candidate from one election to the next, thereby greatly limiting the
utility of the data set. It has been estimated that among incumbents running in
general elections for whom there were more than one observation included in this
data set, 35% had at least one case in which their name was recorded differently
- an error rate of 35%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs, under a recent grant from
NSF, have developed and implemented a procedure to "clean" the candidate names
by creating an adjusted name variable that is consistent across multiple
instances of the same candidate, and should have an error rate of 2% or less.
The procedure includes a series of computer algorithms followed by the human
review of records using a set of formal decision rules. This current
investigation updates the State Legislative Elections Returns data through the
2002 elections and applies the name cleaning process to the extended data set.
The result will be one seamless data set including information on every state
legislative general election candidate from 1968 to&lt;br/&gt;2002 in which
scholars can accurately trace the electoral history of each candidate. ICPSR has
agreed to archive this updated and cleaned version of the data set which will
include the original candidate name variable, the adjusted name variable, and
all of the remaining twenty-seven substantive variables included in the original
data set for the entire time period. To enhance the scholarly value of this data
set, two companion data sets will be created - one containing numerous state-
level variables for 1968-2002, and&lt;br/&gt;one including measures of district
demographic characteristics for the 1992-2002 period.&lt;br/&gt;Several scholars
have already expressed interest in using the enhanced State Legislative Election
Returns data set. When completed, this data set will facilitate research on a
diverse range of topics, including: partisan realignment in the South, the
behavior and impact of minor party candidates, the determinants of electoral
success of incumbents over the course of their careers, and the linkage between
elections and the public policy choices of politicians. Importantly, for various
reasons discussed in the proposal, systematic fifty-state analysis of such
topics as the impact of term limits, the link between&lt;br/&gt;elections and
roll call voting across states, and redistricting is feasible only if the data
set is extended past 1989. Indeed, this research has a plan for the PIs to
employ these data to study how the interaction of strategic candidates and
legislative institutions affects the partisan and incumbency electoral pressures
present in legislative redistricting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the basic
research value of this research, the project has the potential for broader
impacts by informing public debate on a broad range of issues, including
redistricting, term limits, the incumbency advantage, and the operation of
representative democracy in the American
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;