* 0317510
* BioText:  Improving Search over Bioscience Literature via Language Analysis and User Interface Design
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Adam Arkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 01/31/2009
* USD 840,027.00

The University of California at Berkeley has been given a grant to design,
prototype, implement and evaluate a new search system for bioscience literature.
There are significant components of the project that deal with processing of
language as it is naturally spoken or written, the design of the search screen
and how it works, as well as basic database design and implementation.
Evaluation of the effectiveness and performance of the system will be done using
techniques in which the same set of evaluation questions are applied at each
stage of the design, thus ensuring that revisions always improve the results. To
label the linguistic relations between biological terms and descriptions in the
text, a new computational linguistics technique called "statistical semantic
grammars" will be developed. The algorithms will be built on the investigator's
earlier work on the relations between pairs or groups of nouns in natural
language and drawing general ideas about unseen sequences of words by making use
of the hierarchical structure of how word definitions are related to each other.
The evaluation of the language labeling component will use standard measures of
precision and recovery of information against a known standard collection of
text. Although the initial data will come from PubMed abstracts, the design and
interface are meant to be applicable for bioscience literature in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;