* 0317294
* Experimental Investigations of Protein Reconfiguration Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Victor Munoz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 514,693.00

What are the motions of the polypeptide chain in its search for the native
structure? The timescales for these motions set the 'speed limit' to protein
folding. Moreover, the interplay between the local dynamics of the backbone and
the dynamics of long chain segments is critical to the mechanisms of folding.
This project aims at providing direct measurements of the dynamics of chain
reconfiguration in proteins. Although these issues have been subject of
intensive computational studies, very little experimental information is
currently available. The scarcity of experimental data is due to technical
difficulties and the lack of an appropriate model system. The first problem has
been recently alleviated by the development of fast-folding methods. The
solution to the second problem involves finding proteins that undergo these
transitions without crossing large free energy barriers, which hide the
underlying dynamics. In this project a nanosecond laser-induced temperature-jump
instrument will be applied to the study of protein reconfiguration dynamics. Two
complementary processes will be investigated: the dynamics of random hydrophobic
collapse, and the dynamics leading to the native topology. The kinetics of
random hydrophobic collapse will be studied in a 40 residue protein, which has
recently been found to undergo random collapse -i.e. without formation of any
kind of specific structure- at high temperature, as result of the strengthening
of the hydrophobic effect. Collapse to the native topology will be investigated
in a protein fragment that folds into a stable Molten Globule. The degree of
collapse as a function of time will be determined by measuring the end to end
distance using fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Secondary structure will
be measured by infrared absorption. The results from these studies will be
critical to test the predictions from the statistical theory of protein folding.
Moreover, they will provide important benchmarks for computer simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reactions by which proteins fold into their functional
three-dimensional structures are among the most fundamental self-organization
processes in biology. Deciphering the mechanisms of protein folding is critical
to understand how genetic information is translated into specific biological
functions, as well as the mechanics of molecular evolution. Eventually, this
knowledge could be harnessed to design proteins 'a la carte', leading to a new
technological revolution. Protein folding reactions are characterized by a
combination of intertwined dynamic and energetic processes. To investigate
directly the more subtle dynamic processes, this project proposes to study
proteins in special conditions that preclude the formation of specific
structures. This strategy eliminates the free energy barriers that dominate
standard folding reactions, making a direct measure of the reconfiguration
dynamics of proteins feasible. A laser-induced temperature jump apparatus with
nanosecond resolution will be employed to resolve entirely such fast processes.
The specific goals are to directly measure the collapse of unfolded proteins
into a random globule, determine the 'speed limit' to protein folding, and to
investigate the competition between local dynamics and collapse in forming the
native secondary structure and topology. These are some of the most basic and
still unresolved questions in protein folding. &lt;br/&gt;