* 0317826
* Querying Linguistic Databases
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2008
* Steven Bird, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2008
* USD 299,853.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Mark Liberman and Dr. Steven Bird
will lead a team conducting three years of research on data models and query
languages for linguistic databases. The project will develop relational and XML
data models for linguistic databases combining annotated recordings, comparative
wordlists, data tabulations, interlinear texts, syntactic trees, ontologies of
descriptive terms, and links between all these types. High-level user interfaces
will support query-by-example and online analytical processing, permitting
linguists to select appropriate language data, integrate data from multiple
sources, transform the structure of the data, add new annotations in
collaboration with others, and convert it all to suitable formats for archiving
and for use in research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Describing and
analyzing human languages depends on being able to manage large databases of
annotated text and recorded speech. The size and complexity of these databases
promises to bring unprecedented depth and breadth to empirical linguistic
research. However, this promise will not be fulfilled until language scientists
can readily access and manipulate the data. This project will apply recent
research in databases to linguistics, develop a linguistic query language, and
deploy it in a variety of open-source tools for creating, managing, analyzing,
and displaying annotated linguistic databases. By making rich data re-usable,
the research will open the way to a deeper and broader understanding of the
world's languages.&lt;br/&gt;