* 0317345
* Collaborative Research: A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Plasma Deposition of Nanocrystalline Silicon Films
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Dimitrios Maroudas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 09/30/2006
* USD 149,931.00

Hydrogenated nanocrystalline silicon (nc-Si:H) thin films grown by plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) from feed gases containing silane
(SiH4) and hydrogen (H2) have tremendous potential for electronic,
optoelectronic, and photovoltaic device fabrication technologies. Plasma-surface
interactions during PECVD and subsequent H2 plasma treatment of these films
determine their structure and properties. The films may be either
polycrystalline, where nanometer-size grains are separated by grain boundaries,
or polymorphous where the nanocrystals are embedded in a hydrogenated amorphous
Si (a-Si:H) matrix. Fundamental understanding of the plasma-surface interactions
that govern the nucleation and growth of the nanocrystalline phase during
deposition or post-deposition processing, as well as control of the
nanocrystalline grain size distribution are essential for tailoring the
electronic and optical properties of the deposited films.

This research aims at developing strategies for controlling the grain size and
crystalline fraction in nc-Si:H films formed through low-temperature PECVD from
SiH4 heavily diluted in H2 or through post treatment of a-Si:H films with H
atoms created by plasma dissociation of H2. Toward these goals, the PIs propose
a research plan that integrates in situ plasma and surface diagnostics with
atomic-scale simulations. They seek a fundamental and quantitative understanding
of the role of hydrogen in the nucleation and growth of nanocrystalline silicon
films that will aid in manipulating synthesis methods and choosing plasma-
processing parameters to gain a better control over the film properties than is
currently possible. As a result, the proposed study will set the stage for
establishing quantitative relationships between the film's structure (e.g.,
grain size and crystalline fraction) and plasma processing parameters, such as
the H flux and the substrate temperature.

The proposed experimental work will focus on synthesizing silicon films
containing nanocrystals through H-atom post treatment of a-Si:H films deposited
by PECVD. Fluxes of H atoms will be measured using line-of-sight threshold-
ionization mass spectrometry. In situ multiple total internal reflection Fourier
transform infrared (MTIR-FTIR) specroscopy will be used to detect silicon
hydrides in the growing film and on its grain boundaries. High-resolution
transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and Raman
spectroscopy will provide information on the grain sizes and grain-size
distribution, as well as crystalline fraction; spectroscopic ellipsometry will
be used in situ during deposition and post treatment to monitor the evolution of
these same parameters. In conjunction with the experimental work, molecular-
dynamics (MD) simulations of a-Si:H film growth and H2 plasma post treatment
will be carried out aiming at both fundamental understanding of the growth and
crystallization mechanisms and comprehensive identification of chemical reaction
and diffusion processes for subsequent quantitative energetic and rate analysis.
The resulting reaction/diffusion database will be used as input for implementing
hybrid off-lattice kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations that are capable of
capturing the long-time- scale dynamics of silicon film growth and H2 plasma
post treatment. The computational results will be compared directly with the
experimental data; the insights gained from the simulations will be used to
guide new experimental studies and design new deposition strategies.

Intellectual Merit - The proposed research is pioneering in linking experimental
diagnostic measurements and structural characterization analyses with
computational atomic-scale studies of chemical reactions and crystallization
mechanisms. The research is particularly timely given our recent developments of
in situ experimental techniques for monitoring plasma-surface interactions and
atomic-scale simulation tools. The PIs anticipate that their research findings
will enable systematic engineering strategies for controlling thin-film
crystallinity and the grain size distribution of nanocrystalline silicon films,
which in turn determine the films' electronic and optical properties. In
addition, they expect that their research strategy and methodology will be
applicable to studying the growth and processing of various other
technologically important materials.

Broader Impact - The scientific underpinnings of nanostructured materials
synthesis and thin-film deposition & processing are multidisciplinary and cut
across traditional boundaries between physics, chemistry, chemical engineering,
materials science, as well as applied and numerical mathematics. Thus, the
proposed systematic study of silicon thin-film deposition and post-deposition
processing provides ideal means for training students to address technologically
important problems using an integrated, state-of-the-art experimental and
computational approach. The results of the research will be disseminated broadly
in the physics, chemistry, electronic materials, and plasma engineering
communities through publications and conference presentations. The proposed
research has the potential to enable technological advancements in low-
temperature plasma deposition of nc-Si:H films which will have tremendous impact
on fabrication of solar cells for renewable energy production and flexible
display manufacturing for consumer electronics.