* 0318739
* Acquisition of Testing Equipment for the New Lohr Structures Laboratory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Arden Sigl, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2004
* USD 280,213.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; This proposal is for the acquisition of 1) a hydraulic
structural testing system, 2) a modular loading steel frame,&lt;br/&gt;3) a
post-tensioning system, 4) load cells, and 5) miscellaneous tools. The
instrumentation will provide South Dakota with&lt;br/&gt;much needed
opportunities in research, outreach, and education. A host of emerging
technologies and&lt;br/&gt;design philosophies can be researched and developed
using the new testing facility at SDSU. For&lt;br/&gt;example, strength and
fatigue of high performance concrete prestressed girders, performance-
based&lt;br/&gt;design of structures, and behavior of flared bridge columns
under biaxial bending are some of the&lt;br/&gt;research topics that can be
initiated in the immediate future. Availability of research support will
enable&lt;br/&gt;South Dakota to attract and support qualified graduate students
and to provide training and research&lt;br/&gt;experience to undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;. If equipped, the Lohr Structures Laboratory will be a
unique testing facility of its kind and capacity in the state of South Dakota
and some neighboring&lt;br/&gt;states. The goal is to establish an excellent
structures testing facility that will be used for research,&lt;br/&gt;education,
and outreach activities. The main objectives are to : 1) enable researchers at
SDSU to&lt;br/&gt;conduct research in their field of expertise, 2) enhance the
competitiveness of researchers at SDSU to&lt;br/&gt;pursue national research
projects, 3) establish collaborative research projects with SDSM&amp;T and out-
of-state&lt;br/&gt;institutions , 4) meet the research needs of regional
government agencies and private industry,&lt;br/&gt;5) provide research
experience to graduate and undergraduate students at SDSU, and 6) enrich
the&lt;br/&gt;learning experience of students by using experimental
simulation.&lt;br/&gt; The Laboratory can also be used effectively in outreach
activities by providing experimental demonstrations and&lt;br/&gt;hands-on
workshops. Integrating research and teaching will also have positive influence
on&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate education. The Lohr Structures Laboratory can be used
effectively in the instruction of&lt;br/&gt;CEE 311 (Structural Material
Laboratory) and other design courses that incorporate
experimental&lt;br/&gt;simulation. Potential sponsors for research and
educational activities include Federal Highway&lt;br/&gt;Administration,
National Science Foundation, Department of Energy, state departments of
transportation,&lt;br/&gt;and local and national private industries.&lt;br/&gt;