* 0318163
* Models and Measurement:  (S,s) Inventories and Investment Under Adjustment Costs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Julia Thomas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2006
* USD 206,495.00

This proposal includes two projects exploring the relation between adjustment
costs and investment. Each uses new models and methods to examine questions
central to understanding how the economy changes over time. The first project,
joint with Aubhik Khan of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, considers
the question: "Do inventories exacerbate the business cycle?" It examines the
aggregate implications of endogenous generalized (S,s) inventory investment,
focusing on inventories of intermediate goods in a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium model with capital accumulation. First, the model's ability to
reproduce observed cyclical relations between inventory investment, final sales
and production is assessed. Next, the effects of such inventories for the
overall business cycle are studied. The second project considers, "How do
differing assumptions about firms' discount rates influence structural estimates
of capital adjustment costs?" It explores a researcher's ability to estimate
adjustment costs and explain the volatility and persistence of investment
fluctuations under varying assumptions about the relation between the process
governing shocks to firms' profits and that governing their intertemporal profit
valuations. Both projects involve considerable heterogeneity across plants. This
makes the determination of equilibrium prices difficult, due to the standard
feedback of decision rules through prices. Equilibrium prices are solved by
allowing agents' to forecast the future state using a subset of the aggregate
state vector. Firms' decision rules, which are highly nonlinear, are solved
using multivariate spline interpolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: The topic of inventories has long been prominent in discussions of the
business cycle, yet it has been largely ignored by modern business cycle theory.
Most macroeconomic inventory research has focused on linear quadratic
representative firm models that are partial equilibrium by design and generally
disappointing in their empirical predictions. By contrast, the leading
microeconomic model of inventories, the (S,s) model originally solved by Scarf
(1960), has received almost no macroeconomic attention. The project corrects
this important omission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research may
substantially alter policymakers' understanding of the role of inventories in
aggregate fluctuations. For example, preliminary results suggest that recent
advances in inventory management, in reducing the size of average stocks, may be
responsible for dampened business cycles. When these stocks arise from nonconvex
ordering or delivery costs, a reduction in such frictions that leads to reduced
average inventory-sales ratios and dampened fluctuations in inventory investment
may actually raise the overall volatility in GDP, because reduced inventory
accumulation is accompanied by larger fluctuations in final sales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;