* 0318510
* ADVANCE Leadership Award:  MentorNet ACE:  Academic Career E-Mentoring for Women in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Carol Muller, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 10/31/2005
* USD 299,847.00

MentorNet (www.MentorNet.net) was founded in 1997 as an innovative large-scale
electronic mentoring strategy, pairing women studying engineering and related
sciences at colleges and universities with female and male professionals in
industry for yearlong, structured mentoring relationships, conducted via email.
MentorNet has grown into an online community, leveraging its extensive web site,
email, and other electronic communications technologies and related systems and
software to offer structured one-on-one, group and peer mentoring for its
members on a large scale. Over the last five years, MentorNet has matched nearly
10,000 undergraduate and graduate students with e-mentors working in industry
and government in its One-on-One mentoring program; it has also received
numerous requests from both students and faculty to support academic
e-mentoring. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Based on results of past work, evaluation
findings and other research, the PI proposes to expand MentorNet into MentorNet
ACE, a new project focused on substantially refining and expanding MentorNet.s
programs to include e-mentoring services addressing the needs of women students
and untenured faculty seeking or pursuing academic science and engineering
careers. To that end, MentorNet plans to develop specialized components of its
One-on-One Mentoring Program, enabling one-on-one mentoring relationships based
on 1) matching graduate students and postdoctoral scholars with tenured faculty
members as mentors, and 2) matching untenured faculty with tenured faculty
mentors. MentorNet will develop a comprehensive approach for this project, with
programmatic features tailored to the needs of the specific protege-mentor
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;