* 0318712
* SGER: Precision Fabrication of Multi-Component, Multi-Functional Catalytic Membranes Using Photolithography
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Susan Stagg-Williams, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2005
* USD 64,433.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane reactors combine reaction and
separation in the same unit and shift the equilibrium and increase yield by
removing a product as it is formed. Selective oxygen permeable membranes may be
used as selective catalytic reactors for example to make syngas commercially.
The PI plans to use photolithographic techniques to fabricate multi-functional
catalytic membranes consisting of assembled catalyst clusters on a functioning
selective oxygen permeable membrane. The use of photolithography should result
in a highly reproducible fabrication process that will reduce the intra-batch
and inter-batch variability that is inherent in current catalytic manufacturing
techniques. The fabrication process will reduce membrane fabrication cost by
producing an automated manufacturing process similar to the wafer fabrication
technology employed in the semiconductor industry. The enhancement effects on
the oxygen flux through the membrane will provide the technology necessary for
selective oxygen permeable membranes to become industrially attractive. The
technique could also influence the study of model catalysts by fabricating
multi-component, multi-functional heterogeneous catalysts that can be tested and
characterized to gain fundamental information about the functionality of each
catalyst component. In addition, the successful completion of the project should
result in a membrane reactor that can be studied and modeled at bench scale and
then scaled-up by making larger membrane wafers or stacks of parallel
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental information about cluster size,
uniformity, and membrane stability during processing will be obtained, as well
as an understanding of the reaction mechanism, the role of each component, and
the direct effect of the catalyst on the oxygen transport through the membrane.
The membranes will be characterized using Field Emission Scanning Electron
Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis. The oxygen permeation and the
stability of the membranes will be tested using the partial oxidation of methane
monitored with an online gas chromatograph and mass
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential advances achievable using selective
oxygen permeable membranes could make them a viable technology for applications
such as hydrogen production for fuel cells (energy and environmental impact),
oxygen sensors (homeland security), filtration of hazardous components from an
oxygen stream (homeland security), and oxygen generation systems.&lt;br/&gt;