* 0318012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  Age Discrimination, an Audit Study
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Dora Costa, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,045.00

Labor market discrimination is a major social concern in the US, yet its causes
are not well understood. This research explores labor market discrimination
against unskilled women between the ages of 45 and 65 using a resume audit
approach. Matched resumes, identical in all respects except age, will be sent to
companies with entry-level job openings. Age is signaled by date of high school
graduation and only the most recent 10 years of work experience will be listed
on the resume. If discrimination exists, there should be a negative relationship
between age and interview request rates. The resume audit will be conducted in
the Boston and Tampa/St Petersburg areas. Other reasons for discrimination will
also be explored through varying resume characteristics. OLS and logit
regressions will be used to analyze the data.

Sociologists and psychologists have used the resume audits to study labor market
discrimination but these studies lack the double blind attribute. While
economists have used the matched pair resume audit method to study housing and
labor market discrimination, only one set of audit studies has been done to
explore age discrimination in the labor market. This research presents well-
controlled evidence on the extent of age-discrimination against older women in
the labor market and the ability of these potential workers to supplement their
social security income. The result of this research will add to our current
knowledge through its ability to discriminate between different reasons for age
discrimination in hiring. Finally, since it compares four different ages rather
than just two, this study adds power to the audit methodology as used in age
discrimination.

Although there are more older women in the labor force than older men, there are
been virtually no studies of labor market discrimination against older women.
The economics literature generally assumes that labor force non-participation is
a choice for older women and that only supply-side factors are relevant for
policy discussions (such as changing social security benefits). Given that women
live longer than men, this is a serious omission in the literature and policy
discussions. By exploring the demand-side aspects of labor market for older
women, this study will bring the demand-side of the labor market for older women
into policy discussions about older people generally and older women in
particular.

