* 0318843
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Sensitive Surface Plasmon Resonance Instrumentation for Detecting Biomolecular Interactions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Timothy Burland, GWC Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 04/30/2004
* USD 99,724.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop
affordable, highly sensitive instrumentation for detection of biomolecular
interactions without the need for labeling. Although many methods are available
for detecting biomolecular interactions, most require that one of the molecules
involved be labeled. Such labeling may inadvertantly alter the natural binding
properties of the molecules. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) instruments detect
molecular binding in the absence of fluorescent or other labels. However, some
applications of SPR are limited by the method's sensitivity or its throughput:
SPR imaging instruments use light of one wavelength to analyze multiple
molecular interaction sites on a biochip simultaneously, thereby improving
throughput; Fourier-Transform Infrared SPR (FT-SPR) instruments measure SPR of a
single molecular interaction at multiple wavelengths, thereby increasing
sensitivity of detection. Combining the multiple-site detection capabilities of
SPR imagers with the wavelength scanning capabilities of FT-SPR instruments
should improve both sensitivity and throughput in a single instrument. This
project aims to design, assemble and test a prototype irFT-SPR imaging
instrument.

The commercial application of this project will be broadly useful in markets
such as the detection of bioterrorism agents, drug discovery, forensics, and
crop improvement. The instrument would reduce costs compared with competing
detection techniques while bringing the label-free benefits of SPR to these
commercial applications.

