* 0318427
* US-Korea Cooperative Research on Model-Based Analysis of Moving Objects for Video Tracking
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mongi Abidi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 07/31/2007
* USD 40,000.00

0318427&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abidi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
Mongi Abidi and Andreas Koschan of the University of Tennessee, together with a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student, to establish a research
collaboration in image processing with Professor Joonki Paik and his research
group at the Graduate School of Advanced Imaging Science of Chung-Ang University
in Seoul, Korea. Together they will build a theoretical framework for tracking
one or more moving objects in two dimensions (Korean group) and in three
dimensions (US group.) Their research will use multiple active video sensors and
they will explore image-processing techniques to enhance input images gathered
by a self-controlled specialized camera. Stabilizing input images from moving
video sensors is a challenging task because of the irregular movements of the
camera as well as its self-controlled mechanisms for focusing, adjusting shutter
speed and iris, and gain control. Computational efficiency is the primary issue
for achieving real-time video tracking on various computing platforms. The
anticipated results of this work are improvements in both software and hardware
used for video tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important societal benefits of
this research are improved video-based surveillance for security of large areas
and enhanced control of robots used in hazardous situations. Broader impacts of
this research include the educational value to the participating student and
postdoc who will have access to complementary state-of-the-art equipment in the
U.S. and Korea, while benefiting from the experience of research collaboration
and establishing professional contacts in another country.&lt;br/&gt;