* 0318072
* Time Perception and Processing in Human Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* John Colombo, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2006
* USD 190,130.00

The perception and processing of time is a critical aspect of human experience
in many domains. It has long been investigated within theories of learning, but
it has also been demonstrated to be relevant to more complex cognitive
abilities, and its study has been linked recently with both developmental
disabilities and enhancing our knowledge of brain function. Time perception has
been specifically investigated in children, but to this point, we know very
little about how time is perceived or processed during human infancy. However, a
recent study with innovative methodologies monitored infants' heart rate while
they were presented with a visual stimulus sequence in a predictable on-off
pattern. After several repetitions of these patterns, the stimulus was omitted.,
and infants showed a slowing (deceleration) of the heartbeat. The timing of when
that deceleration occurred suggested when the infants expected the stimulus to
reappear, and the timing of that heart rate response indicated that human
infants show an extraordinarily precise sense of time. The studies supported by
this grant award use this basic procedure to conduct a series of four
experiments on the sense of time in 4- and 9-month-old infants. The first
experiment examines whether infants can accurately perceive regular time
intervals of different lengths. The second examines how infants respond to time
intervals that are variable. The third studies whether infants can form simple
rules about whether time intervals increase or decrease. Finally, the fourth
study examines the degree to which distracting infants' attention affects their
sense of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The perception and processing of time is a
fundamental aspect of human behavior. Philosophers such as Aristotle, Kant, and
Wittgenstein have pondered its significance to human experience, and it should
come as no surprise that the perception of time has been an important topic
within the psychology as well. Time perception is critical to learning, given
that the elapsed time between events in our environment governs whether the
brain will associate those events. Thus, the study of how we process time will
illuminate a number of basic human abilities, such as our learning of language,
our linking causes with effects, and our perception and judgments during social
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;