* 0318339
* NEW CONCEPT FOR CONTROLLING MODES IN A FABRY-PEROT
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Elsa Garmire, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00



A Fabry-Perot consists of two parallel mirrors used to define modes in lasers,
tunable filters, spectrum analyzers, and some modulators. The mirrors are
usually dielectric quarter wave stacks that reflect in a distributed way,
throughout their thickness. The objective of this project is to demonstrate that
the effective penetration length into the quarter wave stack mirror (also called
a distributed Bragg reflector) can become large and negative, zero, or large and
positive, depending on careful control of the refractive indices. This concept
will then be applied to: a) producing single mode semiconductor lasers and b)
investigating high speed spatial light modulators.

Intellectual merit: this project stems from a new analytic solution to the
effective penetration length in these distributed mirrors and the discovery of
both a pole and a zero in the solution. The existence of these regimes has been
checked by computer and implies a number of important applications in optical
devices and systems. Defining and demonstrating these applications is the
exciting challenge. For example, this will be the first time that control of a
Fabry-Perot mode spacing is achieved by controlling the refractive index in its
mirrors. Furthermore, a negative penetration length implies superluminal
reflection, which is an important intellectual challenge to explain and find
applications for.

To achieve this regime with high reflectivity requires the distributed reflector
be deposited on metal (or a metal film) or to use a large number of layer-pairs.
In either case, careful control of the refractive indices of the films is
required. This is the technical challenge that will be undertaken in the
laboratory. It will be helped by a thin film measurement technique introduced by
author in 1983 and will use a thin film deposition technology that was developed
at Dartmouth.

Broader impact: Controlling the effective penetration length of a distributed
mirror offers a wide range of applications. These include: inexpensive single
mode semiconductor lasers, mode-locked semiconductor lasers with more power per
pulse, simpler fabrication of fiber Fabry-Perot tunable filters, a practical
variable optical attenuator, better Fabry-Perot optical sensors, simpler
fabrication of VCSEL's, and resonant photo-detectors. Finally, nonlinear and
electrically driven waveguide modulators and spatial light modulators become
practical. The concept pioneered here can also be used to achieve in-plane right
angle bends in waveguides, which usually requires nanostructure photonic bandgap
materials.

This research will also have a positive impact on training engineering
personnel, since the P. I. is a woman and the Ph. D. graduate student proposed
to initiate the research is also a woman. Dartmouth as a college is involved in
state-of-the-art research and provides a model for teaching-research
institutions.