* 0318856
* SBIR Phase I:     Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA) Biosensor for Rapid Bioterrorism Related Agent Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Winston Ho, MAXWELL SENSORS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,776.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
self-contained enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) biochip, for rapid and
confirmatory diagnosis of bioterrorist related pathogens. The ELISA chip
utilizes microfluidic technology to automate and simplify the assay process on a
small chip platform. The plastic chip (reagent pre-loaded) is affordable and
ready for use, but eliminates the need for a network of tubing connected to
bulky external reservoirs and pump systems used in current large clinical
laboratory systems and microfluidic systems. The Phase I research will focus on
developing the ELISA sensor platform, constructing a pressure driven micro-
mechanism for automation, integrating the reader system, performing assays and
evaluating the system's technical merits.

The commercial application of this project will be in detecting biological
warfare agents (BWA) and in managing BWA suspected patients. The ELISA based
biochip has the potential to be used as a rapid testing standard to quickly
yield preliminary data in advance of microbiology tests. The system, with its
extreme sensitivity and specificity, also offers a great deal of commercial
opportunities in the field of clinical diagnostics.