* 0318517
* SBIR Phase I:     Electro-Optic Sensor for Real-Time Defect Detection During Integrated Circuits (IC) and Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) Wafer Growth
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Araz Yacoubian, Ler Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
novel methodology for real time (in-situ) non-destructive detection of defects
and damage at micron and sub-micron length scales. The objectives of this
research are (a) to demonstrate detection of defects in semi-conductor thin-
films and micro-structured materials by generating and detecting high-frequency
elastic waves, and analyzing the acoustic response; and (b) to design a damage
detection technique for real time inspection of integrated circuits (IC) and
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) during wafer growth. The method utilizes a
high-speed polymeric electro-optic (EO) integrated sensor to analyze the
acoustic response due to a pulsed laser induced elastic waves. The sensor is an
interferometer that has an EO element built in, which is used to down convert
gigahertz range (GHz) acoustic response signals to lower-frequency (kHz to MHz)
detectable signal by heterodyning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The commercial
application of this work is real time (in-situ) defect detection during IC and
MEMS wafer growth. Current wafer technology utilizes high-resolution lithography
and expensive, time-consuming processing steps. Early stage detection of defects
using the proposed method will result in high-yield and low-cost wafer
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;