* 0318141
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research: New Sol-Gel Prepared Anti-Corrosion Thin Films for Aluminum Alloys and Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Darryl Butt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0318141&lt;br/&gt;Butt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Darryl Butt, Department of
Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
and Dr. Adel Ismail, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute
(CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt. The PIs will study new surface treatments based on
cerium, vanadate, molybdate and permanganate compounds applied by sol-gel method
as replacement of processes involving hexavalent chromium. Hexavalent chromium
is a widely used corrosion barrier that is a known carcinogen. The corrosion
protection provided by these new treatments will be evaluated using
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and polarization tests. The adhesion
performance will be also measured using standard test methods. A series of
specimens will be prepared under different experimental conditions such as rate
of gelation, drying temperature and also, under different surface preparation
prior to applying the treatment compounds. The viscosity and the time to convert
sol into gel will be also investigated. The corrosion protection performance of
the new coatings systems will be investigated under scratched and uniform
coatings conditions. The adhesion performance will be also measured. The
durability of the promising coating systems will be compared with a chromate-
based coating system under severe conditions using the salt spray chamber
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The research results can have a significant
impact in solving an engineering problem, that of protecting aluminum alloys and
composites from corrosion. Replacement of toxic hexavalent chromium as a method
of corrosion protection of Al alloys is of great importance in a very large
number of applications. The results will lead to the gradual use of non-toxic
materials as coatings for Al alloys and Al composites. There is clear
identification of roles by the collaborating teams and both groups have
experience with sol gels. The two institutes have the necessary facilities for
this work. Students are expected to participate in the project and will develop
an understanding for problems related to corrosion, interfaces, and processing
techniques. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;