* 0318174
* High-Technology Agglomerations and Urban Inequalities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Elsie Echeverri-Carroll, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 50,025.00

The high-techology sector grew at twice the rate of the overall economy during
the 1980s and four times faster during the 1990s. The boom in high-tech
industries in the United States paralleled the rise in U.S. earnings inequality
during the same period. These inequalities were not distributed homogeneously
across regions. Preliminary research shows that wage inequalities seem to be
higher in high-tech regions. Inequalities in high-tech regions are not only
associated with class inequalities determined by earnings differences between
those at the top and the bottom of the wage distribution, but also with the
emergence of a social polarization across race and gender in high-tech regions.
This research project will study high-technology spatial agglomerations and the
relationship with different types of inequality, such as differences associated
with gender, race, and educational levels, and differences within groups.
Previous empirical research makes the strong assumption that regional economies
with conditions associated with rising inequality at the national level should
be associated with high local levels of inequality as well. It does not
identify, however, the factors that ensure that some cities are affected more by
those national trends responsible for wage inequalities. This project will
identify the factors that make some cities more susceptible to the national
trends. These micro-city factors emerge from the rich contribution of an
abundant set of case studies of high-tech agglomerations as well as from recent
studies on urban agglomerations and knowledge externalities. The project will
use the Public Use Microdata Survey (PUMS) sample of the 2000 Census of
Population to measure the effect of the high-tech industry on wages after
controlling for observable characteristics of workers and metropolitan
statistical areas. The model consists of individual-level and city-level
equations with error terms at each level and an absence of correlation across
levels. The research will address statistical issues related to endogeneity in
the analysis of urban wage inequalities in the context of multilevel
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policymakers in high-tech regions have become
increasingly concerned that large segments of their populations are not reaping
the benefits of economic growth associated with high-tech industrial growth.
Social polarization is an increasingly important issue in the United States.
This project will shed light on the degree to which it emanates from the growth
of high-tech firms. The study will document and increasing understanding about
the social polarization effects of high-technology growth so that their effects
can be mitigated when the next expansionary phase starts in earnest. Without
such new insights, the inequalities of the digital divide in high-tech regions
may rend the urban social fabric in much the same way that earlier industrial
waves wrought their divisions on cities.&lt;br/&gt;