* 0318853
* SBIR Phase I:     The Use of Halophytic Plants for the Bioremediation of Coal Bed Methane Discharge Waters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* John Woiwode, AquaMatrix International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project plans to use halophytic
plants for the bioremediation of coal bed methane (CBM) discharge water. CBM
discharge is widely viewed as an environmental liability. Indiscriminant surface
discharge causes salination of soils. The drilling companies are therefore in
urgent need for an acceptable discharge process. The hypothesis for the proposed
work is that halophytic plants will consume enough sodium to enable surface
irrigation of CBM discharge. These bioremediation efforts will be further
enhanced by intensive fish production in CBM waters prior to discharge.
Successful experimental results will provide complementary, alternative,
sustainable tools to manage CBM discharge.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of bioremediation. CBM
discharge would be more environmentally acceptable when utilizing water that has
significantly reduced sodium absorption ratio (SAR). This could open up huge
areas of land for responsible CBM exploration and recovery. Forage animals could
derive significant nutrition from select halophytes irrigated with CBM
discharge. Noxious weeds encroaching on discharge areas would be displaced by
organized agriculture of halophytic plants. Surface soils would ultimately
contain less salts. Nutrient input from fish manures could result in
significantly greater growth of desirable plants.