* 0318436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contesting Beauties: Multilingualism, Language Shift, and Linguistic Ideology in Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Salikoko Mufwene, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2004
* USD 11,972.00

Under the direction of Dr. Salikoko Mufwene, Ms. Sabrina Billings will conduct
sociolinguistic research for her doctoral dissertation on language use and
linguistic ideologies in Tanzania. English, Swahili, and about 120 ethnic
languages are used there, with each language being linked to an array of ideas
about national or regional identity, ethnic or political affiliation, as well as
modernity, globalization, and tradition. The choice of any one of them can be
interpreted ideologically and can arouse controversy. This project seeks to
articulate the multivalent ideologies associated with language choices and how
these ideologies shape societal multilingualism and inform changes in a
community's linguistic repertoire. Billings will study negotiations about
language use during beauty pageants. Despite their recent popularity, there is
no agreed upon language in which to conduct these events. These pageants are
thus ideologically charged performances and hence excellent sites for research
on language ideology. Billings will study language use among contestants,
judges, and hosts in 10 regional beauty pageants and the Tanzanian national
pageant. With video recordings, she will document language choices,
codeswitching, and participants' commentaries about language. Following the
pageants, she will interview participants and audience members to assess their
reactions to language use during the pageant proceedings. Questionnaires
regarding the subjects' linguistic backgrounds will also be filled
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to better understanding
of societal multilingualism and the mechanisms that account for language
endangerment and loss, as well as language use in Tanzania. The project will
document language use in a country where relatively little ethnographic research
has been undertaken, providing insights into regional variation in Swahili, the
ways that Tanzania's many languages fit together socially, and the role of
women's speech in this structure. The project's results will enhance
understanding of the causes driving linguistic change and the disappearance of
many indigenous languages throughout the world. Finally, by reframing the issues
surrounding language death in a way that emphasizes local speakers' own ideas
and decisions, this project will offer a baseline for developing and evaluating
educational and language policies in Tanzania, with potential application to
other strongly multilingual societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;