* 0318800
* Distingushing Principles from Prejudice in American's Views on Racial Policy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Leonie Huddy, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2006
* USD 342,116.00

&lt;br/&gt; Conflict over racial issues has become one of the major political
cleavages in American society and government attempts to eradicate racial
differences in financial well being remained highly controversial. Busing,
affirmative college admission programs, efforts to award government contracts to
minority-owned businesses, the Head Start lunch program, and other racial
programs have aroused heated opposition. To better understand the public
controversy that currently surrounds government action on racial matters, the
investigators examine two competing explanations for broad opposition to racial
policies. The first examines opposition grounded in political ideology that
stems from individualism and support for limited government; the second explores
the role of racial prejudice. There is no consensus, as yet, on which of these
two explanations best accounts for opposition to racial policies. The goal in
this project is to resolve this controversy more fully than has been
accomplished by past research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad approach to the
problem is developed that builds on past empirical studies, but widens the scope
of research considerably. Two analytic methods are melded that have been used in
past research to disentangle the origins of racial attitudes: multivariate
analyses of cross-sectional data, and experimental designs typically embedded
within a survey instrument. Multivariate methods attempt to statistically
distinguish between the effects of prejudice and principles on racial policy
preferences, although the success of the technique depends heavily on the
conceptual status of the measures used to assess a concept. The measurement of
racial attitudes has been especially controversial, undermining broad acceptance
of evidence that racial resentment and other measures of the "new" racism
predict racial policy opposition. In contrast, experimental methods have
typically varied the nature and qualities of racial program beneficiaries, but
can lead to differences in interpretation of key findings. The investigators
build on the strengths of both approaches by relying on a combined experimental-
multivariate approach in which they vary a set of racial programs experimentally
and analyze the results using multivariate tests. This means, for example, that
they infer the existence of prejudicial opposition only when scales of racial
prejudice result in opposition to programs that benefit blacks but not whites or
members of other groups. The current study draws on this combined experimental
-multivariate approach to assess the ideological and prejudicial basis of
support for a diverse set of racial polices within the context of a two-wave
national telephone survey. The sample is based on interviews with 1,400 white
and 400 black respondents in the first wave; re-interviews will be attempted
with all initial respondents in the second wave. The first wave of data
collection will assess reactions to a series of racial policy experiments and
include a set of questions that tap various ideological principles. The second
wave will focus on replication of the same policy experiments for different
racial groups to provide powerful within-subjects data that will complement
reactions to the policy experiments in wave 1. Within the experiments, they
manipulate a series of political principles, and examine support for the
programs when targeted at blacks, whites, and members of other groups. Moreover,
they explore the impact of political principles across the full range of target
groups to assess their respective effects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;From a broader
perspective, this research will extend policy makers' understanding of racial
policy attitudes - a potentially divisive factor within contemporary society
that may deepen as the United States becomes increasingly diverse over the next
several decades. The exploration in this research of a broad variety of racial
policy alternatives will provide clear insight into the kinds of racial policies
that garner most support from Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;