* 0318039
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reported Speech and Discursive Authority among the Nantis of the Peruvian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Joel Sherzer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,996.00

Under the direction of Dr. Joel Sherzer, Mr. Lev Michael will conduct fieldwork
for his doctoral dissertation. His linguistic and ethnographic research among
the Nantis, an indigenous people of the Peruvian Amazon, will focus on how
individuals create personal authority in conversation and how these uses of
language relate to the recent emergence of community leaders in newly-formed
Nanti settlements. Mr. Michael will examine how Nantis quote each other and how
the circulation and reproduction of certain peoples' utterances leads to the
greater influence of these individuals. He will also compare language use, and
quotation in particular, in the more traditional single-family settlements and
in the new settlements. This research will include recordings of live
interactions between Nanti individuals in diverse social settings, which Mr.
Michael will transcribe and analyze. He will also track how speech from
important social events is repeated and spreads through the community by
supplying Nanti individuals with [individual portable recording units that will
enable them conduct their daily business. This last doesn't make sense to me.
Weren't they able to conduct their daily business long before you arrived with
recorders?]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have several impacts. First,
its examination of the relationship between social organization and language use
will provide a testing ground for theoretical frameworks bridging linguistics
and anthropology. Second, it will provide information on how utterances
circulate within a community of speakers, an area of interest to linguists and
anthropologists. Third, this project will contribute to the documentation of
this undescribed language. This documentation will directly benefit the Nanti
people by generating materials for bilingual education in their communities.
Finally, this research will [contribute to improving communication between
Nantis and others by clarifying the central role of quotation in Nanti
communication, which is a source of frequent miscommunication between Nantis and
the representatives of the industrialized world with which they now must
contend. This seems somewhat grand. What specific aspect of your research will
have this impact?]&lt;br/&gt;