* 0318368
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Explaining and Designing Transitional Justice after the Third Wave of Democratization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* John Huber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2005
* USD 12,086.00

This dissertation proposal examines the exchange of public sector jobs for
political support in two developing democracies. By analyzing the politics of
public employment in Argentina and Turkey, the investigator will shed light on
how political and socio-economic factors shape incentives and abilities of
politicians (parties) to distribute public jobs in a particularistic manner
rather than following universalistic criteria like merit and education.

The intellectual contribution of the research stems from its efforts to address
both empirical and theoretical limitations in the existing literature.
Empirically, the dependent variable in the previous research was presented
either ambiguously or too broadly. This research will define the dependent
variable more clearly and specifically as "the particularistic distribution of
public jobs for political support". Theoretically, the literature has failed to
differentiate between different types of political support while analyzing the
political and socio-economic factors that lead to this type of exchange.
Consequently, this led to inaccuracies in identifying the explanatory variables.
To fill this gap, this research differentiates between two types of political
support: votes from the citizens in the elections and support within a party by
other party members. Through the analysis of intra-party politics when the
recipient of the favor is a party member and of electoral politics when the job
is given to a voter, this research will introduce explanatory variables that
have been neglected in the literature. The project proposes the labor market
structure and the organization of the intra-party politics as the two most
important variables that perpetuate particularism and favoritism in the
allocation of public jobs. The empirical analysis of these hypotheses will
include district level statistical analysis for both countries and interviews
with party members.

The broader impact of this research occurs in the following ways. In addition to
the theoretical goals, this research will construct a database that includes
district level socio-economic and political variables for two countries,
Argentina and Turkey. The method of statistical analysis across different
geographical locations within a country is increasingly being used in political
science. It is a recent development, however, and systematic collection of
district level data is lacking for most countries. It is actually completely
missing for some countries like Turkey. This research fills this gap by
providing such a database for two countries. As such, another broader impact of
the project will be to provide a database that will make future research on
these two countries easier.