* 0318451
* Perception of frequency-shifted speech
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Peter Assmann, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2008
* USD 223,418.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Assmann will conduct three
years of research on how listeners adapt to speech that is shifted up or down
along the frequency scale. Such shifts affect everyday speech communication, as
listeners adjust to men, women, and children of varying ages. Recent studies
have shown that intelligibility drops sharply when the spectrum envelope of
speech is shifted upward by a factor of 1.5 or more, or downward by 0.7 or less.
The detrimental effects of such shifts can be counteracted, to some degree, by
incorporating talker-matched changes in fundamental frequency. This finding,
together with predictions from a pattern recognition model, suggests that
listeners are sensitive to statistical regularities in natural speech and that
they may adapt to frequency-shifted speech through long-term exposure. To test
these hypotheses, a speech vocoder will manipulate the spectrum envelope and
fundamental frequency of natural speech. The first set of experiments will
investigate the conditions that preserve the intelligibility of frequency-
shifted speech and test the predictions of pattern recognition models. The
second set of experiments will investigate perceptual accommodations to
frequency-shifted speech following extended listening experience to determine
how well these adjustments generalize across talkers, speech materials, and
shift factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of speech perception must explain
the ability to understand frequency-shifted speech. Research on this topic may
provide insights into two problems faced by hearing-impaired listeners. First,
present-day cochlear implant electrode arrays cannot be inserted completely into
the cochlea; they provide electrical stimulation only to the basal portion.
Implant users need to accommodate to the re-mapping of the frequency spectrum
provided by the device. Second, frequency shifts are used in frequency-
transposing hearing aids that attempt to restore speech intelligibility for
impaired listeners by shifting the spectrum into the region of better hearing.
Frequency lowering provides improved speech recognition for some hearing-
impaired listeners, especially after extended exposure. But the limited extent
of its benefit warrants further study. Studies of the perception of frequency-
shifted speech by listeners with normal hearing may provide a better
understanding of the perceptual adaptations to the altered frequency mapping
provided by cochlear implant processors and frequency-transposing hearing aids.
Studies of the perceptual tolerance for frequency shifts may also provide a
basis for improving voice quality in speech synthesis, and suggest ways to
achieve a greater degree of talker independence in automatic speech recognition
systems.&lt;br/&gt;