* 0318834
* SGER:  The Making of a Science -- Eight Pioneers in Bioelectromagnetics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Nandita Nair, Nair                    Nandita        R
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Project Abstract SES 0318834 Nandita Nair, Independent Scholar "The Making of a
Science-Eight Pioneers in Bioelectromagnetics"

The objective of this project is to record extensive videotaped interviews with
eight American scientists who have done breakthrough research in the field of
Bioelectromagnetics. Bioelectromagnetics is an area of scientific enquiry which
examines the effects of electric and magnetic fields and low-frequency
electromagnetic radiation on biological systems. The relationship of electricity
and magnetism to life has been a subject of scientific interest for hundreds of
years. In the 1950's, incidental observations regarding the health effects of
field exposure during military communication systems research prompted a
reexamination of what scientists had for years viewed as completely mapped
territory regarding the interaction of electromagnetism and living things. With
epidemiological studies conducted in the 1960's and 70's, Bioelectromagnetics
began to emerge as a distinct research field. Over the last forty years,
Bioelectromagnetics has grown out of bold and often controversial research
conducted by a few dozen scientific pioneers working in areas as diverse as
medicine, physics, biology, chemistry, electrical engineering, weapons
development, neuroscience, psychiatry and the space program. The eight
scientists to be interviewed in this project are the senior-most and most
innovative and influential members of this group: Orthopedic surgeon, Robert
Becker; physicists Abraham Liboff, Allan Frey, Ted Litovitz and Ed Leeper;
psychologist, Nancy Wertheimer; physician, W. Ross Adey; and electrochemist,
Arthur Pilla. Each of these scientists has been integral in laying the
foundation for present-day Bioelectromagnetics. There is a high degree of
urgency to this project, as most of the scientists to be interviewed are of
advanced years. All remain active and vital contributors to the field and all
are eloquent and reflective in speaking about their work, the work of others,
and the lessons they have learned about the relationship of science to politics
and culture. This project will be planned and executed by an experienced
interdisciplinary team uniquely qualified to undertake this type of research: --
a physicist, well versed in the history and science of Bioelectromagnetics; a
historian of technology with a specialization in oral history; and a filmmaker
experienced in documentary videography for archival purposes. The team will
develop a research and production protocol which will serve not only as a
guideline for these eight interviews, but also as a template for use in creating
future additions to the project. A digital video format will be used, to create
broadcast and archival quality video documents that can be duplicated without
degeneration of image and sound quality, and which will allow for the greatest
number of options in document storage and accessibility. A full written
transcript of each interview will also be made. And a workbook of this
production template will be made available for use by other researchers
interested in using digital video in their work. At a later stage, the team will
form a partnership with Carnegie Mellon University's Informedia Group,
developers of video storage and retrieval software systems, to create a larger,
permanent, fully cross-referenced, captioned and Internet accessible computer-
based archive of interviews, articles and animated models illustrating
scientific principles pertaining to Bioelectromagnetics. In this way, the
proposed project serves both as an independent research project of lasting
value, and as a critical first stage of a larger educational endeavor.
Interviews with these eight pioneers in Bioelectromagnetics present a unique
opportunity to record the first-person accounts of individuals who not only made
key contributions to their respective fields, but who found themselves
participants in the exciting and precarious creation of a new science. The
videos will serve as invaluable primary source materials for students and
teachers, scientists, historians and sociologists alike. They will bring
together in one place, and in a single accessible and engaging format, clear
explanations of the theoretical underpinnings of the various, cross-disciplinary
aspects of Bioelectromagnetics research, while also affording a rare inside look
at the creative process of the scientist, and the ongoing social, political and
personal processes by which a new science seeks to establish itself.

