* 0318415
* Algorithms for the Discovery and Geometric-Matching of Hierarchical 3-D Templates of Functional Sites in Protein Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Lydia Kavraki, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2007
* USD 896,527.00

The long-term aims of this research are to develop automated algorithms to
identify functional sites in protein structures and to characterize protein
function on a proteomic scale. The approach is predicated on the Evolutionary
Trace method (ET), which uses evolutionary data to identify key functional
residues in proteins. These residues form spatial clusters that predict the
location of active sites, or of binding sites, and they can be taken as three-
dimensional (3-D) templates that may directly suggest functions when recognized
in novel structures. This motivates our specific goals to automate and optimize
functional site identification and the extraction of 3-D templates by ET (Aim
1); and then to refine algorithms that search for these templates in other
structures, and score the quality of matches and the likelihood that they
indicate functional similarity based on molecular mimicry (Aim 2). The broader
impact of this proposal is manifold. It will strengthen biological research
infrastructure, first, by revealing which regions of proteins are most
biologically relevant, and hence logical targets for protein engineering and
drug design. Second, it will develop a novel method for functional
characterization of gene products by extending to three dimensions a functional
annotation strategy traditionally bases on one-dimensional pattern matching on
protein sequences. In so doing, this work addresses the fundamental problem in
"post-genomic biology": that of linking massive and exponentially growing
amounts of raw sequence and structure data to the molecular basis of biological
function. The proposal will also lead to software that is robust, standardized,
and easy to use, and technology transfer will benefit from the channels opened
by the collaboration with the PDB. Another activity with broad impact will be
the training of undergraduates and graduate students, and participation in
programs that support female and minority applications at both Rice and Baylor
College of Medicine.