* 0318828
* SBIR Phase I:     Pipeline Integrity in Natural Gas Distribution and Transmission Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Paul Lander, Flow Metrix, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,920.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop
intelligent acoustic sensors to detect and pinpoint leaks on gas pipelines.
Applied to transmission lines the technology has the potential to provide early
alerts of failed pipeline integrity. In distribution systems the technology will
be able to pinpoint gas pipeline leaks accurately and non-intrusively. Almost 2
million miles of hazardous pipeline in the US carry flammable materials under
high pressure through rural, residential, and downtown areas. Mandatory Pipeline
Integrity Management plans are limited by existing technology. The limited
detection capability and delay might easily allow on the order of 10,000 liters
or more of hazardous material to contaminate the environment. There is a
compelling need for new technology to reduce the cost, effort, and risk
associated with ensuring pipeline integrity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technology to be developed under this research project has the potential to
detect losses of 0.02% of flow or less on a loss-dependent time scale.
Therefore, total losses could be reduced by one or two orders of magnitude; the
source of emissions could be pinpointed without taking the pipeline out of
service; and a timely integrity alert (with supporting data) could be
transmitted to a person or office from remote pipeline locations. &lt;br/&gt;