* 0318476
* Bidding with Securities -- Auctions and Security Design
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Andrzej Skrzypacz, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2006
* USD 242,412.00

In recent years auction theorists have been asked to provide guidance to
policymakers in a wide range of important transactions. Current theory focuses
on the case when the winning bidder pays a fixed amount at the conclusion of the
auction. However, in many real world auctions ranging from broadcasting the
olympic games to the rights to drill for oil or the choice of the leading
counsel in a class action suit, the winning bidder pays long after the
conclusion of the auction. Moreover, the payment is contingent on future events,
and depends on the realized cash flows from the object being sold. In this case,
the payment can be thought of as a derivative security, where the underlying
asset is the future cash-flows. This proposal combines two existing lines of
economic research, auction theory and security design, to study auctions in
which the bids are securities rather than fixed payments. This type of auction,
refered to as a security-bid auction, has a large number of potential
applications beyond those given above, including major privatization auctions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research should advance knowledge
and understanding in two major fields: auction theory and security design. This
study expands auction theory in a direction that will make it more applicable to
an even a larger number of markets. Preliminary work suggests that some of the
fundamental results of standard auction theory with fixed payments could be
modified. This study also contributes to the understanding of security design.
Security design is a basic topic in financial economics. The important questions
include (i) why do parties choose to divide future cash flows (and hence risks)
in standard forms, such as debt and equity; and (ii) does this choice matter?
While a great deal of progress has been made in answering these questions, the
existing finance literature primarily considers the case of a single issuer
selling a security to competing investors. The auctions examined in this study
are important instances in which several issuers compete by offering securities
to a single agent. An important example is that of mergers and acquisitions. In
this case bidders often offer securities such as equity or preferred stocks in
the merged firm. This study provides insight into the optimal choice of
securities in these and other transactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This study should have useful policy implications: the results may guide
practitioners regarding the design of auctions to use in different settings. For
example, when bidders promise fixed payments but may default (i.e., bids are
debt securities), a second-price auction results in superior revenues for the
seller. However, when bidders promise a fixed payment plus a royalty rate, a
first-price auction may be superior. Both examples are common in government
auctions of public resources. Furthermore, this study will hopefully spur and
guide more applied research focused on auction design using security bids in
particular markets. &lt;br/&gt;