* 0318011
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Why Do We Punish?  Crime and Punishment as Purveyors of Social Status
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* John Darley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,533.00

Classic understandings outline four general motivations to punish: general
deterrence of potential wrongdoers, specific deterrence of individual wrongdoers
(usually via incapacitation), rehabilitation, and retribution. Recently,
empirical psychologists have ascertained that people are mostly motivated by
retribution when assigning punishments for criminal wrongdoing. Interestingly,
the benefits of retribution are the least obvious of the four outlined
motivations. Deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation, if successful,
provide the punisher peace of mind by reducing future wrongdoing. Why should
people be willing to expend the costs of punishment simply to exact retribution
for past wrongs? What does it provide the avenger? This study tests the value
that individuals and communities receive from exercising their retributive
impulses against criminal wrongdoers. The researchers hypothesize that
retribution cures the complex symbolic wounds that wrongdoers inflict on their
victims and society. Specifically, being the victim of wrongdoing suggests to
the victim that she, and the group of which she is a member, is lower in social
status and worth than she had previously thought, because the offender felt
entitled to harm her, and because her community did not expend the resources
necessary to protect her. By expending resources to catch and punish the
offender, the community is refuting that message, and implicitly arguing that in
fact she is not deserving of the mistreatment she received. This study tests
these propositions by exposing participants to various conditions in which they
witness or experience intentional wrongdoing, and in which the wrongdoer is
either punished or not. If our hypotheses are correct, then participants should
view victims of unpunished crime as lower in worth and social status than they
were before the victimization, and victims of punished crime as higher than they
were before the punishment. This study illuminates two important social
problems. The first concerns imprisonment, which is almost universally
acknowledged as expensive, and damaging to inmates, their families, and,
sometimes, entire communities. Yet when policy makers suggest alternative
punishment regimes that would reduce these problems (like fines, community
service, or in-home electronic monitoring), these proposals frequently fail,
either by not being adopted of, if adopted, unevenly implemented. The
researchers argue that this is so because they do not satisfy the retributive
impulse. However, this is not inevitable. If a sanction could be designed that
did deliver retribution (such as shaming penalties, or fines coupled with a
shorter prison sentence), then society could benefit from the undisputed
advantages of punishing their offenders retributively, without incarcerating
them for long periods. The second concerns residents of inner city communities.
Our thinking suggests there is a strong link between the very high rates of
criminal victimization in these communities, and the sense of devaluation by and
alienation from the larger society that these residents experience. If policies
could be designed that address crime in a way that addresses these complex
symbolic consequences of victimization, steps could be taken toward relieving
some of the resentment, alienation and sense of helplessness felt by inner city
residents.