* 0318242
* Time as a Trade Barrier
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Hummels, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 209,111.00

An increasing proportion of US trade with partners outside of North America was
air-shipped, even though airfreight commands a premium over ocean freight equal
to 25% of the good's value. Shippers are willing to pay this premium because of
time savings; airfreight saves an average of 4 weeks in shipping time on US
trade routes. Despite this willingness to pay a premium to save time, trade
theory does not explicitly recognize the importance of time. This research will
examine the importance of time as a trade barrier. It addresses three specific
questions: (i) why are importers willingness to pay to save time in transport
and how does this vary across goods, importers, and time periods? (ii) what is
the source of the willingness to pay?, and (iii) how has the relative decline in
air shipping cost affected the rise in world trade in general, and specifically
the rapid increase in time-intensive forms of integration?

This examines how firms choose export location and transport mode in order to
trade off fast but expensive air transport against slow but inexpensive ocean
shipping. Variation across country pairs and commodities in the relative
price/speed tradeoff identify a willingness-to-pay for timesavings in shipment.
A pilot study using US data indicates that each additional day increase in
shipping reduces the probability of sourcing from a given location by 1%.
Conditional on sourcing, the price premium paid for air shipping is equivalent
to a willingness-to-pay for timesavings of just under 1% per day. Identification
of why firms are willing to pay to save time is obtained from looking at
good/industry characteristics, information intensity, price, and inventory
behavior. Cross-country evolution of air relative to ocean freight costs and its
corresponding effect on trade growth and composition will identify trade effects
of relative price declines of air shipping.

In addition to identifying the value of time as a trade barrier, the techniques
developed in this research will be informative about many policies and sources
of technological change that speed goods to market. For example, investing in
streamlined customs procedures allows imported goods to reach their destinations
more quickly, and estimates of the value of each day are necessary to calculate
their economic benefit. These calculations can be especially helpful in
international trade negotiations as well as the effects of disruptions to
international trade. This research will have significant impacts on trade theory
and policy.

