* 0318568
* RUI: Significance of Phospho-Regulated Plastidic Pyruvate,Orthophosphate Dikinase in C3 Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Chris Chastain, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2006
* USD 146,490.00

Historically speaking, plant pyruvate,orthophosphate dikinase (PPDK) was
initially discovered in leaves of plants possessing the C4 photosynthetic
pathway where it is an abundant enzyme. PPDK in C4 plants catalyzes the
regeneration of the primary CO2 acceptor phophoenolpyruvate (PEP). Because this
role in the C4-photosynthetic pathway, major emphasis was placed on gaining an
understanding of its now well-elucidated light/dark regulation of activity
(light, active; dark, inactive) via reversible phosphorylation. This form of
regulation allows the efficient synchronization of PPDK activity with light
availability for optimal functioning of the C4 cycle. Another enzyme "nicknamed"
the PPDK regulatory protein or "RP" catalyzes this light/dark mediated
reversible phosphorylation. RP is an highly unique regulatory enzyme with
catalytic attributes shared with only a handful of other known enzymes. However,
a discrete understanding of the structural and functional properties of this
unusual enzyme has remained elusive since the gene or cDNA for RP has not yet
been cloned, nor has the enzyme been reproducibly purified to homogeneity, the
latter precluding its cloning by conventional means. In C3 plants (plants
possessing only the C3 photosynthetic pathway), PPDK is also present in plastids
but does not function directly in photosynthesis. It apparently occurs with
ubiquity (e.g., in roots, stems, leaves, seeds) and is usually a low abundance
enzyme. Its function(s) in C3 plants, although nonphotosynthetic, remain to be
elucidated. Recently, it was documented that PPDK in leaves and chloroplasts of
C3 plants undergoes light/dark-induced changes in activation state in a manner
similar to C4 dikinase. It was determined that this light/dark regulation was
mediated by an enzyme activity identical to that of the PPDK regulatory protein
(RP) found in chloroplasts of C4 plants. This project will build upon these
recent observations for ultimately elucidating the specific role(s) of PPDK
localized in plastids of C3 plants. The several putative roles of chloroplast
localized PPDK in C3 plants to be resolved include roles in (i) augmenting PEP
supply in plastids for downstream biosynthesis, (ii) osmoregulation in guard
cells, and (iii) seed development. A central strategy will be to assess
morphological and biochemical phenotypes of Arabidopsis mutants with an
inactivated plastidic PPDK gene. Complementing the investigation into C3 plastid
PPDK function will be to obtain a cDNA clone for the putative C3 (Arabidopsis)
RP gene that likely mediates reversible phosphorylation of PPDK in C3
chloroplasts. This sequence will be utilized for in-depth molecular expression
studies of this unique and potentially "one-of-a-kind' enzyme.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;