* 0319555
* MRI/RUI:     Acquisition of a Linux Cluster for Numerical Simulations of Excitable Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Roman Zaritski, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0319555&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: R. Zaritski, Montclair State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
grant will facilitate acquisition of a Linux cluster with a total peak
performance of 150 billion floating point operations per second. Tentatively,
the cluster will consist of 32 dual AMD Athlon nodes interconnected by Gigabit
Ethernet. Its main intended use is for numerical simulations of spiral and
scroll wave interactions in excitable media. This highly multidisciplinary
research project is a collaborative effort between the principal investigator,
Dr. R. Zaritski (Montclair State University), and Dr. A. Pertsov (SUNY Upstate
Medical University). It involves Applied and Computational Mathematics,
Chemistry and Biology, Physics and Computer Science. To increase utilization,
the cluster will also be used for numerical simulations of disease dynamics, an
auxiliary research project headed by Dr. L. Billings (Montclair State
University), and, possibly, for other auxiliary
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of excitable media include a variety of
physical, chemical, and biological systems. Two most well-known examples are
Belousov-Zhabotinsky (BZ) chemical reaction and electrochemical activity in the
cardiac tissue. Virtually all known excitable media support special vortex-like
waves known as spiral waves in two dimensions and scroll waves in three
dimensions. Spiral and scroll waves in human heart correspond to cardiac
arrhythmias, the leading cause of death in industrialized countries. Interacting
spiral and scroll waves are believed to be the primary mechanism of
fibrillation, the most deadly cardiac arrhythmia. Spiral and scroll wave
interactions have been studied for many years, but are not yet well understood.
Numerical simulations of such interactions are very computationally intensive
and, especially in the three-dimensional case, require supercomputing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project at Montclair
State University, which is a major public, predominantly undergraduate
institution serving the diverse New Jersey population, will include: enhancing
the university high-performance computing infrastructure, attracting more
students to hands-on multidisciplinary research, and establishing and
strengthening a cross-institutional research partnership between a teaching and
a research university. Eventually, computer modeling of excitable media may lead
to better prediction and control of heart arrhythmias and to new computing
paradigms, based on chemical reactions. Results of the proposed investigation
will be disseminated through national and international professional journals
and meetings.&lt;br/&gt;