* 0319117
* SBIR Phase I:     Highly Nonlinear Total Internal Reflection (HINTIR) Fiber for All-Optical Wavelength  Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Vladimir Fuflyigin, OmniGuide Communications, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to produce a highly
nonlinear hgh-index-contrast total internal reflection fiber (HINTIR Fiber) for
all-optical signal processing. The projected nonlinear response of this fiber is
five orders of magnitude greater than that of a typical silica fiber. Because of
this extraordinary enhancement of non-linearity, these HINTIR Fibers will be
superior for most nonlinear applications at 1.55 micron. The main engineering
challenge in manufacturing HINTIR Fibers is finding highly nonlinear materials
with highly dissimilar optical properties (i.e. very different indices of
refraction) and very similar thermo-mechanical properties, which are necessary
for co-drawing these materials in a single fiber. HINTIR Fibers could be an
enabling technology for a large class of all-optical devices, including
wavelength conversion, all-optical logic, all-optical pulse reshaping and
regeneration, etc. This project will focus on the application of these fibers
for wavelength conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optical networking
equipment was a $12B market in 2002. Line cards account for roughly 50% of this
market. They perform wavelength conversion by converting the signal from the
optical to the electrical domain and back at a different wavelength (OEO
conversion) and signal regeneration by processing the signal in the electrical
domain. This requires expensive high-speed electronic and opto-electronic
devices operating at the line rate of the network. If deployed in the context of
an all-optical network, the proposed technology could dramatically reduce the
need for OEO conversions, thus opening up a $6B market. While the adoption of
all-optical networks has not happened yet, it is expected to take place in a few
years by both the equipment vendors and the network operators, when current
network capacity is used up. This transition will open up a large
market&lt;br/&gt;