* 0319647
* SBIR Phase I:     Metal Nanoclusters Embedded Composite Thin Films for Photonic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Zhiyong Zhao, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel approach to synthesizing nanocluster embedded dielectric thin films for
photonics applications. Nanosized particles embedded dielectric matrices have
shown unique physical, chemical, optical, electronic, catalytic, and magnetic
properties. For nonlinear optical (NLO) applications, the intrinsic properties
of the nanoclusters such as particle size, size distribution, and volume
fraction are of great importance, and for the matrix materials it is their
dielectric constant and refractive index. A modified Combustion Chemical Vapor
Deposition (CCVD) technique will be utilized to produce the nanocomposite NLO
materials with controlled nanocluster size and distribution, which will exhibit
high third-order optical nonlinearity and fast response. The unique CCVD
technique will produce well-dispersed metal nanoclusters embedded dielectric
thin films. In Phase I, the project team will deposit the nanocomposite films,
characterize their NLO properties, and establish process-structure-property
relationship. Primary efforts will be made on improving nanoclusters' physical
properties such as size, shape, composition, crystallinity, structure, as well
as their size distribution and volume fraction. Today, no third-order NLO
material applications are practical because the nonlinearities observed to date
are two to four orders of magnitude short of what will be required for
commercial devices that use lasers of moderate power. The embedded nanocluster
approach developed here will lead to the necessary orders of magnitude increase
in performance.

Commercially, NLO effects have important applications in optical communications
where optical switching and optical signal processing devices are essential
elements. The use of optics is advantageous over that of electronics because of
the higher carrier frequency used, which gives a potentially higher bandwidth.
Practical applications of the NLO effects are in optical switching,
amplification, beam steering and clean-up, and image processing for optical
communications, computing, and integrated optics.