* 0319328
* SBIR Phase I:      High Average Power Solid State Laser
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Milan Tekula, Maine Research and Technology Co. Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a laser
that can be used in a variety of applications requiring high average power such
as to drive a nonlinear crystal for efficient frequency conversion to generate
radiation at the desired wavelengths. A novel cooling approach will be used to
remove heat from the laser crystal. Preliminary heat transfer analysis show that
a rod cooled with the new technique can be pumped at a rate that is a factor of
ten higher than the rate used to pump a rod using conventional cooling
techniques. A demonstration device will be assembled in Phase I so that the
volumetric efficiency and system performance can be measured. The same cooling
technique can be used in cooling the crystals used in non-linear frequency
conversion. It is anticipated that a compact, efficient, high power, inexpensive
IR laser can be developed using this cooling approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial applications of moderate to high average power
lasers can be found in the remote measurement of atmospheric aerosols, clouds,
molecular species, meteorological parameters, surface topography, vegetation and
subsurface ocean layers. They can also be used in long-range wind shear
measurements, laser ranging, and atmospheric back scatter. A variety of laser
wavelengths are necessary for these measurements to be successfully performed.
Variable wavelengths can be used in monitors and video displays. The
manufacturing of high average power lasers will have a broad impact on commerce
and society if these lasers can be used to make color computer displays. This
application could generate new jobs in the manufacturing segment. &lt;br/&gt;