* 0319789
* SBIR Phase I:  A Systematic Study of the Synthesis of Polythiophenes by GRIgnard Metathesis (GRIM) for Use As Base Materials for Conductive Block Copolymers.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Darin Laird, PLEXTRONICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,585.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the chemistry and reaction conditions necessary to synthesize the conducting
polymer polythiophene with a high degree of end-group control and in a cost-
effective manner. An understanding of this chemistry is vital for the
commercialization of novel single-molecule integrated conductive plastics with
useful mechanical properties. The project is designed to investigate the
synthesis of these materials, determine the reaction equilibrium between two
regioisomers of the thiophene monomer which directly affect the ability of the
resulting polymer to conduct electricity, determine the end-group capping of the
polythiophenes by other reagents in the system, and determine the typical end-
group composition of polymers synthesized by the method under investigation. The
results of the project will lead directly toward a phase II project which will
be focused on using the knowledge gained in this study to engineer novel block
copolymers of polythiophene with other types of plastics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These new materials will revolutionize the conductive plastics
industry by providing low-cost conductive materials in large quantities for
electronic, conductive, anti-static/ESD and anti-corrosive applications. In
primary and secondary market research, demand is seen for this type of material
for broad technological applications such as coatings, thermoplastics, rubbers,
and fibers in a variety of industries, such as electronics, automotive,
shipping, pharmaceuticals, and cosmetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;