* 0319911
* Neural Mechanisms of Hygienic Behavior in the Honey Bee
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Marla Spivak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 380,830.00

Neural mechanisms of hygienic behavior in the honeybee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lay
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marla Spivak&lt;br/&gt;Karen A.
Mesce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to
understand how relatively small genetic differences within a species translate
into significant differences in behavior that are based on how neural circuits
are 'wired up' versus how neurohormones differentially modify the functioning of
similar neural circuits. Honey bees bred for hygienic behavior will be studied
and compared to unselected bees that exhibit less hygienic behavior. Hygienic
bees detect and remove diseased and parasitized brood from their nest more
readily than non-hygienic bees. The honey bee industry is keenly interested in
hygienic lines of bees because they are more resistant to diseases and parasitic
mites. More significant, however, is the potential that this study will
contribute to a better understanding of how a class of compounds, the biogenic
amines, contributes to behavioral alterations in humans. The biogenic amines
include serotonin, dopamine, and adrenaline-related substances. These
neuroactive substances are critically important to human mood disorders,
learning and memory, and numerous diseases including Parkinson's disease.
&lt;br/&gt; A central hypothesis of this study is that octopamine, a
neurohormone related to noradrenaline, contributes to the shaping of the
behavioral differences between hygienic and non-hygienic bees. Hygienic bees
have increased olfactory sensitivity and responsiveness to diseased brood
compared to non-hygienic bees. In essence, it is proposed that neural networks
underlying hygienic behavior are 'polymorphic' and thus can be shifted or biased
into a mode in which hygienic behavioral expression is activated more or less
easily. It is theorized that relatively small genetic differences among animal
species may translate into disproportionately large differences in behavior if
shared polymorphic neural networks are differentially regulated by octopamine
(or dopamine). The specific aims are as follows: 1) determine the relationship
between the expression of hygienic behavior and other important honey bee
behaviors; 2) Examine the olfactory sensitivity of hygienic and non-hygienic
bees, and the role of olfaction in the expression of hygienic behavior; 3)
Determine the role of octopamine and dopamine in the expression of hygienic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;