* 0319870
* SBIR Phase I:    Novel AlGaN-Based Structures for High-Efficiency and High-Power, Deep Ultraviolet Emitters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Amir Dabiran, SVT ASSOCIATES, INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,989.00

`This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed toward the
development of a nitride-based semiconductor laser operating at 280 nm or
shorter. In Phase I, high-efficiency and high power ultraviolet light emitting
diodes (UV LED), incorporating novel AlGaN quantum-well (QW) structures, will be
demonstrated as the proof of concept. The LED structure will overcome most of
the current challenges in AlGaN-based UV emitters. These challenges include
enhanced p-type doping of the cladding layer and reduction of the non-radiative
recombination in the QW layer. The LED structure has unique advantage of
transporting carriers through miniband of a short-period high-Al-fraction alloy
superlattice. In this structure, the desired UV wavelength can be obtained by
adjusting QW parameters such as well thickness and Al mole fraction. The
research will be carried out by a joint effort consisting of the III-N molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE) group and the semiconductor
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor ultraviolet (UV) optical sources have
a wide variety of applications in polymer curing, water purification, white
light generation, projection displays, high-recording-density compact disk data
storage, photolithography, biological agent detection, and non-line-of-sight
covert communications&lt;br/&gt;