* 0319902
* STTR Phase I:     Optics Design Feasibility for a Massively Parallel Oligonucleotide Synthesizer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* James Kaysen, GENETIC ASSEMBLIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop the
instrumentation and processes to fabricate ex-novo large numbers of user-
specified oligonucleotides in hours, using a proprietary tabletop production
system. Oligomers will be synthesized in parallel on a glass slide using light-
directed phosphoramidite chemistry with computer-controlled imaging, and then
selectively eluted using a novel photosensitive release process. Maskless
exposure will make possible the rapid synthesis of any number (up to > 700,000)
of different sequences of 10-40 base pairs oligomers, with a user-defined
tradeoff between the quantity and variety produced. Scaling up from a proof-of-
principle instrument to a Massively Parallel Oligomer Synthesizer (MPOS) tool
requires larger product throughput (picomoles of oligomers) which will be
facilitated through the combination of an optical research study to increase the
exposure area and intensity, and the evaluation of various engineered surfaces
to increase the density among the oligomers.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of oligonucleotide
synthesis. Successful genome sequencing programs have led to an urgent need for
massive sets of different DNA oligonucleotides to be used as affinity reagents
in various types of genetic tests. The current generation of DNA synthesizers
are designed to produce large quantities of only a few oligonucleotides. This
project proposes to develop a system capable of producing thousands of
oligonucleotides on a scale compatible with high throughput genetic assays. It
is expected that practically every laboratory performing molecular biology or
genetic research will benefit tremendously from this project, since the use of
oligonucleotide primers is basic to such fundamental and routine laboratory
protocols as PCR, DNA sequencing, and site-directed mutagenesis. Specific groups
in the commercial sector that will directly benefit from this project include
biotechnology companies that manufacture products for genetic screening and
clinical laboratories performing genetic analysis.