* 0319085
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Cooling Semiconductor-based Low-Dimensional Electron Systems to T~1mK in a Large Magnetic Field
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* James Eisenstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This grant provides funding to acquire instrumentation at the California
Institute of Technology for research on low-dimensional correlated electron
systems in semiconductors. The instrumentation will allow the investigation of
these systems at low temperatures down to 1milliKelvin, a factor of ten below
current practice. In addition, the instrumentation will allow large magnetic
fields, up to 16 Tesla, to be applied to the samples at low temperatures. The
need to work at, or near the temperature of 1milliKelvin is related to the
steady improvement in the quality and complexity of the semiconductor
heterostructure samples that are available. This trend has led to numerous
encounters with subtle electron correlation phenomena whose thorough study
demands lower temperatures than are available using conventional helium dilution
refrigeration. Prominent among the phenomena requiring study near 1milliKelvin
are the so called even-denominator fractional quantized Hall effects; the
recently discovered, yet unpredicted, insulating phases of the 2 dimensional
electron gas in the first excited Landau level; and the remarkable properties of
bilayer electron gases in the strongly coupled limit. The latter is particularly
interesting since it is beginning to appear as if this system is an example of a
long-predicted, yet elusive, collective state known as an excitonic superfluid.
There is the possibility of new discoveries when the technical limitation of the
dilution refrigeration is lifted by the new
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation acquisition will have
impact the education of graduate and undergraduate students at Caltech. Graduate
students, in pursuit of their Ph.D. degrees, will be able to perform experiments
that are at the cutting edge of research on low-dimensional correlated electron
systems. Students will become experienced with the very advanced experimental
techniques needed to work in the low temperature/high magnetic field regime.
This technical experience will help them successfully compete for jobs in the
academic, national lab, and industrial environments. Undergraduate students,
through both summer time research and research participation courses during the
academic year, will also be able to work with this new instrumentation. The
prospect of establishing a state-of-the-art apparatus for pursuing correlated
electron physics into the 1milliKelvin temperature regime has already caught the
imagination of the students in the group. Underrepresented minority and female
researchers (both graduate and undergraduate students) have participated in the
NSF-funded resarch and their participation will continue. This new
instrumentation will provide important opportunities for these students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;