* 0319687
* SBIR Phase I:     Automated Monitoring and Alarming for Elder Care
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Rajeev Sharma, VideoMining Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop an
automated monitoring system for the elderly staying alone at home or under
nursing care. This system would enable the caregivers to remotely attend to any
event or behavior trends requiring intervention. Specifically, the project seeks
to develop a laboratory prototype and automated image analysis for generating
behavior reports and alerts. With the elderly representing an increasing
percentage of the United States population and rapid inflation in nursing home
costs, it is very important to have such technologies that extend one's ability
to live independently. The proposed solution is based on the use of computer
vision techniques that also help in mitigating privacy concerns by not requiring
videos to be transmitted to the caregiver like competing solutions.

The proposed project will contribute to the research and development of new
techniques for alarm generation and activity reporting using video cameras and
could have a broad impact on the healthcare industry, especially for elder care.
The home monitoring solution will appeal to several constituencies, including
the elderly, their families, and the nursing home industry. Factors impacting
adoption include the growing population of seniors, high health care
expenditures, and the cost and service challenges facing the nursing home
industry. The automated monitoring and alarming can potentially offer several
advantages over existing monitoring products and services, such as, where
subscribers press a worn or wall-mounted call button when in trouble or where
they wear an accelerometer that triggers an alarm when the accelerometer notices
certain patterns. The activity recognition capability developed as a result of
this SBIR project will lead to quicker alerts and will mitigate privacy
concerns.