* 0319402
* SBIR Phase I:     Ultra-fast Broadband Imaging Spectroscopy for Geosciences Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Qiushui Chen, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,968.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
fabricate ultra-fast imaging spectroscope for applications in geosciences. One
of the key components in a hyperspectral imaging system is the tunable filter.
Existing mechanical tunable filter are usually heavy, bulky, slow and
unreliable, while those liquid crystal based are slow and limited in terms of
useful spectral range. The company proposes to develop an ultra-fast broadband
tunable filter based on the recently invented electro-optic ceramics. These
electro-optic effect based tunable filters are intrinsically fast (micro-second
response), with superior transparency for wide spectral range (from visible to
mid-IR) and ceramics rugged for airborne application. The proposed unique
multiple-tuning design greatly enlarges the free spectrum range and reduces the
driving voltage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaging spectroscopic instruments can
find applications in earth resources monitoring, precision agriculture, mineral
exploration, medical imaging, military targeting, manufacturing and much more.
The proposed fast broadband spectral imager has particular applications for air-
or space-borne earth remote sensing. The success of this project will have great
impacts not only to many current NSF sponsored R&amp;D and commercial programs
such as biological imaging and microscopic research programs, but also to
defense applications such as target detection and recognition, as well as remote
sensing that will directly relate to the country's security and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;