* 0319968
* SBIR Phase I:    Wired Fiber:    Direct Fiber Connection to Silicon Based on Anodic Bonding for Epoxy-less Fiber Pigtailing of Optoelectronic Components
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Don Abeysinghe, Taitech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,119.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses development of
an epoxy-less fiber pigtailing technology using anodic fiber bonding appropriate
for use with telecommunications transmitters or receivers, or for integration of
sensors directly with fibers. The subgoals include: development of the anodic
bonding technology for parallel fiber; modeling of the stress distribution in
the fiber due to this bonding; characterization of the strength of the fiber-to-
Si bond; and, fabrication of a prototype Si bench with a V-groove suitable for
passive alignment of fiber to an active device and measurement of the thermal
stability of the coupling efficiency. This is based on a solid body of
preliminary work, including demonstration of facet-to-Si anodic bonding, and
development of telecommunications modules using epoxied fiber-in-a-V-groove to
telecommunication laser characterization&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will
result in unprecedented levels of cost effectiveness, device performance,
miniaturization, and ruggedness of a variety of photonic devices. This will
substantially increase U.S. competitiveness in international microelectronics
production, new fabrication and assembly technologies. Applications may be found
in detection, telecommunications, information processing, micro-opto-electro-
mechanical systems (MOEMS), and X-ray device technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;