* 0320238
* SBIR Phase I: MIDI Messenger: Providing Accessibility to the Musical Instrument Digital Interface.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Albert Milani, Dancing Dots Braille Music Technology
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business and Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
provide accessibility to the blind and visually impaired American consumers that
are severely limited as to what features they can take advantage of on Musical
Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) devices, such as electronic musical
keyboards, because most, if not all, MIDI devices have inaccessible user
interfaces. These interfaces are inaccessible primarily because their displays
are purely visual. Membrane-type buttons can also hamper accessibility. Sound
selection, creation and manipulation are just some of the basic MIDI device
functions that musicians need to be able access but cannot do so at present.
Music students also need access to this functionality so that they can learn and
understand sound synthesis. This project will investigate the feasibility of
making MIDI devices accessible to visually impaired musicians. This project will
try to solve these accessibility problems with two separate approaches. The
first approach will provide access to the display information of some MIDI
devices. The second approach will provide control over other MIDI devices. The
success of each approach will be used to determine how much effort should be
applied to each approach in the next phase of the project, which will
concentrate on adding support for more devices and more features for these
devices.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will lead to a product that
will provide blind musicians unprecedented access to musical devices. MIDI
Messenger software will be marketed to visually impaired musicians who want to
have more access to their MIDI devices and also to some sighted musicians who
wish to control their MIDI devices in a live setting with a PDA, for example. If
the product becomes popular in the accessibility market, household appliance and
ATM machine manufacturers may be more likely to implement the interface. It is
notable that this technology has the potential for making other non-musical
appliances accessible in a manner that does not involve electronic hardware
devices that are unique to each model, as has been the case
heretofore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;