* 0320427
* STTR Phase I:  Analysis of Comprehensive Two Dimensional Gas Chromatography with Mass Spectrometry for High-Throughput Metabolomics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Erik Nilsson, INSILICOS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will investigate
a new method for analyzing metabolites using novel instrumentation and software.
Currently, metabolomics offers critical new information to pharmaceutical and
other biological research. However, few researchers can exploit metabolomics,
because appropriate methods have not been developed. Recently, gas
chromatography has been successfully applied to metabolomics, although peak
capacities have been insufficient. This project will combine a leading
multidimensional gas chromatography research facility with a seasoned team of
software experts, to bring the power of multidimensional GC to metabolomics.
Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography with time-of-flight mass
spectrometry detection (GC x GC xTOF-MS) will be combined with pattern
recognition to analyze the reaction of metabolites of methylotrophic bacteria to
perturbations. The collaborative effort between the Synovec Laboratory at the
University of Washington and the Company will produce a software platform for
analysis of GC x GC x TOF-MS data. This platform will use data management and
analysis technologies that have not previously been commercially available for
GC x GC x TOF-MS, and enable GC x GC x TOF-MS for high throughput metabolite
analysis. The result will be an enabling technology for the elucidation of
biological function.

The commercial applications of this project include metabolomics and proteomics.
The current market for proteomics is over $1 billion per year worldwide and
growing at the rate of 34% per year. The market for metabolomics is $38 million,
and growing at the rate of 46% per year. This project will address the current
unmet need for multidimensional separations software in both metabolomics and
proteomics.

