* 0320840
* Acquisition of Multicolor Spinning-Disk Confocal Microscope for New Applications In 4D Cellular Imaging and Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ira Mellman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 332,228.00

A grant has been awarded to Yale University under the direction of Drs. Ira
Mellman and Derek Toomre for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art multicolor
spinning disk confocal microscope for the imaging and analysis of living cells.
A central problem facing modern biology is to understand how cellular activities
are integrated in space and time; this challenge applies to every branch of cell
biology ranging from fundamental aspects of cellular organization and biogenesis
to immunology, neurobiology, developmental biology, and microbiology.
Increasingly, high resolution live cell imaging is emerging as a key tool in
helping one understand how molecules, vesicles, organelles and whole cells are
(re)organized in response to internal and external cues. New technologies that
enable the rapid analysis of intact cells is needed to give a complete picture
of these processes, and to study objects that occupy or dynamically traverse
several optical planes as a function of time. Such imaging is therefore referred
to as being "four-dimensional", capturing the behavior of a single cell in three
physical dimensions plus time. The instrument will be the first of its kind at
Yale University enabling experiments that were impossible using slower
conventional confocal microscopes. In summary, this unique microscope will
enable new applications in cellular imaging and analysis, permitting
quantitative analysis of biochemical reactions in living cells and
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation will enable researchers from
diverse fields to address an array of basic cell biological questions using
model systems including yeast, worms, flies, and mammalian cells, all united by
a need to investigate the complex spatial-temporal dynamics of complex cellular
processes. Not only will data be visualized but a key element of the project, is
the involvement of expert biomedical imaging engineers. Under the leadership of
Dr. James Duncan, new software for the analysis of cell imaging datasets will be
implemented and will foster new exchanges between life scientists and those in
the engineering and computational fields. Private corporate partnerships will
further enhance the capabilities of the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to enabling research for a diverse group of students, post-docs and
visiting scientists, the instrumentation and supporting infrastructure will
provide relevant training and education through seminars and courses.
Underrepresented minorities will participate under the auspices of Yale's well
established "STARS" summer internship program, and a new biology educational
mentorship program for underprivileged New Haven students.&lt;br/&gt;