* 0320907
* DLMS: Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Digital Laboratory for Multi-Scale Science
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 425,000.00

Proposal No. CTS-0320907&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: S. Chen, Johns
Hopkins University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-scale nonlinear physics is an
emerging paradigm for some of the most pressing and exciting scientific problems
of the 21st century. These include predicting turbulent and multiphase fluid
flow, modeling atmospheric transport of bio-aerosols, nano-engineering materials
and devices, and probing the cosmological distribution of matter. The length-
scales involved range, literally, from the size of the universe down to the
scale of elementary particles. High-performance scientific computing is an
indispensable tool in tackling these challenging problems. However, the output
generated by simulation of such systems is so large that long-term storage of
the data at its source has been problematic. This has led to a prevalent style
of research in which very valuable scientific data is used once and then
discarded. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing Major Research Instrumentation Funds,
the Digital Laboratory for Multiscale Sciences (DLMS) at the Johns Hopkins
University will realize a new paradigm in the study of multiscale systems: that
of using an integrated database and cluster as a ``virtual laboratory''. This
system will allow for fast in-house simulations of the large-scale systems of
interest, combined with a long-term storage capability of up to 100 Terabytes of
data, search rates of about 10 Gigabytes per second, and fast, flexible
computational analysis tools within the database itself. This will allow us to
approach parameter space and physical domain sizes that were entirely beyond our
reach. Among other projects, a simulation of incompressible fluid turbulence, at
an unprecedented grid size of 550 billion points, will be performed at national
laboratories and US supercomputer centers and housed and analyzed at the DLMS.
We expect that breakthrough developments will be facilitated in an
interdisciplinary program of research in science and engineering across the
spectrum of multiscale systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About fifty graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows working at the DLMS will receive
training in the areas of multiscale sciences, numerical simulation, parallel
computing, visualization, data analysis, and data-base technology. We will
organize professional workshops introducing the tools developed for the DLMS to
a wider audience of scientists. Outreach efforts will disseminate the results of
our research and our scientific methods to the local schools and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;