* 0320911
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Growth Chambers for Undergraduate and Faculty Research on Genetic and Environmental Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Glena Temple, Viterbo University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 125,927.00

A grant has been awarded to Viterbo University under the direction of Dr.
Jennifer Sadowski, Principal Investigator, and Dr. Glena Temple, co-Principal
Investigator, for a project to strengthen faculty-directed undergraduate
research experiences in the Biology Department. This grant award investigates
the interacting role of the environment and genes on the expression of traits in
insects and plants. The grant award will support the purchase of four large and
two small growth chambers, each with stringent environmental controls, including
light and temperature. Presently there are no growth chambers on campus suitable
to conduct this research; borrowed space at a remote greenhouse has been an
inadequate substitute. The new growth chambers will enable students and their
faculty mentors to simulate multiple, precisely controlled environments to
examine the interacting effects of genes and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is an essential component of the
undergraduate curriculum at Viterbo University. All seniors in the Natural
Science Division are required to work with a faculty mentor to develop a
testable hypothesis, design and implement the appropriate experiments, and
formally present their results. The growth chambers will be used to investigate
genetic and environmental interactions in both plants and insects. Over half of
the students in the Biology department, working with faculty members, will use
the requested instrumentation for their capstone research projects each year.
Projects include studying the interacting effects of the environment and genes
on the social and mating behaviors in insects, and analyzing the biochemical and
genetic adaptations that plants make in response to environmental stress. The
faculty members involved will collaborate with others both within and outside
the university to conduct research of high intellectual merit, which will lead
to peer-reviewed publications and presentations at scientific meetings with
undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition and use of the new growth
chambers will greatly enhance the educational experience of students at Viterbo
University and support high quality research. This facilities enhancement is
expected to encourage more students to pursue advanced degrees in the sciences,
particularly women and first generation college students who form a large
percentage of Viterbo's student body.&lt;br/&gt;