* 0320663
* MRI:  Development of Rapid Manufacturing Equipment for Research, Training, and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Radovan Kovacevic, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2007
* USD 408,249.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding for the
development of manufacturing equipment that will incorporate the laser-based and
welding-based deposition processes with multi-axis computer numerical controlled
machining. Specifically, this award funds the acquisition of an automatic
welding torch changer, a two-axis rotary table, and a PC-based motion
controller. These items, along with already existing hardware components at the
Research Center for Advanced Manufacturing, such as: a Nd:YAG laser of 1 kW in
power, a four-axis computer numerical controlled machining center, a six-axis
robot, two powder feeders, and two computer controlled welding machines,
together make multi-fabrication manufacturing equipment capable of building an
entirely new class of components of monolithic or functionally graded
composition. The equipment will be capable of fabricating parts that are
characterized by complex internal and external geometrical features, as well as
by high dimensional accuracy and good surface quality. Additionally, this award
supports the development of an information system that automates and coordinates
the exchange of information between all of the involved elements of this
equipment. This information processing system consists of a number of modules,
such as: solid data exchange module, adaptive slicing module, process planning
module, process sensing and control module, and a module for the automatic
generation of path planning for welding torches, laser head, and cutting
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will enhance the research, training,
and educational capabilities at Southern Methodist University's Research Center
for Advanced Manufacturing in the area of layered-based manufacturing. The
multi-fabrication system will be an unparalleled candidate for a "Mobile Part
Hospital" that will contribute to the strengthening of America's military
readiness. The availability of hardware and software both acquired and developed
through this project will provide "hands-on" experience and research facilities
for the undergraduate and graduate students, as well as engineers from local
industry. As the project involves various aspects of engineering science and
practice in nontraditional manufacturing processes, welding, design, computer
control systems, interfacing, sensing, signal processing, control, and software
development, students will be exposed to the related concepts, principles,
methods, software and hardware. This exposure will provide the impetus for
addressing more challenging cross-disciplinary manufacturing development
problems. Layered-based manufacturing will become a major graduate thrust of the
School of Engineering at Southern Methodist University.&lt;br/&gt;