* 0320627
* Development of a Low Energy Neutron Scattering Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2007
* David Baxter, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,992,218.00

This project involves the construction of a Low Energy Neutron Scattering (LENS)
facility at the Indiana University Cyclotron Facility (IUCF). LENS will use the
existing linear accelerator at IUCF to produce 11 MeV protons, generating a
pulsed neutron beam through (p, n) reactions on a Be target. Not only is LENS a
novel and relatively inexpensive pulsed cold neutron source, but also - when
completed in 2005 - LENS will enable the design of novel neutron instrumentation
for small angle scattering, a broad program of research in materials science and
biology, the development of novel neutron sources and moderators, and the
education and training of the next generation of neutron scientists in the
United States. LENS will also serve as a regional user facility that will be
particularly well-suited for high-risk experiments and feasibility studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular aspects of LENS that are being completed
through this project are (1) modifications and upgrades of the linear
accelerator, including a beam-switching system and a transfer beam line; (2)
construction of the target, moderator, and neutron reflector; (3) construction
of a conventional small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) instrument; and (4)
development of cold neutron moderators. The flux of cold neutrons that will be
produced when LENS is completed will be comparable to that of the Intense Pulsed
Neutron Source (IPNS) currently in operation at Argonne National Laboratory.
With the high-powered Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory scheduled for completion in 2006, the construction of LENS is
particularly timely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-angle neutron scattering
(SANS), using neutrons with relatively low energies (so-called "cold" neutrons),
allows scientists to study aspects of materials and biological substances that
are not accessible using other types of radiation, such as X-rays. In
particular, neutrons are sensitive probes of the structure and dynamics of atoms
and molecules. For this reason, they have now become widely used, not only in
physics, chemistry, and materials science, but also in biology, earth science,
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the completion of the Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS), neutrons promise to be used increasingly as sensitive and
versatile scientific probes. However, the relative dearth of neutron sources in
the United States up to this time has contributed to the depletion of the ranks
of U. S. neutron scientists. The Low Energy Neutron Scattering (LENS) facility
at Indiana University will help to correct this situation by providing in a
university setting the opportunity for the education and training of the next
generation of neutron scientists, including those from fields such as biology
that have not traditionally employed neutron scattering techniques to the full
extent of their usefulness. In addition, LENS will serve as a regional user
facility, enabling investigators from other institutions - including industry -
to make use of neutron-scattering methods. LENS will also serve as the only U.
S. testbed for the development of cold neutron moderators - the devices that
slow down the neutrons to the low energies needed for materials investigations
and biological studies and which are thus key parts of any neutron-scattering
facility - and for potentially high-payoff experiments that are too risky to
justify time on larger pulsed-neutron
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;