* 0320832
* Collaborative Reseach: Development of a Particle Tracking System for the Qweak Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Mark Pitt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2009
* USD 161,700.00

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will design
and&lt;br/&gt;build the `Region 2' tracking chambers for the Qweak experiment at
&lt;br/&gt;Jefferson Lab. This experiment will make a high precision measurement
&lt;br/&gt;at very low momentum transfer of the proton's weak charge, which is
its &lt;br/&gt;coupling to the neutral Z boson. A high precision value of the
weak&lt;br/&gt;mixing angle at low momentum transfer will be extracted, thus
providing&lt;br/&gt;a sensitive test of the predicted energy scale dependence of
this quantity&lt;br/&gt;in the electroweak standard model. A failure to observe
this expected&lt;br/&gt;behavior could provide evidence for physics beyond the
presently accepted&lt;br/&gt;Standard Model. There are many candidate extensions
to the Standard Model&lt;br/&gt;that would generate observable effects in this
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Region 2 wire chambers are an essential
component of the particle&lt;br/&gt;tracking system, which is needed in order to
precisely measure the&lt;br/&gt;kinematics of the elastically scattered
electrons, as well as for&lt;br/&gt;critical studies of experimental
backgrounds. The chambers will consist&lt;br/&gt;of two sets of 50 cm x 50 cm
horizontal drift chambers. Each drift &lt;br/&gt;chamber will have a total of 6
planes of wires. The expected resolution&lt;br/&gt;will be about 200 microns,
providing an angular resolution of &lt; 1 mrad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Region
2 drift chambers will provide quality educational experiences&lt;br/&gt;for both
graduate and undergraduate students. The timescale of the &lt;br/&gt;project is
well matched to the typical timescale of a graduate student's &lt;br/&gt;time in
graduate school, so the student will get to participate in all
&lt;br/&gt;hardware and software phases of the project. The tasks needed to
&lt;br/&gt;complete the project include design and construction of the chambers,
the &lt;br/&gt;front-end electronics, and the gas handling system, testing of
the finished &lt;br/&gt;product, implementation in the Qweak experiment, and
data analysis and tracking&lt;br/&gt;code development when the experiment takes
data. We expect to involve&lt;br/&gt;two graduate students and at least two
undergraduate students in this&lt;br/&gt;effort, under the supervision of the
faculty and senior research staff&lt;br/&gt;at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;