* 0320097
* International Workshop on Advanced Smart Materials and Smart Structures Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 06/30/2006
* USD 34,440.00

0320097 &lt;br/&gt;Spencer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American researchers in an international workshop on advanced
smart materials and smart structures technology to be held in Hawaii in June
2003. The U.S. organizer is Professor B. F. Spencer of the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. An Asia-Pacific Network of Centers on Research of
Smart Structures Technologies was established last year. This workshop will
enable American participants to have in-depth discussions with researchers of
the affiliated Asian centers, with the goals of enhancing information and data
exchange, promoting activities with regional industries, facilitating exchanges
of young researchers and students, and developing cooperative research projects
that take advantage of the networked centers' infrastructure. Given the
strengths of the Chinese, Japanese and Korean research communities in the
general areas of sensors, materials, structures technology, and disaster
mitigation, there are great potential benefits to having U.S. researchers
cooperate with their Asian counterparts in these fields. The exchange of ideas
and data with Asian experts in these fields will enable U.S. participants to
advance their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative
projects. Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve students.
Findings of the meeting will be publicized via the World Wide Web and through a
published proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;