* 0320083
* SBIR Phase I:     Innovative Aerosol Collector for On-Line Analysis of Organics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Douglas Worsnop, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
adressss the critical need for improved measurements of individual organic
compounds in aerosol particles. Aerosols are crucially important due to their
effects in global climate and human health, as well to industrial applications
such as pharmaceutical drug delivery. This project seeks to develop a new
Aerosol Collector Module (ACM) that will allow the accumulation of sufficient
aerosol mass in an artifact-free manner for analysis of aerosol composition in
near real-time with high- time resolution (&lt; 30 min.) by a variety of
analytical instruments. The ACM will use the techniques implemented by Aerodyne
in its highly successful Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (AMS) to separate the
aerosols from the gas phase. The ACM will consist of: 1) A new cryocollector 2)
An interface module to thermally desorb the collected aerosol 3) A flow control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial market for the ACM will include government,
academic, and industrial research laboratories and may expand to include
regulatory monitoring efforts and process industrial laboratories. The ACM will
allow for the first time near real- time analysis of individual organic species
present on aerosols and will be marketed at a significantly lower cost than
existing analytical methods. The ability to measure aerosol size-resolved
organic composition is needed for understanding and mitigating the climate
impacts and health effects of particulate matter, and for the characterization
and improvement of industrial aerosol technologies.&lt;br/&gt;