* 0320197
* SBIR Phase I:     Use of Phase-Transition Biopolymers as Novel Enzyme Carriers for Biocatalysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Don Rose, Phase Bioscience
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 03/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes develop
unique biopolymers as carriers for enzymes used for biocatalysis. Elastin-like
polypeptides (ELPs) are a new class of biopolymers, which undergo a reversible,
inverse phase transition. When coupled to enzymes as a fusion partner, the ELP
can act as a soluble carrier for performing biocatalysis (below the transition
temperature) and an insoluble carrier for isolation and recovery of the enzyme
(above the transition temperature). The research objectives of the Phase I
project include : (1) Design and synthesis of a series of ELP enzyme carriers,
each with different properties ; (2) Expression and characterization of ELP
enzyme carriers in terms of transition temperature and salt susceptibility ; (3)
Optimization of expression and purification of recombinant glycosylation enzyme-
ELP carrier fusion proteins in terms of soluble protein, and (4) Quantitation
and optimization of glycosylation enzyme activity for the fusion protein
relative to native enzyme and extent of recovery of enzyme post-phase
transition.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of enzymes as relevant
to the markets for food manufacturing and fine chemicals. Examples include
production of sweeteners and antibiotics. Additional applications are expected
in the area of protein therapeutics.