* 0320743
* Quartz Crystal Microbalance Studies of Atomic-Scale Friction
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2009
* Jacqueline Krim, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 430,000.00

By most recent estimates, improved attention to friction and wear would save
developed countries up to 1.6% of their gross national product, or over $100
billion annually in the U.S. alone. The late 1980's and early 1990's
particularly marked a renaissance in fundamental areas of tribology (the study
of friction and wear), sparked by a number of new experimental and theoretical
techniques capable of studying the force of friction in geometries which were
well defined at the nanometer scale. This project involves the use of one such
technique, namely the Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM), (1) to explore the role
of energy dissipative mechanisms in the recently discovered, and increasingly
controversial phenomenon of superconductivity-dependent friction, (2) to probe
the temperature of a simplified sliding contact, a quantity that has been
exceptionally difficult to quantify from theoretical, experimental and
computational approaches, and (3) to explore the linearity of friction laws
governing molecularly thin liquid films over a wide range of length and time
scales. A complimentary educational component includes (1) ongoing participation
of undergraduates in the research, and (2) direct dissemination of state-of-the-
art information on friction to instructors developing curriculum on the topic,
as well as to more general audiences through lectures and written reviews.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The late 1980's and early
1990's marked the advent of a renewed interest in fundamental areas of
tribology, sparked by a number of new experimental and theoretical techniques
capable of studying the force of friction in geometries which were well defined
at the nanometer scale. This project involves the use of one such technique,
namely the Quartz Crystal Microbalance, to probe critical issues of importance
to this field. A first set of experiments will explore the role of electronic
and phononic energy dissipative mechanisms in the recently discovered, and
increasingly controversial phenomenon of superconductivity-dependent friction.
Magnetic fields perpendicular and parallel to adsorbed layers sliding on Pb and
Nb substrates will be employed to drive the system in and out of the
superconducting state. A second set of studies involves documentation of the
impact of sliding on the two-dimensional melting point of monolayer thick
Krypton layers adsorbed on Graphene sheets with variable lattice spacing. The
goal of these studies is to probe the temperature of a simplified sliding
contact, a quantity that has been exceptionally difficult to quantify from
theoretical, experimental and computational approaches. The third set of
proposed experiments involves operation of a QCM in conjunction with a blowoff
apparatus recently developed at IBM Almaden. The goal here is to explore the
linearity of friction laws governing molecularly thin liquid films over a wide
range of length and time scales. A complimentary educational component includes
(1) ongoing participation of undergraduates in the research, and (2) direct
dissemination of state-of-the-art information on friction to instructors
developing curriculum on the topic, as well as to more general audiences through
lectures and written reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;