* 0320456
* SBIR Phase I:     A New Class of Ferroelectric Liquid Crystals for High Performance Optical Phase Modulation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Michael Wand, Displaytech Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,931.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore the
development of a new class of ferroelectric liquid crystal (FLC) materials and a
novel FLC operating mode to produce fast, analog, electro-optical phase
modulation. The innovation exploits two new developments in the science and
technology of FLCs: bent-core FLCs and electrostatically controlled analog
modulation of high polarization FLCs. The Phase I objectives are to formulate
enhanced materials of the new-type FLCs and use them to test the feasibility of
the proposed electro-optic modulation mode. Anticipated results include an
assessment of the innovation's feasibility, an improved understanding of the
physical, chemical, and optical properties of these new materials, and the
identification of further FLC material and cell advances that need to be
achieved in Phase II for subsequent commercialization. The new phase modulators
will be much faster than existing modulators made with nematic LCs and will
operate at lower drive voltage. They will also achieve a full 360 degrees range
of pure analog phase modulation with no optic axis rotation, a goal that has
been impossible to reach using conventional FLCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase
modulation is the foundation for electro-optical beam steering and optical wave
front correction, which find application in free-space optical communications,
in M x N all-optical switches for telecommunications, in beam steering and beam
shaping for laser radar in aviation, and in active optics. The new FLCs will
also enable higher performance megabit write-heads for the emerging holographic
data storage industry, and will be useful for optical information processing.
They also enable fast tunable filters useful for WDM optical telecommunications
systems.&lt;br/&gt;