* 0320569
* Development of a General Use Nanomechanical Imaging System Based on Ultrasonic and Heterodyne Force Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Geer, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 385,000.00

This grant supports the development of a nondestructive, general-use
nanomechanical imaging system (GNIS) based on ultrasonic and heterodyne force
microscopy at SUNY at Albany. This analytical system will be capable of
quantitatively mapping/imaging the elastic (static) and viscoelastic (dynamic)
response of a variety of nanoscale materials and device structures with
nanometer length spatial resolution. By combining the nanometer spatial
resolution of conventional SPMs with the elastic imaging capabilities of
acoustic or ultrasonic microscopes, this instrument will fill a current void in
the quantitative characterization of the static and dynamic mechanics of
nanoscale systems. In laboratory use, this instrument will operate in a manner
analogous to commercially available scanning probe microscopes (SPMs) in that
quantitative, digital, rastered, nanometer scale images will be obtained of
sample elastic modulus and viscoelastic response frequency. Applications for
this instrument are numerous and represent areas of critical need in a broad
range of fields including nanoelectronics, microsystems (MEMS), integrated
circuit (IC) fabrication and nanotechnology. Areas of research include (1) the
mechanical uniformity and process-induced mechanical modification of
materials/devices in IC and MEMS fabrication; (2) cross-sectional analysis for
characterization of depth-dependent modulus variation in MEMS and IC structures;
(3) elastic/viscoelastic imaging of nanotube structures and correlation with
electrical performance; (4) nanomechanical imaging of metallic nanowires; and
(5) investigation of nanomechanical defects in organic photoresist films.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GNIS development program will significantly contribute
to achieving the research/educational goals of the University at Albany and our
research/education partners. It will provide a unique nanomechanical
characterization system to advance our fundamental and applied nanotechnology
research projects (see projects section) and also complement nanoscience
curriculum development in the University's newly formed School of Nanosciences
and Nanoengineering (SNN). The successful development of GNIS will also enhance
the ability of the University at Albany's newly formed SNN to attract both
research programs and, consequently, students in the fields of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. The presence of such a unique system at the SNN will strengthen
our recruitment efforts for new scientists and faculty in the fields of
nanomechanics and nanoscale device reliability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;