* 0320162
* SBIR Phase I:     Novel Nonlinear Optical Films For Ultrafast Photonics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Bunsen Fan, Reveo Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,728.00

This Small Business Innovation Research program is to develop a novel technology
for fabricating organic nonlinear optical (NLO) composite films that are ideal
for photonics. The unprecedented performance for light modulation, switching,
frequency conversion and other optical signal processing can be achieved:
smaller device sizes, lower driving voltages, to name a few. This breakthrough
technology has immense commercial potential in sectors of optical communications
and information processing. The proposed film technology takes advantage of
organic NLO crystals, which are known to have the highest NLO properties. The
technology utilizes the alignment of NLO guest molecules in a host of self-
ordered liquid crystal matrix. Field poling is used, if necessary, to remove the
centro-symmetry. Advanced processing further enhances NLO properties of the
films. Due to coherent interactions, the NLO properties of these films can
approach those of bulk organic crystals. Moreover, temporal and thermal
stability of the NLO properties is enhanced due to naturally ordered host.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed NLO material technology can also used to
fabricate low-cost, ultrahigh-performance photonics, such as modulators,
switches, phase shifters, beam steering devices that have immediate commercial
use. For example, these devices are the enabling components to realize
broadband, high-speed, all-optical communication, which has a multi-billion
market&lt;br/&gt;