* 0320801
* Acquisition of a Chemistry/Biology Biomolecular Imaging Center
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Bernard Brown II, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 42,295.00

A grant has been awarded to Wake Forest University under the direction of Dr.
Rebecca Alexander and Dr. Bernard Brown II. This grant will help to establish an
interdepartmental, multi-user, biomolecular imaging facility on the Reynolda
campus of Wake Forest University. With an increasing number of research programs
at the interface of chemistry and biology, Wake Forest has been building its
instrumental infrastructure. In particular, researchers needed imaging equipment
to analyze data rapidly and with increased sensitivity. This grant will support
the purchase of a chemiluminescent/fluorescent imager and associated peripherals
to supplement a recently acquired phosphorimager. The imager will be used for
image capture of ethidium bromide-stained DNA gels; dye or silver-stained
protein gels; chemiluminescent blotting applications; colony counting of agar
plates; and other applications.

The initial group of seven major users includes four faculty in the Chemistry
Department and three in the Biology Department. Each investigator supervises
undergraduate and graduate research projects in addition to teaching
undergraduate and graduate courses. Four are junior faculty within the first
four years of appointment, and this imaging facility is expected to increase
their research productivity and improve the quality of data submitted to funding
agencies and for publication. In addition to the major users included in the
proposal, others in the Biology, Chemistry, and Physics Departments are likely
to take advantage of the imaging facility once it is fully operational. It is
estimated that as many as 80 undergraduates and graduate students will access
the facility during the funding period.

Funding of this proposal will have significant impact on teaching and outreach
at Wake Forest University. In particular, WFU is pursuing approval for an
undergraduate biochemistry major, including a required biochemistry laboratory
and independent research projects. Access to contemporary imaging equipment will
be vital to this training. Women and minorities are well-represented in both the
undergraduate and graduate programs in the WFU Chemistry and Biology
Departments, and their familiarity with the instrumentation described here will
enhance their training and future career opportunities. In addition, science
faculty from Salem College, a women's college in Winston-Salem, have expressed
interest in demonstrating various imaging techniques to students, and equipment
purchased through this award will be used in this outreach capacity. Wake Forest
researchers will also use the instrumentation in an ongoing collaborative
project with faculty and students at Winston-Salem State University, a
historically Black university. Finally, this equipment will be available for
demonstration to middle and high school teachers in the local public school
district as a part of wider faculty outreach efforts.