* 0320908
* MRI/RUI:Acquisition of Surface Preparation Instrumentation for Surface Physics Studies of Epitaxial Growth on Metallic Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kelly Roos, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 106,000.00

The grant provides support for the acquisition of surface preparation
instrumentation to be used in surface physics studies of epitaxial growth on
metallic surfaces. This new instrumentation will be integrated into an ultra
high vacuum (UHV) preparation chamber that is part of the existing variable
temperature scanning tunneling microscope (VT-STM) system at Bradley University.
This new instrument capability will allow the research efforts at Bradley to be
expanded to include surface physics studies of metallic surfaces by the addition
of sample cleaning/preparation and sample analysis systems. The sample cleaning
instrumentation includes an ion gun and a turbomolecular pumping station for
sputtering-cleaning of metallic surfaces, and an effusion cell for surface
alteration via molecular beam epitaxy. The sample analysis includes an electron
gun and hemispherical energy analyzer for surface chemical composition
determination, and a low energy electron diffractometer (LEED) for surface
structural determination. Research projects include measurement of interlayer
diffusion in metallic homoepitaxial systems, the interaction of
metalloquinolates with metallic surfaces, the initial nucleation and growth of
thin films on atomically clean metal surfaces, and fundamental tribological
studies of friction and wear at the nano-scale which are of interest to local
area industry. Subsequent research could improve understanding of fundamental
atomic scale processes governing the formation of ultra thin films on surfaces.
Such understanding could lead to the ability to develop optimal ultra thin film
fabrication techniques necessary for building faster and smaller nano-electronic
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The established undergraduate program in
materials research and education at Bradley University will be greatly enhanced
through the acquisition of the new instrumentation and the associated research
activities. A significant impact will be the establishment of unique
collaborations between scientists in academia, with a fundamental approach to
nanomaterials research, and engineers in industry, with a practical, applied
science approach. Collaborations with industrial partners will be established to
efficiently convert fundamental research results into practical technological
applications, and further provide undergraduate students with excellent work
related training experiences in applied science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;