* 0320861
* Acquisition of a Raman Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Steve Singleton, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 153,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a Raman spectrometer for
undergraduate research at Coe College. Coe has a very successful undergraduate
research program in physics and chemistry, which has recently become an NSF REU
site in Spectroscopy. The Raman system will not only complement our substantial
base of research equipment, but also provide new opportunities for the
incorporation of this kind of spectroscopy in the physics and chemistry
curriculum. The Raman system will allow research work in glass science, optics,
and environmental chemistry. Projects include the determination of the structure
of novel glasses, including alkali and lead vanadates, and lithium bismuthates;
investigations of changes in the structure of photosensitive lead silicate
glasses upon laser irradiation, to analyze superstructural units desorbed from
glass surfaces by laser light, and to check results obtained using a laser
ionization time of flight mass spectrometer; measurements of the optical
basicity of glasses, and to investigations of changes in the structure of
materials that have been exposed to corrosive environments, especially species
in the gas phase; studies of the role of surface bound iron in the reduction of
nitroaromatic compounds, by monitoring the transformation of iron oxides in
electrodes, and by characterizing ligand binding to iron ions on the surface;
and studies of the redox reactions at iron-containing mineral
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coe is in its second year hosting an NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site, designed to recruit students from
small colleges, often from rural settings, that have little or no opportunities
for research. The scientific emphasis of the site is on spectroscopy, covering
the areas of Optics, Materials Science, Acoustics, Gas Phase Chemistry,
Environmental Chemistry, and Chemical Synthesis. Over thirty undergraduate
students involved in physics and chemistry research at Coe will make use of this
instrument for their work. For the Coe students, the instrument will not only be
a research tool, but also part of a comprehensive exposure to spectroscopy
throughout the curriculum. The Raman system will be fully integrated into a
variety of courses and their corresponding labs, providing training in Raman
theory and operation for research students and exposure to all pupils. These
courses include Materials Physics and Chemistry, Advanced Labs in Glass and in
Chemistry, Optics, and Physical Chemistry. We note that Coe's spectroscopy-based
REU site is designed to provide research opportunities for students from small
colleges, often rural, who do not have the chance to do hands-on, publishable
work. It is therefore essential that we maintain an updated, broad, research-
grade instrumentation base to enable us to train these REU students in the field
of spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;