* 0320509
* SBIR Phase I:  Software-Based Clock Recovery for Dense Wavelength-Division Multiplexing (DWDM) Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Matthias Bussmann, ELTECH PRECISION INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of a novel software-based clock and data recovery (SCDR) solution
based on a programmable implementation of all critical components in a phase-
lock loop (PLL) based clock and data recovery (CDR). This software-based
implementation will allow CDR operation for programmable data rates and data
formats. The proposed CDR implementation will be able to process new data
formats through software upgrade allowing complete adaptability and upgrade-
ability. State-of-the-art high-performance dense wavelength-division
multiplexing (DWDM) optical data transmission systems typically use hybrid clock
and data recovery assemblies based on passive filter (usually dielectric
resonator based) clock recovery techniques to achieve superior system margins.
This technology does not allow the CDR circuit to be adaptable to different data
formats (NRZ, RZ, duo-binary, etc.), data rates (9.953Gb/s and forward error
correction rates), or jitter transfer/tolerance requirements. Competing CDR
implementations using phase-locked loop (PLL) techniques often suffer from
insufficient jitter transfer and jitter tolerance performance and usually
deliver inferior performance in high-end transmission
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purely digital SCDR implementation is
compatible with today's fine-line CMOS technologies and will lead to
programmable CMOS-based precision CDR technology for LH and ULH DWDM
applications. In-service eye and Q-factor monitoring capability is available
with minimum overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;