* 0320302
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Instrumentation for Methane Flux Measurements in Ambient Air
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Douglas Baer, LOS GATOS RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
support the development of a compact, rugged instrument for field measurements
of methane flux. The instrument is based on a new technology called Off-Axis
Integrated Cavity Output Spectroscopy (Off-Axis ICOS) combined with established
eddy covariance techniques. This novel instrument will measure methane flux with
high sensitivity, accuracy and specificity in real time. The instrument combines
inexpensive, robust telecommunications-grade near-infrared diode lasers with
Off-Axis ICOS, a patented innovative technology that provides extremely long
optical paths (several kilometers typical) to yield an instrument capable of
continuously recording data in the field with state-of-the-art precision (better
than 0.2% uncertainty at a 10-Hz rate). By significantly increasing the accuracy
of methane flux measurements in the field, the instrument will significantly
enhance studies of global warming and facilitate multi-year studies and
comparisons between geographically distant sites. These studies (which could
involve using the instruments aboard airplanes to enable wide coverage and to
correlate with satellite images) will help quantify the global carbon cycle on
small and large spatial scales, and enable scientists to generate more reliable
models of climate change and to determine environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument is hoped to exceed current
performance levels in accuracy, sensitivity, speed and reliability and thus
compete favorably against existing technology (gas chromatographs, flame
ionization detectors). As a result, the proposed novel instrument has several
commercial applications including industrial process control, vehicle engine
testing, and atmospheric and environmental monitoring. For industrial process
control, the instrument may be applied to real-time measurements of multiple
pollutants in petrochemical and chemical production plants and in vehicle test
facilities, and for on-site mud gas analyses in oil and gas exploration, where
existing technology is too slow, expensive or insensitive. In engine testing,
for example, the proposed instrument should provide measurements with a faster
response and a sensitivity that is three orders of magnitude better than current
techniques. In addition, the low cost, portability, and reliability of the
instrument should enable researchers in atmospheric chemistry, geology, biology
and ecology to more accurately monitor, and determine the sources and sinks of,
greenhouse gases and pollutants in the field and on board
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;