* 0320586
* Acquisition of a Biological Electron Microscope and Digital Camera System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Susan Sesack, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 256,274.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Pittsburgh under the direction of
Dr. Susan R. Sesack to fund the purchase of a biological electron microscope
with a digital photography system and external monitor. This instrumentation
will enable faculty in the Departments of Neuroscience, Biological Sciences and
Chemistry to achieve and expand their research objectives by providing a state-
of-the-art electron microscope system that is designed to enhance the efficiency
and productivity of analyzing complex biological specimens and to capture images
in a digital format. For all biologically-based sciences, knowledge regarding
the fine structural details of organisms is essential for understanding their
function, and the awarded electron microscope will be a principal means for
visualizing this ultrastructure. The instrumentation will also be used to
determine how structure is altered by environmental manipulations that drive
adaptive responses. Moreover, ultrastructural methods will be combined with
other techniques to determine the shape, distribution and trafficking of
molecules that are essential for biological functions. Finally, the digital
format of the system will considerably increase the efficiency of image capture
and reproduction and greatly enhance the training missions of faculty in the
natural sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty supported by this award are
distributed across multiple departments, and so the instrumentation will support
research programs that are quite diverse. A brief listing includes:
ultrastructural investigation of synaptic connections that link brain regions
regulating behavior, cellular processes and plasticity underlying neuronal
signaling, localization of molecules regulating neurotransmission,
microanalytical monitoring of brain neurochemicals, biochemical processes of
muscle, synthesis and assembly of cellular organelles, intracellular molecular
trafficking of proteins, synthesis, assembly and structure of proteins and
bacterial viruses, assembly and segregation of chromosomes, and the molecular
biology of mycobacteria and DNA tumor viruses. In the process of conducting this
research, the faculty will integrate their experimental studies involving the
instrumentation with the training of new scientists at the postdoctoral,
doctoral, undergraduate, and high school levels. The digital format for image
capture will be particularly instrumental in training, because it will provide
external viewing of specimens by faculty and students working together. The
instrumentation will also be used to teach courses in cell biology and virology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific importance of this project stems from the
fact that it provides instrumentation that will facilitate the research programs
of a large number of well-established investigators whose work is designed to
improve understanding of the basic structure and function of biological
organisms ranging from viruses to humans and including both normal and diseased
cellular processes. The academic applications of the instrumentation will
facilitate both the recruitment and education of new scientists from both
traditionally represented and underrepresented groups. Such educational
objectives will ensure that students of science enter society with a better
appreciation of biological structure and function and a conviction that more
research is needed to understand all living organisms, the environment, and the
inner workings of the human body and brain. Finally, the instrumentation will
enhance the infrastructure that integrates research and teaching, foster
collaborations within and across scientific disciplines (e.g., chemistry,
biology, and neuroscience), and contribute to the broad dissemination of the
intellectual benefits of ultrastructural research within the scientific and lay
communities.&lt;br/&gt;