* 0320942
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Particle Tracking System for the Qweak Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Todd Averett, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2008
* USD 264,600.00

The College of William and Mary will design and build the `Region
3'&lt;br/&gt;tracking chambers for the Qweak experiment at Jefferson Lab.
This&lt;br/&gt;groundbreaking experiment will measure the weak charge of the
proton,&lt;br/&gt;as a precision test of the energy scale dependence of the weak
mixing&lt;br/&gt;angle, sin2(theta_W), thus providing a uniquely sensitive probe
of physics&lt;br/&gt;beyond the Standard Model of fundamental
physics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The Region 3 wire chambers are an essential
component of the particle&lt;br/&gt;tracking system, which is needed in order to
precisely measure the kinematics of&lt;br/&gt;the elastically scattered
electrons, as well as for critical studies&lt;br/&gt;of experimental
backgrounds. The chambers will consist of &lt;br/&gt;two sets of large (2 m
long, 30 cm wide) vertical drift chambers for&lt;br/&gt;a total of 4 planes of
x,y positions with delay-line readout, providing&lt;br/&gt;a position resolution
on the order of 100 microns and an angular resolution &lt;br/&gt;of about 1.5
milliradians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Region 3 project will have a substantial
educational component,&lt;br/&gt;as both undergraduate and graduate students
will be intimately&lt;br/&gt;involved in all phases: design, prototyping,
construction and testing&lt;br/&gt;of the chambers. William &amp; Mary has
committed new funding support for&lt;br/&gt;this project for two entry-level
graduate students for three years,&lt;br/&gt;providing tangible impact on
graduate physics education. The project&lt;br/&gt;will be be ideal for
generating topics for senior theses and summer&lt;br/&gt;research projects for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;