* 0320722
* MRI:  Development of a Parallel Machine Tool for Research and Education in Advanced Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Ming Leu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2006
* USD 178,058.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project provides for the development
of a parallel machine tool for research and education in advanced manufacturing.
The parallel machine tool will have the capability to perform parallel milling
and drilling operations on both cylindrical and prismatic parts, as well as
parallel lathing operations on cylindrical parts. The developed parallel machine
tool will have an open control system providing for the ability to easily
reconfigure the software structure and the monitoring, control, and diagnostic
modules. The open control platform will provide the means to implement process
planning and control laboratories in advanced manufacturing automation courses.
Research projects that will be conducted on the developed parallel machine tool
include hierarchical and process control, process planning for multiple cutting
tools, object-oriented and fault tolerant manufacturing software systems, and
virtual and internet manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallel machine tools
utilize multiple tools simultaneously, but independently, on a single part.
Thus, these machine tools offer the benefits of increased productivity due to
multiple operations being performed simultaneously, increased quality due to a
reduction in the number of setups, and decreased floor space. Further, their
flexibility will make parallel machine tools a key component in future
reconfigurable manufacturing enterprises. The development of the parallel
machine tool in this proposal will create a platform for educational and
research opportunities for this new class of machine tool.