* 0320115
* SBIR Phase I:     Hydrothermal Growth of Ultra-High Performance Nd:YVO4 Laser Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Henry Giesber, ADVANCED PHOTONIC CRYSTALS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will work to develop the
concept that ultra-high performance Nd: YVO4 laser crystals can be grown via a
commercially viable hydrothermal processes. Recently, Nd: YVO4 crystal growth
program using proprietary hydrothermal growth methods has been developed.
Preliminary results indicate that low defect Nd: YVO4 can be grown in aqueous
base at ~ 500 microC. These crystals appear to have greatly superior optical
properties. Hydrothermal Nd: YVO4 crystals will enable the development of new,
higher efficiency, higher performance, lower cost diode pumped solid state
lasers that emit at 1064, 532, 355, 266, and 190nm. In this Phase I program, two
novel hydrothermal synthetic pathways to the production of single crystal, Nd:
YVO4, will be developed and optimized at a scaleable and commercially viable
hydrothermal growth process for the production of mm-scale crystals. The optical
properties of these crystals will be characterized and a comparison will be made
against similar commercially available optical materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market for Nd: YVO4 in 2002 was estimated to range
from $6-$10 MM. It is almost ideal for DPSS lasers, and Nd: YVO4 is rapidly
becoming the material of choice for DPSS laser manufacturers. The growth of this
material is projected to be $16-$21 MM by 2005, and thereafter at 25% annually.
Hydrothermal Nd: YVO4 crystals will be used to make higher efficiency, higher
performance, lower cost diode pumped solid state lasers; these lasers will emit
at 1064, 532, and 355, 266, and 190 nm. Because of the advantages and benefits
of hydrothermal Nd: YVO4 crystals, the material will rapidly displace existing
Nd: YVO4 crystals in most, if not all, diode pumped solid-state laser
applications. &lt;br/&gt;