* 0320865
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Beowulf supercomputer for physical science research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Harold Hastings, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2006
* USD 252,368.00

This project, acquiring a Beowulf supercomputer for research and research
training in Physics and Chemistry, supports activities in three related research
groups: Cardiac Dynamics, Belousov-Zahobontinsky (BZ) dynamics/excitable media
group, and Molecular dynamics. The first group studies initiation, evolution,
and interaction of scroll waves in an extended system whose cells possess
specific dynamic properties within the anatomies of real human and animal
hearts. Additionally, this group studies the effect of tissue size on the
stability of scroll waves employing computer simulations and models (anatomical,
cellular electrophysiology, and means of analyzing wave activity). The second
group, often employing partial differential equations with a broad range of
temporal and spatial scales, explores mechanisms for the initiation of activity
in excitable media, in the BZ reaction (the best-known experimental example of
pattern formation in a simple system). This research entails two simulations:
First, simulation of the full spatio-temporal dynamics of the onset of
spontaneous activations, comparison of macroscopic dynamics with experimental
observations, and determination of whether microscopic fluctuations can affect
timing in the full reaction-diffusion system nucleating targets. Second,
simulations of the full spatio-temporal dynamics of the onset of activations in
the high-f regime and in the heart will be used to determine how mechanisms
depend upon the excitable medium. In the projects involving proteins, the last
group involves several projects in computational chemistry that work in
molecular modeling. The Beowulf supercomputer is expected to contribute to
visualize large molecules and perform molecular dynamic calculations on them.
Its enhanced computational power and speed augment the projects involving
quantum mechanical calculations. The molecules in the excited state electronic
properties of substituted chalcones are of interest as potential non-linear
optical materials and roles as antioxidants. The project involves research
training in an undergraduate institution. Moreover, training for teachers in
community college will take place