* 0320373
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) 3D Micro-Opto-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MOEMS) Optical Switch for Dynamically Reconfigurable Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Roger Helkey, Calient Networks
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,511.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
investigate the integration of Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM)
with optical switching based on Micro-opto-electro-mechanical systems (MOEMS) to
make important network elements needed for reconfigurable, high capacity fiber
optic networks. Optical networks in place today consist predominantly of DWDM
fiber optic links connected by electrical switches with optical interfaces (OEO
Switch). The goal of next generation transparent networks is to keep the
transmitted optical signals optical. In this way, the switch is as transparent
as the fiber itself. A problem is that these switches are surrounded by DWDM
multiplexing modules that have significant loss (6 dB each) and are relatively
expensive. The goal of this proposal is to design an integrated module
containing MOEMS switches with DWDM multiplexers and demultiplexers resulting in
a significant size, cost and loss reduction. The MOEMS elements will use the
technology developed. Two alternatives will be considered for the DWDM elements.
One utilizes Arrayed-Waveguide-Grating (AWG) chips and one design uses bulk
gratings. At the conclusion of this Phase I study, one design will be proposed
for fabrication under Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated DWDM PXC is
needed for emerging reconfigurable DWDM networks, and will find application in
commercial and government networks. The capacity is huge: 256 ports carrying 10
Terabit/s of data results in 2.5 Petabit/s switching capacity. The significant
risk lies in the integration of the DWDM elements with the optical switch
elements, and many tradeoffs need to be investigated. The development of the
Internet has resulted in tremendous benefit to society as more people have
access to more information, regardless of their background. Continued expansion
requires larger switch capacities and reductions in cost.&lt;br/&gt;