* 0320550
* Regulation of 5-Aminolevulinic Acid Biosynthesis In Rhodobacter Sphaeroides 2.4.1
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 284,058.00

As the common precursor to all tetrapyrroles, important biomolecules that
include hemes, (bacterio)chlorophyll, and vitamin B12, 5-aminolevulinic acid
(ALA) formation is crucial to both energy metabolism and other biosynthetic
processes. This project focuses on an investigation of the regulated synthesis
of this essential compound in the metabolically versatile bacterium, Rhodobacter
sphaeroides 2.4.1. The metabolic flexibility of this organism is made possible
by its ability to form all of these tetrapyrroles; aerobic and anaerobic
respiratory chains require heme-containing cytochromes, the photosynthetic
apparatus requires bacteriochlorophyll, and key biosynthesis enzymes require the
cofactor vitamin B12 for functionality. To accommodate the exceedingly variable
need in both types and quantities of tetrapyrroles in these cells, ALA formation
in R. sphaeroides is responsive to changes in many environmental parameters,
including oxygen availability, incident light intensity, carbon source, nitrogen
source, and iron availability. This responsiveness in ALA synthesis is due to
the highly regulated expression of hemA, which encodes ALA synthase, the enzyme
that catalyzes ALA formation in this organism. Thus, the hemA gene constitutes a
powerful system for examining how cells integrate complex regulatory networks in
R. sphaeroides 2.4.1. Sequence elements within the hemA gene that are necessary
for its regulated expression have been identified. Other sequences that are not
part of the hemA gene, but which affect its expression, have also been
discovered. These sequences will be investigated in more detail to determine how
the cell achieves the optimum expression of hemA, such that the total ALA
requirement for all the various tetrapyrroles, in all their various
concentrations, is met.

Because ALA is the necessary ingredient for the formation of molecules that are
indispensable to the cell, understanding how its formation is regulated is of
broad significance. In R. sphaeroides, as in animal cells, ALA is formed by the
enzyme ALA synthase. Thus, R. sphaeroides is a prokaryotic paradigm of this
critical biosynthetic reaction. The highly regulated hemA gene, coding for ALA
synthase, constitutes an appropriate and amenable model to address questions of
how cells can process multiple regulatory signals, since this gene is designed
to respond appropriately to changing needs for ALA.