* 0320281
* SBIR Phase I:  Integration of Radio Front End Using Radio Frequency Micro-electro-Mechanical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Robert Miracky, Teravicta Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,931.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project will investigate
breakthrough improvements in radio frequency (RF) electronics for wireless
portable devices, including cellular telephones and wireless local area network
(LAN) elements. The focus is on the radio transceiver, or "front-end,"
circuitry: that portion of the wireless device that first receives signals from
the antenna, or finally sends them to the antenna for transmission. This project
is important because the rate of improvement in the performance and usefulness
of wireless devices is hindered by difficulty in miniaturizing and combining
certain components (like inductors, capacitors, and filters) with other
microelectronics. The project goal will be achieved by combining micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) devices with RF circuitry in synergistic ways. The
novelty lies in monolithically building ultra low-loss RF MEMS switches with
microcoils, to yield electronically reconfigurable, high Q inductors, and
thereby enable frequency-agile devices. Additionally, the project will include
design of more complex MEMSplus RF-device combinations, the latter including
variable capacitors and active circuit elements, to explore greater
implementation possibilities. Significant innovation in microfabrication
technology and device design will be required, covering both MEMS and non-MEMS
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology will be used by high volume
component manufacturing partners and cell phone producers. This will make the
solutions emerging from this project broadly available commercially, at low
cost. A successful implementation will have a broad, important impact on
reducing cost, increasing functionality, and increasingly the data handling
capacity of next generation wireless handheld devices.&lt;br/&gt;