* 0320494
* SBIR Phase I:      Waveguide Optical Gyroscope
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Ronald Kubacki, IONIC SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,875.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project proposes to use
advanced materials and microfabrication techniques to produce a micro-
opticalelectrical system (MOEMs) gyroscope. The innovation uses both self-
assembled silicon quantum dot nano-composites and a unique poled plasma polymer
to produce micro-photonic structures suitable for construction of a solid-state
equivalent of a fiber optic gyroscope (FOG). Typically, in a MEMs or micro-
optical-electrical-mechanical system (MOEMs), a reduction in size is often
accompanied by a reduction in precision. The proposed technology provides the
high levels of FOG precision in the compact, low cost MOEMs format. We propose
to construct the photonic portion of an optical gyroscope using linear self
assembled quantum confined silicon nanocomposites and non linear, stable poled
polymers including spiral waveguide arrays to produce significant optical path
lengths in a compact form. The compact spiral waveguide structures, which
possess long optical path length, can be used for replacement of the optical
fiber coil in a FOG and other applications such as biophotonics. The nano-
composite materials permit deposition of thin films with varying in plane index
of refraction (VIPIR) that achieve performance levels of conventional fiber
optic gyros to be constructed in miniature, on chip waveguide optical
gyros.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microfabricated gyroscopes for measuring rate or
angle of rotation can be used either as a low-cost miniature companion with
micromachined accelerometers to provide heading information for inertial
navigation purposes or in other areas, including automotive applications for
ride stabilization and rollover detection; consumer electronic applications,
such as video-camera stabilization, robotics applications; and a wide range of
military applications. Current market for fiber gyroscopes is estimated to be
$200 million and growing by 7% a year. Other gyroscope type represents a current
market of well over $1 billion per year and is one of the fastest growing of the
MEMs sensor categories. We believe the proposed technology can bring fiber
gyroscope precision to the broader commercial gyroscope market and significantly
increase both market sizes. We believe it is possible to attain a minimum of 10%
market share with the proposed technology in the five to ten year time
frame.&lt;br/&gt;