* 0320332
* STTR Phase I:     Polar On Line Acquisition Relay and Transmission System (POLARATS)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Katherine Yuracko, YAHSGS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project focuses on the
feasibility of deploying closely coupled monitors with global positioning
systems (GPS), central processing units (CPU), and satellite communication
devices to ultimately provide real-time access to a wide variety of data
(chemical, biological, radiological, physical) remotely obtained in harsh Arctic
climates. Phase I focuses on developing a radiation detection prototype for
concept feasibility purposes. The initial prototype module includes beta/gamma
detectors, GPS, thermometer, CPU, and a radio-transmission device. Cold weather
performance of both individual components and the integrated module will be
determined along with corrective methods for hardening the components to achieve
reliable detection and reporting at Arctic temperatures. The performance of a
hardened integrated prototype will be evaluated over a range of simulated Arctic
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial applications include acquiring,
transmitting, and managing chemical, biological, radiological, and physical data
from remote Arctic environments and installations in real-time. Potential
customers include Arctic researchers; oil and mining companies; schools and
universities; and municipal, state, and federal agencies with regulation,
oversight, and security missions related to Arctic areas.