* 0320684
* Acquisition of an Instron Universial Test Frame for Advanced Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Joseph Genin, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 134,000.00

0320684&lt;br/&gt;Munson-McGee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant funds the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art Instron Universal Test Frame, as well as
providing advanced training in the use of its computer control system for the
interdisciplinary Advanced Materials Research Group (AMRG) at New Mexico State
University (NMSU), a minority-serving institution. The AMRG is currently active
in a wide range of materials research and educational projects across the
College of Engineering. Additional support is provided for a graduate student
and partial faculty summer support to ensure that the instrument is properly
utilized to the greatest extent possible. Current research projects that benefit
from this equipment include studies of advanced polyimide nanocomposites,
cellular and foam materials, correlations between elastic and conductive
properties of materials undergoing accumulated damage, and hydroxyapatite-based
biomaterials. In addition, in the polyimide nanocomposite program, this
instrumentation will see use in a theoretical and experimental study of the
viscoelastic behavior of these novel materials. In the biomaterials program the
instrumentation will be applied to the design of hydroxyapatie-based materials
for surgical implants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation supports the
education of hundreds of minority engineering and science students and is a
critical component of the developing materials education program at NMSU. In
conjunction with other facilities (including thermal analysis, ultrasonic
characterization, SEM and TEM), the AMRG is developing a new course in Advanced
Materials Characterization that will be a required portion of an
interdisciplinary Minor in Materials offered to engineering and science
undergraduates. This laboratory course will enhance existing theoretical courses
in Advanced Composite Materials, Mechanics of Failure, Polymer Science, and
Semiconductor Manufacturing. Additionally, the instrumentation will be utilized
in a variety of undergraduate courses, in capstone design courses, and in
outreach programs conducted to attract middle- and high-school students to
engineering and science at NMSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;