* 0320657
* MRI: Aquisition of fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy instrumentation for advanced materials and biomaterials research and education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 12/31/2004
* USD 135,041.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for acquisition of a fourier transform
infrared microspectroscopy equipment. The new equipment will offer a
significantly better energy&lt;br/&gt;resolution and stability for step-scan
capabilities. No FTIR facility currently&lt;br/&gt;exists at the college of
engineering. A number of faculty have formed a collaborative team&lt;br/&gt;for
biomaterials research in collaboration with Mayo Clinic researchers. The FTIR
system will be the&lt;br/&gt;necessary molecular characterization tool for the
collaborative research efforts of the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of FTIR
capabilities will enhance the educational experience of undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. PIs also plan to offer a hands-on graduate level
course on vibrational spectroscopy for college of&lt;br/&gt;engineering students
for which this instrumentation will be used as an important teaching tool. The
use of&lt;br/&gt;the instrument for demonstrative purposes in several courses
taught by PIs and as a hands-on learning tool&lt;br/&gt;in Vibrational
Spectroscopy, Biomaterials, and Fundamentals of Nanotechnology and
Nanomaterials&lt;br/&gt;courses will be extremely beneficial for students for
introducing novel and cutting edge research into the&lt;br/&gt;educational
experience of students. PIs are all committed to seeking, promoting and
encouraging female&lt;br/&gt;and/or minority students and have several
undergraduate students participating in research as part of
NSF&lt;br/&gt;research experiences for undergraduates program. In addition, the
team is actively working to establish a&lt;br/&gt;program in Biomedical
Engineering at NDSU with full support from central administration. Further,
the&lt;br/&gt;instruments will also be available to industries in the region and
those associated with the NDSU&lt;br/&gt;technology park for materials
characterization. &lt;br/&gt;