* 0320056
* SBIR Phase I:  Geiger Mode Avalanche Photodiodes for Photon Counting from 0.9 Micrometers to 2.0 Micrometers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* John Dries, Sensors Unlimited, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
deliver an avalanche photodiode sensitive from 0.9 to 2.0 microns, enabling
solid-state photon counting applications in this wavelength band. The avalanche
photodiode will operate in Geiger mode, wherein the device is cooled to minimize
the dark current rate, and biased slightly above breakdown. During Phase I, our
commercial avalanche photodiodes will be evaluated for use in Geiger mode. These
detectors are sensitive from 0.9 to 1.7 microns. The experimental setup for
gated photon counting measurements will be established, and optimum-operating
temperatures determined. In Phase II, the cutoff wavelength will be extended to
achieve a cutoff wavelength of 2.0 microns at the optimum operating temperature.
The cutoff wavelength will be extended using one a technique for decreasing the
effective band gap of InGaAs. The first method uses graded layers of InAsP of
varying composition to develop a lattice-matched substrate to high In content
InGaAs. The second method uses strain-compensation expitaxial growth techniques
to grow high In content InGaAs without incorporating misfit dislocations, which
act as dark current generation sites. The Phase II deliverable will be a Dewar
based photon-counting system for 2.0-micron
wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of this technology would
immensely benefit spectral analysis in the range from a 1.0 micron to 2.0 micron
solid-state photon counting detector. Geiger mode long wavelength APDs can be
used in embedded spectrometers for remote sensing, gas detection, or in
applications where weak fluorescence signals must be detected.