* 0320554
* A Consortium for the Acquisition of Equipment to Complete a Proton Detector for the DZero Experimental Particle Physics Program
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Gerald Blazey, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2006
* USD 125,209.00

This proposal from the Northern Illinois University (NIU) and University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA) groups, requests funds to fully equip a new proton sub-
detector for an accelerator-based high-energy physics experiment, the D0
experiment at Fermilab. The Fermilab Tevatron is the world's highest energy
collider, and will remain at the energy frontier for much of the decade. The D0
and CDF experiments will lead the U.S. high-energy frontier physics program
during this period, and it is important to maximize their capabilities. The D0
experiment is a large international collaboration that has significantly
advanced the understanding of particle physics through the discovery of the top
quark and via a broad range of Standard Model tests and new phenomena searches.
One of the new and most surprising results from Tevatron Run I was the existence
of large rapidity gaps (regions with no produced particles) between high
transverse energy jets. Improved understanding of this new field of hard
diffraction, which probes otherwise inaccessible details of the strong force and
vacuum excitation, requires new detectors for tagging and measuring scattered
protons. The experience from Run I resulted in the proposal for a new component,
the Forward Proton Detector (FPD), to be added to the baseline upgrade of the D0
detector. The FPD consists of momentum spectrometers that make use of
accelerator magnets along with points measured on the track of the scattered
proton to calculate its momentum and scattering angle. Preliminary results from
a partially equipped FPD are very promising and show that the detector is
working as designed. The funding of this proposal will allow UTA and NIU to
purchase the phototubes and electronics needed to fully equip the FPD and to
provide a graduate student to commission and maintain the new
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Located at Fermilab, the FPD
will be widely accessible to students from more than 60 institutions of higher
learning in the U.S. and abroad. The FPD will be an important component of
vigorous outreach programs already in place at UTA and NIU. Graduate students
will play a critical role in the installation and commissioning of this new
detector. The knowledge gained from this experiment will lead to a deeper
understanding of the basic forces of nature.&lt;br/&gt;