* 0320992
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Carl Boehlert, Alfred University NY State College of Ceramics
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 323,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a field emission gun environmental
scanning electron microscope (ESEM-FEG). The intellectual merit of this
acquisition is in research, particularly related to biomedical materials
components, nanoparticles, metals and alloys, ceramics, composites, glasses,
photonic materials, oxidation phenomena, thin films, and the interactions
between materials and living systems. The instrument enables the microstructure
and chemical composition of specimens to be characterized at a higher resolution
and accuracy than presently available. For instance the ESEM-FEG allows dynamic
heating and cooling experiments to be performed with observation of reactions
occurring on the nanoscale level. The new microscope will be housed in a
dedicated and newly renovated laboratory on campus. The Biomaterials Industrial
Outreach Services (BIOS) Center provides partial funding towards the purchase
and maintenance of the ESEM- FEG. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
this acquisition include education advancement in AU engineering and science
programs through state-of-the-art instrumentation used in all areas of materials
science, including biological cells, the cell/matrix interface, and the
material/exterior medium interface. Overall, acquisition of this ESEM-FEG will
benefit research and teaching at AU by making state-of-the-art characterization
tools available to both undergraduate and graduate students as part of their
curriculum and research activities. A diverse group, including minorities and
women faculty and students, will use the ESEM-FEG. This instrument upgrades the
AU microscopy facilities to state-of-the-art level, benefiting both
undergraduate and graduate teaching, encouraging interdisciplinary studies
within the University, and attracting local high school students to careers in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;