* 0320409
* SBIR Phase I:  A Biochip for Biological Pathogen Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Kristian Scaboo, GENORX INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
biosensor that measures the inherent electron transport properties of DNA on a
semiconductor chip. This biochip is expected to improve data quality, decrease
cost and minimize sample processing. The ability of DNA to transport electrons
is dependent on the bases being perfectly matched. Thus, only the correct target
DNA would give a signal in the proposed system. Furthermore, since the signal is
electronic, the instrumentation required to make the measurements will be far
less expensive than currently used fluorescent systems. Finally, since the
ability to transport electrons is intrinsic to DNA, no modifications and very
little sample processing will be required. This project will address two
fundamental barriers to a reliable, mass-manufacturable biosensor based on
electron transport through DNA. First, the project will investigate decreasing
the voltage biases required to initiate electron transport by decreasing the
overall resistance of the DNA/electrode assembly. Second, the project will
investigate methods to decrease the contact resistance between the electrode and
the DNA. Overcoming these two obstacles will greatly facilitate the manufacture
of an inexpensive, accurate biochip that will detect DNA without amplification.

The commercial application of this project will be in four select markets :
biological agent detection for homeland defense, life science research, drug
development and medical diagnostics.