* 0321471
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Migratory Fish as Material and Functional Linkages Across Tropical Andean Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Alexander Flecker, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 425,996.00

Migratory fishes are major components of many river systems and comprise the
mainstay of riverine fisheries around the world. The proposed research examines
the importance of migratory fishes as linkages between downstream floodplain and
upstream piedmont ecosystems. Fishes that make large seasonal migrations can be
important links between these ecosystems by providing energy and nutrient
subsidies and by influencing nutrient recycling rates and productivity. This
study focuses on one species, the flannelmouth characin Prochilodus mariae, that
makes spectacular migrations from floodplain areas into the Andean piedmont in
Venezuela. The proposed research is organized under three objectives. First, the
extent to which Prochilodus transfers nitrogen from floodplains into the Andes
will be measured. The second objective examines the effects that Prochilodus has
on nutrient cycling and therefore on stream productivity and metabolism. The
third objective is to determine the importance of stream processes during the
dry season to year-round patterns of stream production and nutrient cycling.
This research will conceptually advance our understanding of how individual
species affect ecosystem-level processes across different regions in a
landscape. It integrates across population, community and ecosystem ecology,
which is an important contemporary challenge in ecology. Broader impacts of this
study are several. The research focuses on migratory fishes that have great
social, economic, and cultural significance throughout tropical South America,
as they are important components of fisheries and major sources of human
protein. These studies will link the human dimension of fishing to our
understanding of how tropical streams function. Finally, this research will
provide training of graduate and undergraduate students from the U.S. and
Venezuela, including groups underrepresented in science, and it will strengthen
ties to Venezuelan colleagues and institutions.