* 0321017
* Function of Tissue-specific eIF4E isoforms in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Brett Keiper, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 12/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

The critical question in embryonic development is, "How do nondescript
(undifferentiated) cells change in character to become the very specialized
cells that make up the vital organs of a fetus?". It is already known that the
production of new and unique proteins in individual cells very early in embryo
development contributes to their taking on the character of adult tissue types.
Processes that introduce (synthesize) new proteins ultimately direct cells to
form distinct organ systems such as brain, muscle, gonad and gut. It is this
regulation of new protein synthesis in embryos that is the focus of this
research. The soil-dwelling nematode worm, Caenorhabditis elegans, develops from
a fertilized egg to an organized multicellular embryo in a manner very similar
to that of higher animals. Fortunately these worms have a far simpler body plan
made up of just a few muscles, neurons, digestive and reproductive organs. They
also grow to adulthood in just one day. More to the point, the critical genes
and gene products expressed at the earliest stages of development are very
similar in this simple model system. Among these products are messenger RNAs
(mRNA) that are stored in egg or embryo. These mRNAs are recruited to ribosomes
(the protein synthesizing machines of the cell) at just the right moment to be
used as a template for the synthesis of regulatory or structural proteins. The
mRNA recruiting factors have been studied for many years, and were thought to be
identical in every type of cell in the body. However, Dr. Keiper's laboratory
has recently shown that unique forms (isoforms) of these factors are found in
certain tissue types, most notably those that are undergoing developmental
changes in embryos. The current project addresses the role of specialized
protein synthesis factors in selecting which mRNAs are used in embryonic cells.
An understanding of their unique activities will begin to uncover how different
cells begin to express a unique set of proteins. This cell-specific
translational control is part of the internal program that takes embryos from a
uniform mass of cells to a complex adult organism. Students and postdoctoral
researchers involved in this project will learn how informational biomolecules
(DNA, RNA and protein) elaborate the changes that make embryogenesis a
fascinating dynamic process.