* 0321197
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Particle Tracking System for the Qweak Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2008
* USD 131,770.00

The intermediate-energy nuclear physics group at&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana Tech
consists of four faculty members: Tony Forest,&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen Johnston,
Neven Simicevic and Steve Wells. As part of&lt;br/&gt;its commitment to the
Qweak experiment in Hall C at&lt;br/&gt;Jefferson Lab, the group will construct
the Region 1 component to&lt;br/&gt;the particle tracking system. The Region 1
detector will utilize gas&lt;br/&gt;electron multiplication as a preamplifier to
the ionization&lt;br/&gt;chamber signal, which facilitates a measurement of the
elastically&lt;br/&gt;scattered electron's position with respect to the face of
the&lt;br/&gt;chamber. Based on the performance of these chambers in
the&lt;br/&gt;COMPASS experiment, the devices should be well suited to
the&lt;br/&gt;lower rates expected during the calibration runs for
the&lt;br/&gt;Qweak experiment. Two chambers will be constructed, based
on&lt;br/&gt;the COMPASS design, which will be less that half the surface
area&lt;br/&gt;as the original 30cm x 30cm COMPASS chambers. We will
use&lt;br/&gt;similar multiplexing electronics to read out the chambers.
The&lt;br/&gt;AS-7 Helix chip boards are presently being tested with
our&lt;br/&gt;prototype ionization chamber. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Graduate
student Jena Kraft will base her thesis on the&lt;br/&gt;design, construction,
and performance evaluation of the region 1&lt;br/&gt;tracking system. Two
undergraduates, Justin Beam and Jeremy&lt;br/&gt;Dobbins, will gain experience
instrumenting and testing the&lt;br/&gt;prototype detector this summer. We
anticipate a similar number&lt;br/&gt;of undergraduates will be involved over
the course of the&lt;br/&gt;project. &lt;br/&gt;