* 0321015
* RUI: Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer and Other Instrumentation for the Study of Multicomponent Fuel Film Vaporization at Trinity University
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Christopher Pursell, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2007
* USD 163,154.00

This project will provide instrumentation to support research on the
vaporization of thin films composed of non-ideal mixtures of fuels typically
utilized in internal combustion engines. A research-grade Fourier transform
infrared spectrometer, a high speed digital camera, a stabilized helium-neon
laser, and a pressure chamber will be used to measure the composition and mass
of vaporizing multicomponent fuel films as a function of time. The experimental
research will provide key kinetic information about fuel film combustion, which
is necessary for successful modeling of combustion processes. Furthermore, as
fuel films form in internal combustion engines, they affect fuel-air mixing:
pollutant emissions can be drastically altered. The research will lead to a
better understanding of how fuel films contribute to pollutant emissions from
engines by: 1) improving the understanding of the roles of thermal and mass
transport processes within the films, and 2) providing a thorough
characterization of the changing film composition during vaporization. The
broader educational aspects of the work will include the education of
undergraduate and graduate students in design and analysis in a
multidisciplinary research program. This will further strengthen a strong
tradition of undergraduate research at Trinity University and will foster closer
relations between engineering sciences and chemistry.