* 0321869
* Development of a Gas Correlation Camera for Improved Ground-Based Monitoring of Volcanic SO2 Emissions
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Iain Watson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 48,347.00

0321869 Watson

This grant supports the development and field testing of a lightweight (ca. 3
kg.) portable gas correlation camera for the measurement of SO2 in volcanic gas
plumes. The camera will be based on an Apogee AP8P digital camera with a 1024 x
1024 charge coupled device (CCD) detector, fitted with a 100 mm focal length
lens and bandpass filter to select for UV radiation at a wavelength that has a
strong SO2 absorption band (318 nm), ad maintained in an aluminum housing which
would allow a filter wheel mechanism to pass gas cells with known concentrations
of SO2 in front of the lens. The difference between an image shot through a
reference cell of know SO2 concentration and a blank reference cell with no SO2
is proportional to the line-of-sight SO2 burden. The CCD array design will
facilitate spatial mapping of large areas of plumes and an associated field
laptop running customized software will allow for near real-time interpretation
and visualization of the data. The instrument will be laboratory calibrated and
then tested at a coal-fired power plant in Montana that independently records
SO2 concentrations in their smokestack effluent. These tests will attempt to
validate laboratory calibrations and asses the detection limits of the
instrument. Typical coal-fired power plant effluents have SO2 fluxes that are
often an order of magnitude less than typical volcanic gases (e.g., 25-100
tonnes/d vs. 200-1000 tonnes/d, respectively). The instrument will also be
tested at the active Soufriere Hills volcano on Montserrat where independent
techniques for monitoring SO2 in the volcanic plume already exist (i.e., COSPEC
and DOAS). The ability to accurately image the dynamics of SO2 in the atmosphere
in near real-time and to accurately estimate SO2 fluxes is a critical need in
volcanological and atmospheric chemistry research and a potentially useful tool
in industrial environmental monitoring. The development and testing of this
instrument will involve a graduate student and faculty at Michigan Technological
University and collaborations with scientists at NASA-JPL and the Montserrat
Volcanological Observatory. ***

