* 0321185
* Acquisition of Alignment, Bonding and Hot Embossing Tools for Hybrid Bioelectronic-Nanofluidic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Trevor Thornton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 375,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of alignment, bonding, and hot
embossing tools for hybrid bioelectronic-nanofluidic systems. Combining the
hard, solid, inorganic world of the silicon chip with the soft, wet, molecular
world of biological systems will unlock an extraordinary potential for
scientific advance and societal benefit. The acquisition of wafer alignment,
bonding and hot embossing tools will allow a diverse group of scientists and
engineers at Arizona State University to work together across traditional
disciplines to better understand hybrid bioelectronic-nanofluidic systems and
how they can be engineered for a variety of applications. ASU currently has a
number of cross-disciplinary programs exploring the interface between electronic
and biological/biochemical systems. Examples of the kind of structures coupling
wet biology and chemistry to inorganic electronics include microfluidic channels
patterned in glass or silicon substrates that are subsequently aligned and
bonded to nano-transistor and/or nano-electrode arrays. Biomedical implants such
as glucose sensors and neural electrodes already being developed at ASU will
also benefit from advanced bonding capabilities, as will non-biological
applications such as advanced packaging for micro-electro-mechanical systems and
an expanded capability for the MEMS devices themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These new tools will advance discovery while promoting
training and learning in a number of ways including the NSF-funded Integrative
Graduate Education Research and Traineeship (IGERT) program in Optical
Biomolecular Devices. The entering group of IGERT students has been working on
the design of a nano-robot system, based on moving microtubules on a patterned
surface using biological molecular motors. The bonder/aligner tools we are
proposing to acquire are ideally suited to the interdisciplinary learning,
teaching and research philosophy that underpins the NSF IGERT program. Faculty
will run Senior Design Projects through a cleanroom so that undergraduate
students from a wide range of Departments gain exposure to these, and other,
state-of-the-art processing tools. The bonder/aligner tools play a key role in
the fabrication of prototype systems that will be used as demonstrators for any
practical technology that emerges. The processing capability provided by this
acquisition will be used in ASU outreach programs for teacher training (Arizona
Mathematics-Science Technology Education Partnership AM-STEP). Materials
produced by the aligner/bonding tools, including hands-on examples of integrated
nano-bio-electronic systems, will be made available to teachers and their
classrooms, and will be on display at the Arizona Science Center in downtown
Phoenix. We shall work with an ASU co-director of the NSF sponsored Western
Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO) to further recruit talented
under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;