* 0321646
* SBIR Phase II:   Biosensor for Label-Free, Real-Time Monitoring of Environmental Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Salvador Fernandez, CIENCIA INC
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 10/31/2005
* USD 510,295.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a portable
system for real-time, simultaneous detection and identification of multiple
environmental microbes and toxins from aqueous or aerosol samples, on site, with
high sensitivity and specificity and with minimal false positives or negative
events. The system consists of a disposable biosensor chip and an optical reader
device. The detection is based on a proprietary optical transduction technology
known as grating-coupled surface plasmon resonance imaging (GCSPRI). Prior Phase
I work has demonstrated the feasibility of the GCSPR microarray technology for
multiplexed detection with high sensitivity. The goal of the Phase II project is
to develop a laboratory prototype of a detection/identification sensor and a
prototype chip for multiplexed detection of a model set of three analytes
including a bacterium, a virus and a toxin. Non-pathogenic organisms will be
used as model systems. Multi-epitope detection methods will be explored for
reducing the probability of false alarms. The end result of the Phase II effort
will be a demonstration with the laboratory prototype using manual sample
introduction. This will provide the logical and critical milestone to transition
into commercial development of a portable detection system interfaced to an
aerosol collector for field testing and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this
project is in the detection of biological agents for Homeland Defense. The
capability for near real-time, multiplexed measurements with a low false alarm
rate will be valuable whenever rapid assessment of a contaminated environment is
needed. The potential applications would include hospitals, where nosocomial
infections may arise; large buildings, where accidental contamination with mold
spores, Legionella and other pathogens may create health hazards; recreational
water and drinking water supplies, where waterborne pathogens are a great
concern; and the food industry, where there is a need for sensitive methods for
on-line and real-time detection of pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;