* 0321293
* Host Specialization and Population Differentiation in Parasitoids
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* N. Olof Pellmyr, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2007
* USD 230,000.00

Host specialization and population differentiation in
parasitoids&lt;br/&gt;Pellmyr, N. Olof&lt;br/&gt;University of
Idaho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasites are an integral part of many ecosystems and
represent much of the earth's biodiversity. Specialization to hosts has been
implicated as a major factor in the immense diversification of parasitic groups,
however, empirical work examining the link between specialization and
diversification has been based mostly on phytophagous insects. Next to
phytophagous insects, parasitoids are the second most diverse parasitic group,
and are also an ecologically and economically important trophic link in
terrestrial ecosystems, because they feed on many phytophagous insect species.
Ongoing research on the interactions between yuccas, yucca moths, and their
hymenopteran parasitoids has identified a parasitoid species amenable to testing
the link between host specialization and diversification. Specifically, this
study will analyze parasitoid host use patterns at several geographic scales,
and evaluate how host use influences parasitoid population structure. Previous
research on yucca moths has shown that specialization to plant species and
microhabitat within a plant are important to moth diversification. Results from
the proposed research will determine if these same factors also influence
differentiation in parasitoids. One objective will test hypotheses about how
host microhabitat influences the pattern of parasitoid host use at a very local
scale. A second objective will evaluate parasitoid host use at a broader
geographic scale, and test hypotheses on how community context influences host
specificity. A final objective will test how host specificity due to host
microhabitat and community context influences the pattern of parasitoid
population structure obtained from molecular markers. The proposed research will
incorporate the third trophic level into a well-known and well-studied plant-
insect interaction that is commonly used in biology textbooks as an example of
the importance of mutualisms and species interactions. Undergraduate students
will be actively involved at every level of the proposed research to further
their training and understanding of science by providing hands-on experience in
both the field and laboratory setting. &lt;br/&gt;