* 0321990
* Epigenetic Variation and Inheritance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Eric Richards, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 346,103.00

Genomes encode information in two ways, genetically and epigenetically. Genetic
information is that contained in the nucleotide sequence of the genome, whereas
epigenetic information is that contained elsewhere, typically in modifications
to the nucleotides or to the chromatin. Epigenetic information in the form of
differential DNA methylation and alternative chromatin packaging influences
access to the underlying genetic information and thereby plays a central role in
the modulation of gene expression. This project focuses on variation in
epigenetic information and the extent to which this variation can affect
inheritance from one generation to the next. The impetus for this project was
the observation of the effects of altering cytosine methylation in Arabidopsis
thaliana. In this plant, reduction in cytosine methylation leads to stable
inherited variation in epigenetic information. This variation, in turn,
generates abnormal phenotypes at the whole organism level. The project involves
two major components. The first is the investigation of the molecular basis of
the DNA hypomethylation-induced dwarfing defect, bal, caused by an epigenetic
alteration that leads to elevated transcription of a pathogen resistance gene.
The second objective is to determine the prevalence of epigenetic variation
generated under more natural conditions (i.e. in the absence of mutations that
destroy proper epigenetic modification). To establish a baseline for epigenetic
variation in this model species, the investigator will study the occurrence of
alternative epigenetic alleles among different Arabidopsis strains.

Understanding the influence of modifications to nucleotides in genes and of the
packaging of chromosomes is essential to understanding inheritance. This project
will help the scientific community in this endeavour.





