* 0321171
* Acquisition of a Tunable, 10-fs and 100-fs Laser Spectroscopy System for Chemistry, Biomedical Engineering, Materials Science and Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Leonard Feldman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of an ultrashort-pulse, broadly tunable
laser facility for the study of electron and phonon dynamics in micro- and
nanostructured materials. The facility includes a titanium:sapphire oscillator,
a regenerative amplifier for the oscillator, and a set of two optical parametric
amplifiers that can be used by the oscillator-amplifier combination. The
combined laser systems supply multiple streams of intense, coherent pulses over
a wavelength range from ultraviolet to mid-infrared, with pulse duration of 100
fs, The unique experiments made accessible by the availability of this ultrafast
laboratory will include: studies of electron-electron correlations, femtosecond
dynamics of phase transitions, coherent phonon generation, spectral hole burning
in nanostructures, optical spectroscopy of photosynthetic processes in
biomimetic nanostructures, studies of fast nonradiative processes in
semiconductors, and optical coherence tomography with sub-cellular resolution.
The initial program involves researchers with substantial research funding
carrying out studies on all of these topics. In addition to the co-investigators
named in the proposal, scientists and engineers from several other schools and
departments at Vanderbilt, Fisk and neighboring undergraduate institutions are
expected to use the facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance
teaching, training and learning through an associated for-credit, two-week
intensive training course in ultrafast spectroscopy taught by the co-
investigators and associated post-doctoral scholars. This is necessary for
effective use of the facility, but will also serve to enrich our graduate
curriculum and provide a venue for recruitment of new users. Participation from
underrepresented groups will be enhanced through the participation of faculty
and students from Fisk University with whom many of the Vanderbilt co-PIs have
established collaborative research arrangements. By making available this unique
resource to qualified users, the ultrafast laser facility will significantly
enhance the current infrastructure for research in Middle Tennessee. Broad
dissemination of the results will be ensured not only through the usual
scientific venues (conferences, workshops, seminars and colloquia), but also
through Vanderbilt's Internet Webzine, Explorations, which is staffed by full-
time professionals from the University's Division of News and Public Affairs.
Benefits to society can be expected in fields ranging from biomedical
engineering to semiconductor science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;