* 0321417
* Intracellular Survival of Protistan Parasites: Role(s) of the Host and Parasite Membrane Transporter Slc11a in the Competition for Iron
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jose Fernandez Robledo, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 451,620.00

Perkinsus marinus is a facultative intracellular parasite that causes "Dermo"
disease in the eastern oyster Crassostrea virginica. In the past few decades it
has produced extensive damage to oyster populations along the Gulf of Mexico and
Atlantic coast, with catastrophic consequences for local fisheries and the
health of coastal waters. P. marinus survives and proliferates inside the oyster
hemocytes, blood cells that normally kill potential pathogens, eventually
overwhelming the host. Among the factors that modulate the parasite's
intracellular survival, soluble iron is a critical component. Parasites must
acquire from their host the iron essential for growth, while the host must
withhold iron to prevent pathogens from acquiring it, and for its own basic
cellular functions. This "tug-of-war" for iron is fundamental to the outcome of
parasite-host interactions. The goal of this research project is to characterize
the iron uptake pathways in both P. marinus and its oyster host. Studies will be
focused on membrane iron transporters identified and cloned in the parasite (P.
marinus Slc11a) and the oyster (C. virginica Slc11a) during preliminary studies,
and will consist of their detailed molecular and functional characterization,
attempting to correlate gene expression of parasite and host iron transporters
with the fate of endocytosed P. marinus. These studies will add significantly to
the basic understanding of iron transport, provide insight into the role of
metal transporters in host-parasites systems, and provide information on
invertebrate defense mechanisms and parasites' adaptations to escape
intracellular killing. The proposed studies encompass significant educational
and training activities. Two part-time postdoctoral trainees, a graduate
student, and student interns (particularly underrepresented minorities) from
schools, colleges and universities will participate. Research activities will be
adapted for conceptual and "hands-on" experiences for the SciTech program at the
Center of Marine Biotechnology, which uses this model as a science-teaching tool
for K-12 students from the Baltimore region.

