* 0321367
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Genetic Analyzer and Sequence Detection System for the Sonoma State University Core DNA Analysis Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Richard Whitkus, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/29/2008
* USD 340,000.00

This project, upgrading capabilities of a Core DNA Analysis Facility, builds on
a successful NSF CCLI award. The acquisition of a capillary based genetic
analyzer and a real-time PCR detection system is proposed to complete
investigations in a variety of fields ranging from studies of gene regulation,
to the mentoring and modeling of disease spread, to molecular systematics, and
conservation genetics. Ten of the on-going projects use DNA sequencing for
various purposes, including molecular systematics, mapping of phenotypic
characters, examination of population structure, understanding biogeography, and
identification and characterization of specific genes. Of four genotyping
projects, three use analysis of highly variable microsatellites for fine scale
population analyses, analyses of kinship (genetic fingerprinting), or mutation
detection. One genotyping project uses AFLP analysis to conduct genome-wide
sampling for use in GIS modeling that includes a genotypic "landscape." Two
projects rely simply on genotype detection or mutation detection by analysis of
the presence/absence or condition of PCR products. In line with the mission to
foster combined research/education, this work carries a good success story.

The project, accommodating the increased demand for usage of the facility by
students and faculty, not only enhances faculty research programs, but also
involves research training in an undergraduate institution. Moreover, teacher
training is expected to impact on K-12 education.