* 0321630
* STTR PHASE II: Nuclear-Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Properties of Carbon Nanomaterials for Medical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Steven Stevenson, Luna Innovations, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 07/31/2006
* USD 715,855.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project aims to develop
advanced contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging diagnostics. In Phase I
dramatically improved contrast agents based on carbon nanospheres were
demonstrated. The researchers discovered this new class of molecules called
Trimetaspheres, which involve three Gadolinium metal ions encapsulated in a
fullerene molecule. They are more than 50 times better in terms of relaxivity
than the currently available contrast agents and safer, because the metal ions
cannot escape the carbon cage. In the Phase II project full-scale production of
the Gadolinium Trimetaspheres will be accomplished at the kilogram level to
satisfy the market demand. These Trimetaspheres will be developed into future
high field contrast agents and functionalization will be pursued to make the
Trimetaspheres more soluble and biocompatible for various medical applications
including cell targeting. Following this, the Trimetaspheres will be
characterized and evaluated for R1 MRI contrast agents for both high and low
magnetic fields. Subsequently Trimetaspheres will be developed for R2 MRI agents
for high magnetic field applications.

Commercially, Trimetaspheres have proven potential in the $1.5 billion market of
MRI contrast agents. Trimetaspheres dramatically improve patient care and lower
medical costs by improving existing MRI diagnostics and providing new contrast
agents that allow diagnoses in cases where there is no current method. The
technology developed in this project has immediate applications in current MRI
measurements and satisfies requirements for future high field strength MRI
instruments. Improved contrast agents increase the likelihood of accurate
diagnosis, and ultimately reduce the treatment cost. There are many instances
where a MRI scan is not prescribed because no contrast agent exists. For example
within the brain, Trimetaspheres can pass the blood-brain barrier and are small
enough to fit inside the smaller regions of blood vessels. In addition,
Trimetaspheres will lead to applications in other diagnostic equipment (x-ray,
PET), and have advantages as a therapeutic delivering radiation upon targeted
biodistribution.