* 0321938
* Travel and Exploration at the American Geographical Society: A Postcolonial Interpretation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Karen Morin, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 72,000.00

Many, if not most, geographical organizations in the Euro-American world are now
understood as having supported colonial or imperial relationships of power in
the 19th century. They did this by activities such as by cataloguing data or
mapping colonies for territorial acquisition or military control, extracting
resources, or opening trade routes for home goods. This study examines the
historical geography of the American Geographical Society (AGS) from 1851 to
1912, questioning whether and how geographical knowledge produced by the AGS
aided in specifically American expansionism, imperialism, and 'empire building'.
The study questions whether the strong (and explicit) business and commercial
orientation of the AGS produced for it different programmatic interests compared
with other geographical organizations of the period (such as the Royal
Geographical Society and National Geographical Society) whose primary purpose
was articulated more as advancement of scientific knowledge or education in
geography. While the project brings much needed attention to relationships
between geographical knowledge and American imperialism (both globally and
within what came to be its own borders in North America), the study furthers
analysis of a little-studied but highly influential geographical society that,
unlike others, was explicitly concerned with the commercial or 'practical' value
of geography. The project focuses on programmatic activities of the AGS as read
through archival sources - e.g., financial and other support of expeditions;
collection and dissemination of explorers' and travelers' reports; lectures; and
an AGS-sponsored transcontinental railroad tour of the United States by American
and European geographers in 1912.

This study builds upon, and contributes to, research that has theorized
relationships between the history and development of science and scientific
knowledge and the expansion of 'empires'. Most significantly it directs much
needed attention to the 'colonial science' of geographical organizations in the
American context, where such analysis is especially lacking. Through a
postcolonial reading of AGS documents and activities, the study reveals the
manner and extent of AGS complicity or resistance to American imperial
expansion; and brings into view the actions, voices, and contributions of
colonial underclasses to both the histories and historical geographies of North
America, and to western geographical knowledge production. In that way the study
outlines the critical and productive uses to which postcolonial thought might be
put in American studies more broadly.