* 0321253
* Acquisition of TeraPort:  A Grid Enabled Analysis Platform with Optical Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,186,405.00

This project, building and deploying "TeraPort," a university-based, multi-
disciplinary, and internationally integrated data-intensive, Grid enabled
analysis platform with superior connectivity to both domestic and international
networks, aims at acquiring the necessary computing and network infrastructure.
While serving as an excellent testbed for computer science research (workload
management, policy specification and enforcement, middleware testing and
support), the facility will provide application production services and be
operated as a shared resource not only among the University of Chicago
researchers, but faculty, scientists, and students participating in U of C
affiliated virtual organizations, with specific focus on integration and
interoperability with the TeraGrid, iVDGL (international Virtual Data Grid
Laboratory), and the LCG (Computing Grid Project) grid fabrics. The project
exploits the State of Illinois optical networking project, I-WIRE, to provide
high performance connectivity between the TeraPort facility on the U of Chicago
campus and off site Grid resources. (This is made possible by the I-WIRE's
connection to optical Starlight facility in downtown Chicago which provides a
peering point of access to the TeraGrid backbone, U.S. universities and national
laboratories connected to the Abilene and ESnet networks, European networks,
such as SURFnet and NORDUnet, and the multi-Gigabit DataTAG network to CERN, the
European Particle Physics Laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland.) Many scientific
disciplines requiring data-intensive computations at scales orders of magnitude
larger than previously attempted, such as high energy physics, computational
biology, genome science, and emerging problems in computational psychology and
the social sciences, will benefit from this infrastructure. Persistent,
distributed infrastructures, known as "data grids," that allow sharing of data,
knowledge and compute resources in a secure manner across organizational and
institutional boundaries, address these problems involving large, geographically
distributed communities of researchers that require controlled access to
Petascale data collections and computational resources. Advances in development
of high performance optical networks connecting distributed resources at speeds
up to 40 gigabits per second are central to these new infrastructures.
Computational biology, particle physics, and astrophysics constitute examples of
many "e-Science" disciplines that have been recognized as prime candidates for
application and development of these new Grid technologies and networks. The
facility supports the following projects:&lt;br/&gt; TeraPort as an Enabler of
Grid Research,&lt;br/&gt; TeraPort, TeraGrid, Tier2 Centers and High Energy
Physics Data Grids, &lt;br/&gt; Computational Systems Biology and Using TeraPort
to Prototype the Proteomics Data Grid,&lt;br/&gt; Enabling Computational
Genomics with TeraPort, &lt;br/&gt; TeraPort and Multimodal Communication in
Humans and Machines, &lt;br/&gt; Computational Social Science, &lt;br/&gt;
Constraint-Based Social Simulation. &lt;br/&gt;The TeraPort facility presents a
unique resource for researchers accelerating progress by providing on-ramp
services to a very large scale national and international platforms.
Furthermore, the facility allows exploration of hybrid combinations of local,
shared resources in concert with very large scale Grid resource.&lt;br/&gt;