* 0321240
* Acquisition of a Scanning ESCA Spectrometer: Probing the Interfaces of Bio-, Geo- and Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Richard Smalley, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 450,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a scanning electron spectroscopy for
chemical analysis (ESCA) instrument for interface characterization of bio- ,
geo- and nanomaterials at Rice University. ESCA, also known as x-ray
photoemission spectroscopy (XPS), is a powerful and versatile method for
evaluating the surfaces of complex materials. The characterization of material
interfaces is an important activity in much of materials research; for bio-,
geo- and nanomaterials it is essential for developing new materials and
understanding their properties. It is intrinsically a surface technique
sensitive only to the top several angstroms of a sample, but with the
appropriate conditions can be used to probe depths up to 20 nanometers. Several
projects require depth profiling of atomic concentrations at surfaces while
others need information about the nature of chemical bonding at interfaces.
Still others are interested in chemical mapping of interfaces at the tens of
micron level. Nearly all participants must be able to measure the atomic
composition of surfaces, and the ability to analyze multiple samples quickly and
consistently is of particular value. ESCA can measure the relative amounts of
carbon and nitrogen at a surface and can determine whether the carbon is
graphitic or bound to nitrogen. ESCA works by bombarding surfaces with a
controlled X-ray source and resolving the kinetic energy of the photoemitted
electrons; these energies are then used to identify surface atoms and their
chemical state. Both the relative amounts of atomic species at surfaces, as well
as their chemical environment can be deduced from XPS data. Though samples are
evaluated under vacuum conditions, the technique is flexible- conductive and
non-conductive powders and thin films have been analyzed with this method. The
specific system has a focused, intense x-ray source, leading to small spot sizes
(10 microns and high x-ray flux. This feature speeds data collection and its
large sample platforms allow for rapid analysis of multiple samples. The
scanning capability also enables a wider range of surface chemical experiments,
such as depth profiles of atomic composition near surfaces and chemical mapping
at the tens of micron length scale.

The acquisition of a scanning ESCA will be especially significant to student
training and development, specialized courses for undergraduates and graduates,
and workshops. Over thirty graduate students, and tens of post-docs and
undergraduates will be able to use this system to understand how surface
chemistry plays a role in their research. The existence of a scanning ESCA will
allow us to implement a set of programs that not only teaches students how to
use the instrument, but also highlights the importance of interface chemistry in
areas such as bio- and nanoengineering.

