* 0321266
* MRI: Development of a National University Wireless Testbed: Rice Configurable Baseband Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2007
* USD 401,203.00

This project, developing a Distributed National University Wireless Testbed in
cooperation with multi-disciplinary multi-university teams from UCLA, U Mass,
and Ohio State, promotes the sharing of resources and expertise among various
universities. The work leads towards a national experimentation infrastructure
that can serve the wireless communication research and engineering community.
The infrastructure enhances the existing local wireless testbed at Rice,
contributing to the development of a distributed wireless testbed, and enabling
researchers to access a wireless testbed in different remote university sites
through web interfaces. The platform, intended to serve as a flexible,
programmable, and publicly available testbed, provides a seamless integration of
experiments with theory, supporting the following research activities:
Reconfigurable Wireless Architectures, High Data Rate Communication, and QoS
Scheduling and Modeling for Dense Wireless Networks. The web-enabled testbed
allows researchers to test, validate, and design RF, baseband, VLSI, and
networking components of future systems. At Rice, the research platform will be
composed of programmable and configurable multiple antenna wireless
communication transceivers based in high speed baseband processors, RF
transmitters and receivers, channel emulators, and a programmable RF switching
matrix.

Providing students a more well rounded education, this experimental
communication research offers a distinct advantage over a more traditional
academic/theoretical research environment. The distributed research and
educational platform will also be utilized for outreach activities, both on
campus and via the web interface.