* 0321028
* Mechanisms of tritrophic effects of plant chemistry on a parasitoid
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Paul Ode, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 331,000.00

Mechanisms of tritrophic effects of plant chemistry on a
parasitoid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paul Ode1 and May
Berenbaum2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1North Dakota State
University&lt;br/&gt;2University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant chemistry is well known to have impacts not
only on herbivores, but also on natural enemies of these herbivores. While the
effects of plant chemistry on host finding and acceptance behavior of natural
enemies is well studied in many systems, comparatively little is known about
effects of plant chemistry on other fitness correlates and how natural enemies
are able to cope with negative effects of plant chemistry. The parasitic wasp,
Copidosoma sosares, is the predominant natural enemy in a system where the
selective interactions between plant and herbivore have been particularly well
studied. Furanocoumarin production by wild parsnip plants, Pastinaca sativa,
selects for detoxification capabilities of the parsnip webworm, Depressaria
pastinacella, a specialist herbivore of the wild parsnip. In turn, herbivory by
the webworms selects for furanocoumarin-based resistance by wild parsnips. This
tritrophic system is native to Europe and has been introduced to western North
America; wild parsnips and parsnip webworms are found throughout Midwestern
North America, but are effectively parasitoid-free. The central goal of this
project is to examine the impacts of wild parsnip furanocoumarins on growth and
reproduction of Copidosoma sosares. Furanocoumarin profiles of parsnip plants
and their correlation with C. sosares fitness measures in western US populations
will be documented. Laboratory studies, manipulating xanthotoxin concentrations
in artificial diets, will directly examine the effect of furanocoumarins on C.
sosares fitness measures. Other experiments will examine levels of
furanocoumarins encountered by C. sosares in their webworm hosts as well as
their ability to detoxify any encountered furanocoumarins. Finally, the effects
of furanocoumarin variation on reproductive decisions made by C. sosares will be
examined. The existence of relatively parasitoid free populations in the
Midwestern US and heavily parasitized European and western US populations allows
comparison of parasitoid effects on webworm detoxification abilities as well as
plant chemistry. Studying the physiological effects of host plant chemistry on
natural enemies will allow for a more complete understanding of how trophic
relationships function. &lt;br/&gt;