* 0321380
* Acquisition of an Earth System Modeling Facility for Coupled Climate, Chemistry, and Biogeochemistry Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Charles Zender, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2006
* USD 773,543.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the purchase of a high-
performance computer and storage system as the centerpiece for the University of
California-Irvine (UCI) Earth System Modeling Facility (ESMF). The UCI ESMF will
be devoted to the integration, synthesis, and analysis of large models and
datasets required to advance fundamental understanding of the coupled physical
climate, chemistry, and biogeochemical cycles of the Earth system. It is
tailored for the merging of ESM components (e.g., atmosphere, oceans, chemistry,
biology, land hydrology) that normally consume the available computing resources
of individual research projects. Although primarily a development facility for
faculty and graduate researchers, the ESMF will produce the decade-long
simulations of the coupled system that are needed for basic scientific studies.
In terms of computing power, the ESMF fits between individual PI and school-
based resources and national modeling facilities but in terms of development it
is unique. The UCI ESMF fills a niche, allowing faculty, post-graduates, and
students to work with high-performance computing in an environment where they
control the computer and the code development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system
being purchased is an IBM 64 processor p655 Power4 system, similar to, but
(much) smaller than, the fastest production systems at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include use of results
from Earth system models to better inform environmental and energy policy
decision-making and education and training of students in Earth system modeling,
including students from a nearby Minority Serving Institution, California State
University at Bakersfield (CSUB).