* 0321118
* Acquisition and Customization of a Facility for the In-situ X-ray Structural Analysis of Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Alexander Wei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2007
* USD 531,000.00

This research will establish a small angle x-ray scattering facility at Purdue
University for characterization of catalysts and other nanomaterials. A
customized small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) instrument and an ultra small
angle x-ray scattering instrument (USAXS) will be developed with environmental
chambers that provide control of temperature, pressure, and gas-phase
composition for in situ analysis. X-ray scattering at small and ultra small
angles provides valuable quantitative structural information about domain size,
shape, and fractal dimension. Due to the wealth of information obtained, small
angle x-ray scattering (with diffraction) can lead to the rapid development of
new nanomaterials including heterogeneous catalysts, ordered nanoporous thin
films, oxide-based nanoparticles, metal nanoclusters, and self-assembled block
copolymers. However, efficient materials development requires direct access to
x-ray scattering instrumentation in order to provide immediate feedback for
rational nanomaterials synthesis.

Many of the research efforts that the facility will benefit have the potential
to broadly impact society. For example, novel nanostructured electrodes for fuel
cell catalysis and low-cost self-assembled nanostructured photovoltaic materials
have the potential to reduce society's dependence on non-renewable resources and
enable the hydrogen economy of the future. Novel nanostructured thermoelectric
materials have the potential to revolutionize the cooling industry, and metal
nanoparticle structures could lead to plasmonic sensors capable of detecting
single molecules of a wide spectrum of biological and chemical agents. All of
these endeavors require the rapid x-ray characterization of nanostructured
materials and will greatly benefit from the proposed instrument. The resulting
facility will provide unique and powerful instruments to campus and regional
researchers that will enable the development of the next generation of
nanomaterials and catalysts.