* 0321545
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Proteomics and Functional Genomics Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Toivo Kallas, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 407,718.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Wisconsin - Oshkosh under the
direction of Dr. Todd Sandrin (PI) and Drs. Toivo Kallas and Teri Shors (co-
PIs). The grant will enable Dr. Sandrin and his colleagues at UW - Oshkosh and
at several area academic institutions including Ripon College, Lawrence
University, UW - Green Bay, and St. Norbert College, to address a wide variety
of interdisciplinary research problems. To accomplish these goals, funding has
been provided for the following instrumentation: 1) electrophoresis equipment
for one and two-dimensional gel analyses, 2) a versatile fluorescence
scanner/imaging system to visualize nucleic acid and protein gels and to analyze
DNA microarrays, and 3) a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption - Time of Flight -
Mass Spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-MS) to identify and characterize proteins. The Core
Facility is critical to advancing the research projects of individual users of
the facility and will provide exciting educational opportunities for students as
described below. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The common theme of the research that
will be conducted in the Core Facility is the elucidation of complex biological
and chemical processes through proteomics- and functional genomics-based
approaches. Microbiologists, including Drs. Sandrin, Kallas, and Johnson, will
benefit from the Core Facility in a variety of ways. Dr. Sandrin is interested
in effects of metals and their speciation on expression of bacterial metal
resistance mechanisms. Dr. Kallas will investigate the structure/function of
proteins involved in electron transport, signal transduction, iron-sulfur
cluster assembly, and oxidative damage. Dr. Johnson is characterizing a global
regulatory factor in E. coli. Two virologists, Drs. Hall and Shors, are
characterizing poxvirus proteins (Shors) and determining how the rhinovirus
interacts with genes involved in asthma (Hall). Cell biologists will also
benefit. Vaughan will determine the impact of light-induced retinal degeneration
on protein profiles in retinal cells. Dr. Oschler is determining protein
expression involved in synaptic neural impulse transmission. Finally,
investigators with research interests in biochemistry will benefit. Dr. Hawi is
investigating biomolecule monitoring using fluorescent semiconductor
nanocrystals. Dr. Paulson is investigating the structure and biochemistry of
mitotic chromosomes. Education, teaching and training efforts are an additional,
major focus of the project. The new instrumentation will augment the depth and
breadth of practical laboratory skills students acquire during their education.
Several laboratory courses (e.g., in Microbial Physiology, Microbial Genetics,
Genetics, Immunology/Virology, and Biotechnology) will benefit from acquisition
of the equipment. New courses, including a course, entitled Introduction to
Proteomics, will be offered. Each of these activities will provide students with
the requisite skills to serve as tomorrow's effective life science
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The impacts of the proposed activity on
research, teaching, training, and learning are not limited to the UW-Oshkosh
campus community. Several area academic institutions in Northeastern Wisconsin
will have access to the instrumentation and will use it for their research
endeavors as described above. The Facility will enhance the infrastructure for
research in Northeastern Wisconsin by fostering inter-institution and
interdisciplinary collaborations. Access to the Facility will surely attract new
student and faculty researchers. As UW-Oshkosh increases its focus on
integrating research with education, the University is hiring new faculty with
extensive research experience. The Proteomics and Functional Genomics Core
Facility will be an attractive asset to prospective faculty and will provide the
University with a competitive advantage in recruiting new students. In
particular, the University's Women in Science, Science Outreach, and Pre-College
Programs will use the Facility to attract students to the Life Sciences and for
recruitment of members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;