* 0321882
* Evolution of Genetic Mechanisms Controlling Developmental Fate
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Susan Brown, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 697,133.00

0321882&lt;br/&gt;Denell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity. Studies of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, have shown
that embryonic developmental commitments along most of the anterior-posterior
axis are controlled by homeotic genes in two Hox clusters: the Antennapedia
complex (ANTC) and bithorax complex (BXC). Comparative molecular studies
indicate that a single Hox complex (the equivalent of the ANTC and BXC in
juxtaposition) arose very early in animal evolution, and that the genes in such
complexes play important roles in regulating developmental commitments
throughout the kingdom. A good deal of interest has been stimulated by the
hypothesis that changes in Hox gene functions have been an important aspect of
morphological evolution. The P.I./co-P.I.s have been developing Tribolium as a
second insect genetic model system, which allows meaningful comparisons with
Drosophila and other insects. To date over 100 mutations in the Tribolium Hox
complex have been isolated. All of the Hox genes have been cloned, and their
structure and expression pattern described. These researchers have also shown
that a construct based on the lepidopteran transposable element piggyBac can be
used for facile germ line transformation, that insertion lines can be easily and
stably maintained by selection, and that stable insertions can be remobilized in
a fashion which will allow enhancer trapping and mutagenesis by transposon
tagging. These techniques provide a very strong rationale for the continued
study in Tribolium of the control of developmental decisions and the
implications for morphological evolution. Proposed studies include the
completion of work in progress and the undertaking of new, transposon-based
approaches. Characterization of EMS-induced variants, isolated because they fail
to complement one of two deficiencies that overlap in the region of the Hox
complex, will be completed. A study of genes specifying antennal fate by
characterizing the cloned homothorax and extradenticle genes and by cloning and
studying the spineless ortholog will also be completed. A major goal of the next
grant period will be to undertake genome-wide transposon mutagenesis by
remobilizing an insertion. This approach will allow the recognition of new
variants in the Hox complex, as well as the isolation, easy maintenance, and
cloning of developmentally significant mutations throughout the genome, and the
isolation and characterization of useful enhancers. The roles of Tribolium Hox
genes will be studied further by ectopically expressing them as
transgenes.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity.
The proposed work will have a broader impact in several ways. Firstly, the
laboratories participating in this proposal have an outstanding record of
incorporating undergraduates in research. We intend to continue to incorporate
outstanding undergraduates into our research program, with special attention on
recruiting female and minority students. Secondly, in addition to working toward
answering specific experimental questions, we will continue to develop Tribolium
castaneum as a model system for a variety of studies that involve a genetic as
well as molecular component. We have freely shared materials and techniques in
the past, and will do so in the future.&lt;br/&gt;