* 0321875
* What Moves Us? Unifying the biology of human behavior
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Stephen Downes, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2004
* USD 74,215.00

SES 0321875&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Downes, University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;"What Moves
Us? Unifying the Biology of Human Behavior"&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Humans are
animals and much of their behavior invites biological explanation. Such
explanations will ultimately form an important part of self-understanding. The
number of distinct approaches to the biology of human behavior has dramatically
increased but the presupposition that a unified approach is possible still
guides researchers. This situation introduces the need for a detailed
examination of the biology of human behavior by philosophers of science. This
proposal is to undertake such an examination. Behavioral ecologists, behavioral
geneticists, evolutionary psychologists and a large range of other researchers
propose a wide variety of causal mechanisms that they take to underlie human
behavior. A careful articulation of this wide range of causal mechanisms is an
important component of the bigger task of providing a viable biologically based
account of human behavior. Currently, there is no adequate overarching causal
model that captures all the claims in the various disciplines in the biology of
human behavior and such an overarching model would add credibility to the idea
that all the various research traditions in human behavioral biology are engaged
in a unified endeavor. &lt;br/&gt;The proposal has three main aims:
&lt;br/&gt;1. To propose and defend a causal framework that is adequate to the
task of unifying biological approaches to human behavior. &lt;br/&gt;2. To
present detailed arguments showing that appeals to folk psychology as an
encompassing explanatory framework for human behavior are undermined by work in
biology. &lt;br/&gt;3. To provide an account of introspection that acknowledges
the causal power of the unconscious mechanisms proposed by biologists of human
behavior while explaining our lack of introspective access to these mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt; The project will contribute to both the philosophy of science and
the philosophy of mind. As a result, the intended audience is philosophers in
these fields but also includes anthropologists, biologists, psychologists and
sociobiologists, all of whom have a stake in understanding the causal framework
underlying their research. The approach involves taking the details of various
biological approaches seriously with the aim of drawing scientists into the
philosophical discussion. The proposed book will continue the discussion about
the potential integration of the various biological approaches to human behavior
begun by researchers in numerous fields.&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of critics of
the biology of human behavior target sociobiology and argue that sociobiologists
embrace an untenable genetic determinism. One of the aims of the proposed
project is to present such critics with an accurate assessment of the claims of
researchers in the biology of human behavior. It will reveal that while it may
be fair to level a carefully circumscribed charge of genetic determinism at a
few researchers, most biologists of human behavior are not genetic determinists.
Further, much critical discussion of sociobiology and other biological
approaches to explaining behavior has an ethical dimension. Although the
proposed project has no explicit ethical component, the research is relevant to
work in ethics to the extent that a clear account of the wide range of causal
claims made by various biologists of behavior may provide a useful starting
point for ethical consideration of this research. As a result the project is
relevant to broad based interdisciplinary discussions of the role of biology in
human understanding. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;