* 0321310
* Development of an Experimental Social Sciences Laboratory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* George Akerlof, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2008
* USD 535,603.00

This award provides funding for a 50-station Experimental Social Sciences
Laboratory with the primary role of studying individual and group behavior. The
main intellectual merit of the Lab is that it facilitates efforts to synthesize
models of behavior that cut across traditional disciplinary lines-that is, the
mission of the Lab is to foster interdisciplinary experiments drawn from across
the social sciences. Previously, a division of labor has arisen between
researchers developing theory in the area of individual and group behavior and
those performing experiments. This division is anachronistic. One of the
intellectual merits of the proposal is that it seeks to abolish this division by
dramatically lowering the barriers to conducting experiments. The design of the
Lab emphasizes maximum flexibility at minimum hassle so as to accommodate highly
varied approaches to conducting experiments. The physical configuration of the
lab stations will be highly mobile, and the computing environment will make it a
Lab without wires. The Lab will be staffed with a full-time lab manager and
part-time programmer so that the creativity of the researcher, and not
administration tasks, is the binding constraint to research productivity.
Together, this design approach provides a highly customizable setting for
researchers across disciplines. Similarly, the Lab will develop web-based and
highly flexible software for the implementation of experiments without the need
for programming expertise on the part of researchers. This software development
effort, which is already underway, will be done in collaboration with experts at
HP Labs.

The Lab benefits the research lives of faculty at UC Berkeley as well as
attracting visitors from other institutions from across all fields of the social
sciences. An important part of these efforts to attract outside scholars centers
on our development of a program to train young scholars in the field of
behavioral economics in conjunction with a successful program in this area run
out ofUC Berkeley under the auspices of the Russell Sage Foundation. In addition
to research, the broader impact of the Lab will occur in the areas of education
and application. The Lab would contribute to the education of graduate and
undergraduate students by augmenting discussion of important findings relating
to behavior with hand-on experience,' thus enriching their educational
experience and giving them an additional tool when entering the labor force upon
graduation. The results and fmdings of the Lab are likely to have important
market and policy implications which might come to be incorporated in practice.

UC Berkeley is uniquely positioned to exploit synergies arising from an
interdisciplinary approach to experiments in individual and group behavior. The
proposal has sparked strong interest from researchers at UC Berkeley in
economics, psychology, political science, as well as in fields as far-reaching
as computer science, engineering, information systems, and business. Finally,
the Lab is in a position to exploit Berkeley's large and diverse student
population, making it particularly amenable to studies involving gender and
historically underrepresented minorities.