* 0321628
* SBIR Phase II:   Synthesis of High Capacity Sn/MOx Nano Composite Anode Materials for Lithium Rechargeable Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Suresh Mani, T/J Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 08/31/2006
* USD 736,103.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
metal-oxide tin-alloy nano-composite for use as an anode material in a new
ultra-low cost lithium-ion battery. This new battery system could impact many
applications and offer an environmentally benign alternative to lead acid
batteries with significant performance enhancements. With the advent of ultra-
low cost cathode materials, for example lithiated metal phosphates, the
development of a complementary anode material is now the gating item for low-
cost lithium-ion batteries. In Phase I, mixtures of transition metal oxides and
tin alloy were successfully produced. The electrochemical and physical
characteristics were evaluated and these materials showed excellent
electrochemical performance but exhibited a high first cycle loss. Internal work
on tin alloys mixed with transition metal carbides and nitrides suggests the
first cycle loss could be improved through simple chemical modification of the
oxide component. The Phase II work will involve development of these modified
oxides to reduce first cycle loss. In addition low cost production methods will
be developed for preparing the precursors and materials. Optimized electrodes
for use in ultra-low cost battery prototypes will be produced and targeted for
outside evaluation.

Commercially, this anode material will be combined with metal phosphate cathodes
to make a new class of lithium-ion batteries that are cost competitive with
lead-acid batteries and maintenance free. This higher energy lead acid
replacement opens up opportunities in the growing UPS and HEV markets. There are
also non-commercial impacts. Any reduced use of lead acid batteries, which
creates toxic waste, is beneficial to the environment. This new class of
batteries would lead to the reduction of the 50,000 tons of toxic lead released
due to incomplete recycling of lead-acid batteries. The development of materials
that enable lithium-ion batteries to be cost competitive with lead acid
batteries could give US battery manufacturers a chance to compete against the
Asian dominated rechargeable battery market.