* 0321356
* Acquisition of an Atomic Resolution TEM for Advanced Analysis of Nanomaterials in the Environment, Agriculture and Technology (NEAT)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Alexandra Navrotsky, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,400,000.00

The rapidly developing world of nanoscience and engineering will revolutionize
technology for a multitude of applications. While the possibilities for new
devices, materials, or catalysts are virtually unlimited, the key to realizing
them is a deep understanding of the interactions and properties of each of the
nanoscale systems being developed. Only through such understanding can control,
tuning, and reproducibility of structures and properties be achieved. The first
step is to characterize all aspects of the structure, composition, and bonding
that are responsible for the properties of the system. The ability to
simultaneously characterize these features on the sub-nanometer scale lies
uniquely within the realm of transmission electron microscopy (TEM). This
research award will fund a field emission TEM instrument operating at 200kV that
will also have extensive analytical capabilities. A key feature is the design
and development of in situ stages that will allow the dynamics of nanoscale
materials to be studied under various conditions of temperature, gas pressure,
strain, and applied voltage. Specific research areas to be advanced by this
grant will include investigations of catalysts, metal and ceramic glasses,
electronic materials, and nanoparticles in host and biological systems. A strong
connection with an NSF IGERT program will be made so that the next generation of
microscopists can be trained on this pioneering approach for electron
microscopy. Significant enhancement of the educational experience of
underrepresented minorities will also be achieved. Collaborations with other
academic and industrial laboratories will be an important part of the management
of the facility.