* 0321694
* The Economics of Technology Sharing:  Open Source and Beyond
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Jean Tirole, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

The past several years have seen an explosion of interest in open source
software. This process entails software developers at many different locations
and organizations share their codes to develop and refine software programs.
Interest in this process has been spurred by the rapid diffusion of the open
source software, the major capital investment made into open source projects,
and its new distinctive organizational form. The rapid rise of open source
projects is interesting not only in its own right, but because it poses a number
of economic puzzles. Why do programmers freely contribute their rime to the
creation of a public good? Which types of projects are most suited to being
developed in an open source environment? How do leaders of open source projects
overcome challenges, such as the inclination of contributors whose suggestions
are rejected to "fork", or begin a competing project, and insure the success of
their efforts? How do specific licenses chosen by open source projects leaders
affect the evolution of the projects? How do the efforts of commercial companies
strengthen open source projects, and what dangers do they pose? This research
will examine the economic puzzles posed by open source software, employing a
variety of methodologies, including theoretical analyses, large-sample studies,
and clinical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's strategy is two-fold:
to examine the open source phenomena in depth, and to understand how the same
issues are addressed in similar economic institutions. Many of the issues posed
by open source are not new. Open source can be sees as at the end of a spectrum
of technology sharing institutions, including patent pools an standard setting
organizations, which must address similar conflicts. These similar institutions
provide another perspective from which to observe and understand the issues with
which open source projects are struggling. In particular, this research will
focus on two projects, one examining the nature of the contributors to open
source projects, and the other examining similar issues in the context of
standard-setting organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;