* 0321610
* Allelic Variability and Tests for Signatures of Natural Selection at the Human ALDH2 Locus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jeffrey Long, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 336,481.00

The enzyme produced by the human ALDH2 gene is important in normal alcohol and
drug metabolism via its role in the oxidation of aldehydes. There is a
deficiency variant of the gene, ALDH2-2, that is common in people from East Asia
but absent in other people. People who carry of the ALDH2-2 allele tend to
abstain from drinking because acetaldehyde in their blood builds up to
unpleasant and noxious levels. It is possible that natural selection has favored
the ALDH2-2 variant, at least in the parts of Asia where it occurs. However, the
benefit of abstaining from alcohol to people who carry ALDH2-2 might be offset
by the fact that acetaldehyde is cytotoxic and mutagenic, and may exacerbate
liver disease and throat cancer. Natural selection will act on the balance
between positive and negative effects of ALDH2-2. This research tests the
hypothesis that natural selection has influenced variation at the human ALDH2
gene locus. It is important to identify genetic loci that are under natural
selection because they are likely to demonstrate adaptations to specific
environments and to influence health and
reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular signatures of natural selection
will be identified by analyzing DNA sequences within and between regions of the
human genome, within and between human populations, and between species. The
analysis is based on first principles of neutral molecular evolution applied to
the complex geography of our species. In accordance with the specific aims, the
project will sequence DNA at the ALDH2 locus in humans and chimpanzees. For some
samples, DNA will also be sequenced at the ALDH1A1 locus. The specific aims also
include developing and refining an original statistical method for comparing
genetic differences within and between populations. This project utilizes recent
advances in genome science and the completed human DNA sequence. It would have
been impossible to conduct even a decade ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
impact on the scientific community has several dimensions. It has a training
component that spans undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels.
Intellectual contributions will be made through the fusion of talents of
graduate and postdoctoral trainees with those of undergraduates drawn from the
Summer Research Opportunities Program for underrepresented minority students.
The principal investigator will incorporate the results of this research into a
lecture on human genetic diversity that will be given as part of the University
of Michigan Life Sciences Values Program public outreach series. Furthermore,
the project will collect a large body of DNA sequence data for several
populations. These data will be deposited in GenBank and will provide a resource
for other genetic researchers.&lt;br/&gt;