* 0321236
* MRI: Acquisition of a Directional Random Wave Generator for the Coastal Engineering Laboratory Wave Basin
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Billy Edge, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2006
* USD 800,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The College of Engineering and Department of Civil
Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University is committed&lt;br/&gt;to Coastal
Engineering as one of the research growth areas. The College completed a new
Coastal Engineering Laboratory in&lt;br/&gt;September 2002 that contains a 22.8m
by 36.6m by 1.5m deep wave basin, making it the largest wave&lt;br/&gt;basin at
a US academic institution. This basin will be used for studying three areas:
nearshore coastal&lt;br/&gt;processes, wave-structure interaction and coastal
environmental dynamics.In the three-dimensional basin, a segmented,
multidirectional random wavemaker will be designed,&lt;br/&gt;constructed, and
installed to generate short and long period waves in a water depth up to 1.2 m.
The&lt;br/&gt;wavemaker will have a stroke of approximately one meter, which is
adequate to generate both short and&lt;br/&gt;long waves. Additionally, the
equipment will be capable of creating solitons, directional waves
and&lt;br/&gt;focusing and defocusing waves. Participation of remote users will
be encouraged through teleobservation&lt;br/&gt;capabilities.&lt;br/&gt; The
equipment will be used to study research issues of state and
national&lt;br/&gt;significance as well as applied research addressing practical
problems. Studies will include the effects of&lt;br/&gt;storm surges and ocean
waves on human safety and infrastructure by studying areas of wave-
structure&lt;br/&gt;interaction, wave hydrodynamics such as flooding and
inundation, erosion and transport of sediments,&lt;br/&gt;scour, and debris
flow. It will also be used to study the influence of waves and currents in the
coastal&lt;br/&gt;zone on morphological evolution. Major sources of support for
the operation and maintenance of the laboratory will be from&lt;br/&gt;State
initiatives, national research grants and industry testing.&lt;br/&gt;Students
at the graduate and undergraduate level will use the equipment. Groups from
geography,&lt;br/&gt;oceanography and engineering will be using the equipment to
integrate research with teaching. Each&lt;br/&gt;group of users will be given
training commensurate with their intended use of the equipment. Some
users&lt;br/&gt;will be merely observers of ongoing experiments and others,
primarily of graduate MS and Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;students, will actually be
conducting experiments. Training for non-resident researchers will be
provided&lt;br/&gt;to the specific users on a case-by-case basis through hands
on training in the laboratory and via-web&lt;br/&gt;based instruction. The web-
based instruction will use teleobservation capabilities in the laboratory.
For&lt;br/&gt;many, the Laboratory and the three-dimensional equipment will
serve as a learning opportunity to better&lt;br/&gt;understand wave and current
dynamics and the processes causing the extensive damages of
hurricanes&lt;br/&gt;and coastal storms. Our educational mission will include
the integration of research and education from&lt;br/&gt;K-12 and undergraduate
research through existing campus programs that will ensure the availability
of&lt;br/&gt;the equipment to underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;