* 0321851
* RET:      Nanofabrication Training and Research Experience for Virginia Teachers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Paul Hallacher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 05/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;To meet the expanding need for nanotechnology workers,
new nanotechnology education&lt;br/&gt;programs, courses, and course modules
must be developed and delivered to students at all&lt;br/&gt;levels. There is a
particular need for secondary science teachers to receive hands-
on&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology training and research experience so that they are
equipped to incorporate&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology principles and concepts into
science curriculum. This proposed&lt;br/&gt;Research Experience for Teachers
(RET) project will provide a three-day hands-&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology training
and research experience to 20 high school science teachers
from&lt;br/&gt;Virginia at the Penn State Nanofabrication Facility during late
March or early April 2003.&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon prior
investments by the state of Pennsylvania and the NSF&lt;br/&gt;in nanotechnology
education in Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;The Pennsylvania NMT (Nanofabrication
Manufacturing Technology) Partnership was&lt;br/&gt;initiated in 1998 by the
state of Pennsylvania. It involves more than 30 colleges
and&lt;br/&gt;universities, secondary schools including vocational-technical
schools, and private&lt;br/&gt;industry. The NMT Partnership leverages the $26
million Penn State Nanofabrication&lt;br/&gt;Facility, part of the NSF National
Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN), to provide&lt;br/&gt;semester-long, hands-
on nanofabrication education to students enrolled in associate&lt;br/&gt;degree
programs in nanofabrication at community colleges and other institutions
across&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania. The NMT Partnership also provides professional
development workshops&lt;br/&gt;for educators and industry personnel, and summer
iunano campsln secondary school&lt;br/&gt;students. The NMT Partnership is also
a NSF Advanced Technology Education Center.&lt;br/&gt;The NMT Partnership first
began offering professional development workshops for&lt;br/&gt;educators at the
Penn State Nanofabrication Facility in 1999. To date, 169 educators
and&lt;br/&gt;industry personnel have attended these workshops. This proposed
project builds upon&lt;br/&gt;and expands the components of the Pennsylvania NMT
Partnership associated with&lt;br/&gt;professional development of educators, and
will take the NMT Partnership beyond the&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of Pennsylvania
through an alliance with the Initiative for Nanotechnology in&lt;br/&gt;Virginia
(INanoVA). INanoVA is a statewide initiative involving higher
education,&lt;br/&gt;national laboraties, state and local education and economic
development organization,&lt;br/&gt;and private industry. INanoVA aims to
promote collaborative nanotechnology research,&lt;br/&gt;commercialization, and
workforce education. The University of Virginia provides&lt;br/&gt;leadership
for InanoVA.&lt;br/&gt;The University of Virginia will coordinate recruitment of
20 secondary science teachers&lt;br/&gt;from Virginia for the proposed RET
workshop, ensuring balanced geographic&lt;br/&gt;representation across the
state. Penn State will deliver the three-day nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;training
and research experience at the Penn State Nanofabrication Facility. The
project&lt;br/&gt;will be managed by Penn State. The project has clear
intellectual merit, as evidenced by&lt;br/&gt;the role of the PI in leading the
Penn State site of the NSF NNUN, the NSF Center for&lt;br/&gt;Nanofabrication
Manufacturing Education, the September 11-12, 2002 NSF Workshop&lt;br/&gt;on
Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE), and other nanotechnology
research&lt;br/&gt;and education activities. The project is expected to have
broad impact on the science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering workforce of Pennsylvania,
Virginia, and the nation.