* 0321725
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Race Matters-- Ideologies of Race in Police Personnel Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Lauren Edelman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,900.00

This project explores the evolving ideologies of race in police personnel
decisions from the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to the present.
Against the background of the societal forces behind the changing face of
metropolitan policing, the project analyzes how police officials, past and
present, perceive race to matter in law enforcement. The project involves two
phases. The first is historical: the researchers investigate whether and how
ideologies of race in policing have changed over time. The second is
contemporary: the researchers examine conceptions of the appropriate use of race
in police personnel decisions. In both phases, the primary focus is on the
official justifications used by police commissioners, police chiefs and higher
level officers and officials for taking race into account in making personnel
decisions, e.g., recruiting, hiring, promoting and making assignments. These
justifications are discernible from EEO lawsuits and consent decrees against
urban police departments as well as other archival data, including newspaper
interviews and testimony before government bodies. This research is supplemented
by interviews and observational data from a case study involving one urban
police department in order to explore whether there is a gap between what
contemporary law enforcement management is willing to endorse as an appropriate
use of race-conscious policies and what street-level officers deem to be an
acceptable law enforcement resource. This research has important implications
both for the sociology of law with regard to race and criminal justice and for
policy considerations regarding the balance between protecting individual rights
and achieving societal benefits. This research explores issues of race and
policing that have received little scholarly attention and makes significant
contributions to several areas of law and social science scholarship, including
organizational theory and legal consciousness and ideology.