* 0321973
* A Data-Oriented, Active Learning, Post-Calculus Introduction to Statistical Concepts, Methods and Theory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/10/2002,06/30/2005
* Allan Rossman, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2005
* USD 142,500.00

This project is developing curricular materials for a two-course sequence that
introduces students at the post-calculus level to statistical concepts, methods,
and theory. These courses are providing a more balanced introduction to the
discipline of statistics than the standard sequence in probability and
mathematical statistics. The materials incorporate features of successful
statistics education projects, including development of students' conceptual
understandings, student explorations through hands-on activities, analysis of
genuine data, and integration of computer tools both to enhance students'
learning and to analyze data efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student
audience targeted by this project is particularly important because it has been
overlooked by previous curricular reform projects focused on the introductory
course for students with majors outside of mathematics. The proposed two-course
sequence introduces mathematics and science majors to content and pedagogy,
which prepare them well for careers in statistics or teaching. Because large
numbers of mathematics majors become teachers at the secondary school level,
these students must learn fundamental principles of data analysis to be able to
teach according to NCTM standards. This course is particularly appropriate as it
teaches students in a discovery-oriented manner in which they should
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing, testing and revising
these materials, the project includes a significant program of dissemination and
evaluation. The primary outcomes are two fully self-contained textbook/
workbooks, which integrate investigative activities with more traditional
exposition. Other expected outcomes include a suite of Java applets designed to
aid students' conceptual visualization and extensive support materials such as
instructor's guides and sample examinations. A final anticipated outcome is a
week-long faculty development workshop.