* 0322065
* Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles in Human Ecosystems: Stoichiometry, Hydrology, Connectiveness, and Culture
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Diane Hope, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2006
* USD 355,317.00

Brezonik&lt;br/&gt;0322065&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to expand
our understanding of biogeochemical cycles in human ecosystems. Our main
question is: how do humans in cities and on farms alter biogeochemical cycles?
We will address this question using a fourfold concept of coupling: (i) between
hydrology and element cycling, (ii) among elements (stoichiometry), (iii) across
spatial scales (from households to regions), and (iv) between human behavior and
element cycling.&lt;br/&gt; Element cycles are controlled by spatial connections
at three key scales. Elements move between households (which are key components
of urban landscapes) and their surroundings, within and between watersheds
(i.e., hierarchically from small upstream (low-order) watersheds downstream to
larger, higher-order ones), and between major ecosystem types (e.g., from farm
to city). Some of this movement is deliberately controlled (e.g., food import to
cities), but a large portion is not (e.g., movement of NOx from autos and
landscapes to the atmosphere. Moreover, there are "hotspots" within landscapes
where disproportionate nutrient inputs, transformations, and losses occur.
&lt;br/&gt; The complexity of human-dominated ecosystems is one reason why our
understanding of their biogeochemical cycles has lagged behind that of natural
systems. Nevertheless, for two reasons, now is the time to confront this
complexity and develop this understanding. First, we must, as a matter of
survival. Second, we can; our ability to acquire, store, and use data has
reached the point that we can expect to unravel this complexity to a useful
degree and develop new management paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;