* 0322839
* Electronic Devices of Germanium Carbide
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Rodney Soukup, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

Germanium Carbon alloys are a potentially very interesting class of new
electronic and perhaps electro-optic materials about which little is known. A
remarkable feature of the materials is that they remain near direct gap
materials, at least for a few % C incorporation. A 1.1 eV bandgap material has
already been made using reactive plasma deposition, and it shows much higher
absorption than c-Si with the same bandgap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
incorporate more C into Ge, and to incorporate more Ge into SiC, the group at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) has developed a novel, low temperature,
deposition technique (hollow cathode plasma jet deposition) to provide sputtered
Ge, sputtered C, sputtered Si and a highly reactive H beam. Each material can be
independently controlled, and therefore, much greater amounts of C can be
incorporated than is possible using a standard reactive plasma ECR or a glow
discharge reactor. We have already shown that this technique is capable of
producing high quality a-(Si,Ge) films, and now we want to explore the use of
this technique to produce well controlled, crystalline films of Ge 1-xCx . Both
microcrystalline films on glass, and crystalline films on Ge or Si substrates
will be explored. A systematic set of material properties, including structural,
optical and electronic properties, will be measured at UNL and Iowa State
University (ISU). The structural measurements include x-ray diffraction, Raman
spectroscopy, SEM and TEM, constant photo-electron spectroscopy and FTIR to
measure H bonding in the material. Optical measurements will include measurement
of n and k using ellipsometry, spectro- photometry and double-beam photo-
conductivity techniques. Electronic measurements will include mobility
measurements, type of doping, dopant levels, mid-level defects using DLTS, the
type of recombination, etc. Given the importance of the materials to devices,
proof of concept p-n junctions will be made. The deposition system can introduce
dopants such as B and P during growth. Electronic properties such as minority
carrier lifetime and diffusion lengths will be measured in devices. This will be
the first systematic exploration of this novel material system. Virtually
nothing is known about the fundamental device-related properties of this
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Broad Impact&lt;br/&gt;The potential industrial
impact has already been described above. We plan a very activeinvolvement of
both undergraduate and graduate students in the program. There will be exchanges
of graduate and undergraduate students between UNL and ISU. Both institutions
teach courses in semiconductor materials and devices, including lab courses. ISU
plans to offer a new, advanced semiconductor material fabrication and
characterization course, and the results from this project will be integrated
into that new course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;