* 0322635
* Stability and Performance Guarantees for Self-Organizing On-Line Approximation Based Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Jay Farrell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2006
* USD 222,670.00

On-line approximation based control achieves stability and accurate reference
input tracking for systems with unknown nonlinear dynamics by implementing
approximations to the unknown nonlinear dynamics during the operation of the
system. Theoretical analysis of the conditions for stability is a prerequisite
for widespread military and commercial use of on-line approximation based
control systems. The fact that on-line approximation based control is being
seriously considered is demonstrated, for example, by the joint Air Force and
Navy Intelligent Control Initiative (PRDA 01-03-VAK) for flight control which
required both on-line approximation capabilities as well as analytic guarantees
of stability and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In applications of such
systems for which stability results exist, the structure of
the&lt;br/&gt;approximator is fixed a priori and the parameters of the
approximator are adjusted on-line. The designer must therefore over design the
approximator structure to guarantee that a desired approximation accuracy is
achievable for the unknown nonlinearities. Definition of the approximator
structure is currently the weakest link in the design of such (stability based)
on-line approximation based control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-
organizing on-line approximation based control defines and adapts both the
approximator structure and its parameters during on-line operation. Self-
organizing on-line approximation based control offers the potential for
increased performance with fewer computational resources, since the on-line
algorithm can optimally define the approximator structure based on the data that
is measured. Although statistically based algorithms for on-line specification
of the approximator structure are beginning to emerge, the theoretical
understanding of the stability and performance guarantees achievable for such
self-organizing systems is still in its infancy. This project will utilize
methods from the fields of nonlinear control, Lyapunov-like stability analysis,
and nonparametric regression to develop stability and performance guarantees for
self-organizing on-line approximation based control. To aid the clear
dissemination of the theoretical outcomes of this project to students and the
general technical community, the new methods will be demonstrated on academic
examples. To aid the transition of this technology to relevant industry groups,
application case studies of, for example, aircraft or robotic control problems
will be presented.&lt;br/&gt;