* 0322007
* Collaborative Research between Israel, Greece, Turkey and the U.S. (Thessalonica, Greece, May 14-16, 2003)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Balaji Narasimhan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2004
* USD 2,555.00

Balaji Narasimhan&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Collaborative Research between Israel, Greece,
Turkey and the U.S. (Conference to be held in Thessalonica, Greece, May 14-16,
2003)." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports travel funds to attend the 3rd
Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research in Eastern
Mediterranean (EMCC-3) to be held in Thessalonica, Greece, May 14-16, 2003. The
participating countries are Turkey, Greece, Israel and the U.S. Academic
chemical engineers from other Eastern Mediterranean countries will also be
invited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;An important
objective of the PI's visit will be to establish new collaborations with Greece
and Turkey to complement current interactions (with Technion University, Israel)
in the area of understanding crystallization mechanisms across semicrystalline
polymer interfaces with a view to improve processing and to strengthen the
interface. The collaborations will bring new insights to some of the research
that the PI has performed with NSF support and will enable submission of a new
collaborative proposal to the CTS Division of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The insights developed in the research will be critical in the
design of semicrystalline polymer interfaces in applications such as
microelectronics packaging, composite materials, and artificial organs. The
interactions between Israel, Greece and Turkey will also enable graduate
students to be exposed to a multi-cultural environment, which is very important
in today's increasingly global perspective.&lt;br/&gt;