* 0322074
* Plankton dynamics and carbon cycling in the equatorial Pacific Ocean: Control by Fe, Si and grazing
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* David Nelson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2008
* USD 2,061,993.00

Intellectual merit: Of the many linkages among the cycles of biologically active
elements in the ocean-atmosphere-biosphere system, regulation of the oceanic
carbon cycle by the processes that supply nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon and iron
to surface waters may be the most important. Phytoplankton photosynthesis,
export of organic carbon from the surface layer and remineralization of that
carbon in the deep sea comprise a biological pump, which transports CO2 from the
atmosphere to the deep ocean at globally significant rates. Ice-core records
suggest that oscillations in the global- scale efficiency of this pump may play
a major role in controlling atmospheric CO2 concentrations on
glacial/interglacial time scales. Because N, P, Si and Fe availability are all
known to limit organic matter production by phytoplankton or its export to depth
in present-day ocean habitats, limitation by those elements may be the main
biogeochemical mechanism regulating atmospheric CO2 levels In several large
oceanic areas high surface concentrations of nitrate and phosphate persist
throughout the year, suggesting Fe limitation of phytoplankton growth and/or Si
limitation of diatom growth. In those high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll (HNLC)
areas, relatively little of the dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) delivered to
surface waters is taken up, making the system either a greater source or smaller
sink for atmospheric CO2 than it would be if all N and P were used. Two HNLC
systems are of the greatest global importance with respect to these processes:
In the Southern Ocean, glacial/interglacial changes in Fe supply may stimulate
phytoplankton photosynthesis during glacial periods and limit it during
interglacials, driving the well-documented changes in atmospheric CO2. In the
Pacific Ocean, wind-driven upwelling at the equator and inefficient use of the
upwelled N, P and DIC by phytoplankton combine to make the Eastern Equatorial
Pacific (EEP) the largest oceanic source of CO2 to the atmosphere under present
conditions. There is now direct experimental evidence of both Fe limitation and
Si limitation in HNLC surface waters. In addition, diatoms (the only major
phytoplankton group that requires Si) are usually stimulated more than other
groups by release from Fe limitation. Fe and Si availability can also interact
to control the production and export of organic matter in HNLC areas because low
[Fe] increases the Si/C and Si/N uptake ratios of diatoms. This project will
undertake a coordinated program of field research, biogeochemical modeling and
education focused on the roles of Fe limitation, Si limitation and zooplankton
grazing in regulating the carbon cycle in HNLC areas. The experimental work and
modeling will both stress effects of these control mechanisms on three
functional groups within the phytoplankton -- diatoms, coccolithophores and
picoplankton -- whose nutrient requirements differ significantly and which
produce organic matter that has distinctly different fates in the ocean. The
educational phase of the project will address both the Southern Ocean and the
equatorial Pacific, the research phase will be conducted in the upwelling zone
of the EEP (135 - 140 W). This research will combine field observations,
manipulative field experiments and biogeochemical modeling, with all field
observations and experiments designed to support a new generation of upper-ocean
models that distinguish explicitly among the roles of diatoms, coccolithophores
and picoplankton in the oceanic carbon cycle. The experiments and models are
designed to examine competition among these groups under different nutrient
regimes, their selective removal by zooplankton and the effects of changing
light and nutrient conditions on their elemental composition. These interaction
terms have not been explored well enough in previous models to address their
effects on carbon cycling in any ocean system.

Broader impacts: An integral part of this project is an educational program for
elementary and high school teachers, focused on ocean biogeochemistry, the
global carbon cycle and their connections with global climate. The program's
goal is to help teachers present these topics to their classes in an accurate
and engaging way, leading to real understanding. Three workshops for teachers
will illustrate physical and biological controls on the oceanic carbon cycle,
explain the global-scale consequences of changes in that cycle and develop
instructional materials for the teachers to use. Those educational tools will
include an interactive web site where teachers and students can run
biogeochemical models of the EEP, make their own assumptions about how the
system might work and use the model to explore the consequences of those
assumptions. In addition, one teacher will go on each cruise to experience
seagoing research first-hand and interpret the results for students. There will
also be a significant international collaboration with scientists at l'Institut
Universitaire Europen de la Mer (IUEM) in Brest, France in both the seagoing and
modeling phases of this project.