* 0322334
* The Transformation of Italian Democracy:  Geographies of Party Replacement and Electoral Change in Italy, 1987-1996
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* John Agnew, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2006
* USD 149,987.00

Italian democracy underwent a dramatic transformation between 1987 and 1996 as
historically entrenched political parties disappeared and were replaced by new
ones. A variety of factors, such as the end of the cold war and investigations
into government corruption, contributed to the numerous political changes of the
period. Closer investigation reveals, however, that many of the agents behind
this party-system change in Italy originated and operated at regional,
provincial and local levels. This research explores the geographical dynamics of
party replacement and electoral change in Italy during this period in order to
understand better the overall process of political change. Electoral change is
often understood and framed in terms of a zero-sum game; vote gains for one
party or candidate are viewed as coming at the expense of another. In two-party
systems like American democracy, such changes from election to election are
referred to as vote swings. In multiparty systems like Italy, electoral changes
are often understood through the statistical estimation of the flow of votes
between parties. Such vote-flow estimates are frequently inaccurate because it
is assumed that changes are homogeneous nationwide, when in fact such changes
may vary considerably from place to place. This research implements a geographic
theoretical perspective and uses spatial analysis to clarify and better
understand electoral and party change. Since political behavior is not uniform
across a democracy, it is first necessary to determine how electoral changes are
played out differently in different places before a complete understanding of
why such changes occur can be obtained. From this viewpoint, levels of electoral
change and types of change (e.g., when one party replaces another, when one
party splits into two or more new parties, etc.) are likely to be more
consistent within and between proximate geographic contexts because voters are
probably responding to similar political messages and experiencing similar local
circumstances. Understanding political change through the identification and
evaluation of such geographic contexts, therefore, is more appropriate than
assuming uniform levels of change and harmonious voter behaviors across a
country as a whole.

This research extends the large body of literature on party-system change by
detailing the consequences of party decline and change using a geographic
perspective. By identifying how political changes are played out, insights into
why such change occurs are obtained. Such information is useful to understanding
political change in established democracies, and can be applied to emerging and
transitional democracies as well. Moreover, the project engages and stimulates
current discussions about and the role and significance of geography within the
democratic process. Finally, by implementing and evaluating recent
methodological developments in the fields of geography and political science,
this exploration into the geography of political change provides constructive
research and educational opportunities for graduate students.