* 0322920
* Frozen-in Birefringence and Optical Performance of Injection/Compression Molded Optical Products:    Quantitative Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Avraam Isayev, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

With the development of information technology and nanotechnology, the
manufacturing via molding of precision plastic optical parts such as light guide
plates, lenses, disk substrates and other optical components are continuously
gaining more importance. The birefringence of molded plastic optical parts
introducing optical anisotropy is one of the major problems, lowering their
optical quality. Until now, trial-and-error procedures have been required to
meet the stringent specifications of the optical parts, because of the lack of
science-based technology suitable for the calculation of optical performance of
moldings as affected by inherent optical characteristics of polymers and
processing conditions used in the manufacturing process. The presently available
fundamental tools to evaluate optical performance characteristics of products,
such as brightness and aberration, are inadequate and based on geometric ray
tracing with the assumption that the media is isotropic. Due to the neglect of
anisotropy, inevitable discrepancy appears between the theoretical and
experimental evaluation of optical parts. The present proposal attempts to
develop novel scientific approaches for predicting optical performance of molded
plastic parts with anisotropy by carrying out targeted theoretical and
experimental research. Theoretical studies include numerical simulation of
frozen-in birefringence and subsequent calculation of the principal refractive
index tensor and the directions of the principal axes of the molded parts as
affected by processing parameters and measurable inherent optical properties of
polymers. This will be done by considering nonisothermal polymer melt flow with
solidification using a nonlinear viscoelastic model combined with the stress-
optical rule, and a linear viscoelastic solid model, combined with a
photoviscoelastic model (optical memory), and free volume relaxation theory.
Then a ray-tracing algorithm through anisotropic media will be developed to
predict the brightness distribution on light guide plate surfaces and the
aberration of lenses and suitable for utilization in practical application for
optical products. Extensive molding and characterization experiments will be
conducted on optical materials and products to validate the proposed theoretical
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have a significant
impact on the development of technology for manufacturing of optical products in
various industrial areas and will help to develop a methodology to increase the
optical quality of molded plastic components. Theoretical modeling and computer
simulations of molding processes will aid to optimize the mold design parameters
and processing conditions eventually eliminating a trial-and-error procedure in
the manufacturing.