* 0322515
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Signaling in C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jo Powell-Coffman, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

Most of the cells within a multi-cellular organism have equivalent genomes, and
distinct cellular identities arise from differences in gene expression. Thus, a
key to deciphering the mechanisms by which individual cell types develop is to
identify and characterize the proteins that regulate critical changes in gene
expression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Powell-Coffman laboratory is employing a
powerful genetic model system, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, to study the
regulation and function of a transcriptional complex that regulates neuronal
development. The C. elegans ahr-1 gene is homologous to the vertebrate aryl
hydrocarbon receptor. ahr-1 is expressed in a subset of neurons, and disruption
of the ahr-1 gene causes specific neuronal defects. The near-term research goals
of this proposal are to characterize AHR-1 function and regulation in two
classes of sensory neurons. Specific hypotheses regarding the identity of
upstream regulators and downstream targets will be tested. The proposed
experiments will provide important insights to AHR-1 signaling. Additionally,
they will further define the genetic circuitry that defines these classes of
neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education of undergraduate and graduate
researchers is integral to this project. A central objective is to enable
students to become skilled at scientific method and to develop critical thinking
skills. Additionally, this project will provide faculty mentorship and research
experience for women and members of ethnic minorities, who are currently
underrepresented in science and technological careers.&lt;br/&gt;