* 0322962
* "SCREMS" Computational Mathematics Research at UTM
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jack Xin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 111,553.00

Investigators from the Department of Mathematics at The University of Texas at
Austin are involved in projects that include the development of deterministic
high order numerical schemes for Boltzmann type kinetic transport models and the
study of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics; computer-assisted theorem
proving in analysis related to the onset of instabilities in dynamical systems;
development of computational tools for studying the material and conformational
properties of DNA at various scales; computations of random fronts in two or
three space dimensional stochastic reaction-diffusion equations and generation
of a large solution sample space to analyze front statistics; computational
investigations for large-scale distribution of predicted orders of the Tate-
Shafarevich groups of the quadratic twists of a fixed elliptic curve; and the
growth of the minimal weight in various families of error correcting codes. Each
of these projects shares the need for large amounts of uninterrupted computation
cycles. A single computer-assisted proof in the analysis of dynamical systems
can consume over 3 years of CPU time on a 1GHz Pentium class processor. The
computational requirements of testing numerical methods for kinetic transport
models are essentially open ended; investigators currently use all available
resources continuously. Similarly, the computational requirements of
investigating the large-scale distribution of orders of Tate-Shafarevich groups
are practically unlimited. The scope and the magnitude of the projects outlined
above warrant the deployment of a substantial dedicated computational facility
for the pursuit of these objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF funds awarded
for the purchase of a computational server cluster provide considerable momentum
to the vigorous pursuit of the research agenda outlined in preceding paragraph.
All of these projects deal with problems that are of current interest in
computational mathematics. They are part of an effort to understand the
mechanisms behind phenomena that play an important role in solid state physics,
biology, cryptography, and other sciences. In addition, they advance the state
of the art in computational mathematics, which brings new problems within the
reach of mathematical analysis. Some of the projects also involve interactions
with software developers, which contributes to the design of new software for
scientific applications. The applications of this research are wide ranging and
profound. They include the modeling of nano-electronic and biological
structures; analyzing the stability of dynamical systems such as plasma
confinement in fusion energy accelerators, celestial mechanics, and models for
atmospheric dynamics; understanding how forest fires and turbulent fire fronts
propagate; and investigating computer security and quantum computing. The
results are communicated to as wide an audience as possible, through
discussions, lectures, refereed journals, preprint archives, web sites, etc. The
research involves the participation and training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;