* 0322042
* SGER:  Regulation of Metal Bioavailability in Floodplain Continuum by Carbon and Sulfur Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Andrew neal, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2006
* USD 99,906.00

0322042&lt;br/&gt;Adriano&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial variabilities of
contaminants, microbial activity, and community structure are being measured at
a floodplain site on the Tisza River floodplain in Hungary in a search for
relationships over a variety of scales between soil microbial activity and in
situ concentrations of heavy metals (Pb, Zn, Cu, Cd &amp; As), both in solution
and as bound to solid phases. Stochastic modeling will be used to study metal
availability to plants. The floodplain has experienced episodic discharges of
heavy metal wastes from overflows from upstream storage reservoirs during major
flood events in 2000-01. Researchers from the Univ. of Georgia, UC-Riverside and
Oklahoma State are working in cooperation with colleagues from Debrecen Univ.
and the Hungarian Academy of Science to assess how metal dynamics is being
regulated by interactions between microbial communities and nutrients (C &amp;
S) and to evaluate resulting long-term ecological effects. The work would
specifically generate data for understanding the role of microbial assemblages
and carbon and sulfur compounds on metal dynamics in the context of
heterogeneities in soil type and redox potential across the floodplain. Results
will be integrated into the SREL and the Hungarian outreach programs to support
research and education at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;