* 0322375
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute:  Advanced Training in Amphibian Population Decline Research; Costa Rica, January 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* James Collins, NatureServe
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2004
* USD 90,600.00

0322375&lt;br/&gt;Young&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Institutes (PASI) award on the topic of amphibian population decline, jointly
supported by the NSF and the Department of Energy (DOE), will take place in La
Selva, Costa Rica, in early January 2004. Organized by Dr. Bruce Young of
NatureServe, the institute will involve approximately 30 students from the U.S.
and Latin America and 15 well-known researchers as lecturers and mentors. The
main goal is to increase understanding of current advances in research on
amphibian population decline as well as identify needs for future research. The
course will: 1) provide an up to date summary of current advances; 2) provide
hands-on training in techniques necessary for studying the causes of amphibian
declines; and 3) foster an environment of open communication among a cohort of
students and senior researchers conducive to future collaboration. Results of
the scientific program will be disseminated electronically on
http://rana.biologia.ucr.ac.cr. By bringing together graduate/post-doc
researchers with different cultural and biological backgrounds to focus on
amphibian declines, the institute will help to satisfy a growing demand for
training opportunities and, in the process, help to develop international
collaborations in an important global concern. &lt;br/&gt;