* 0322813
* Low Latency, Scalable Photonic Packet Switching Fabric
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Keren Bergman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 269,979.00

The goal of the proposed research program is to develop a photonic packet
switching fabric capable of interconnecting large-scale systems (with >2000
ports) in a closely coupled fashion featuring latency that is dominated by time-
of-flight. An integrative photonic interconnection network will be demonstrated.
The underlying photonic switching fabric is based on a novel architecture termed
the Data Vortex, that utilizes hierarchal topology, simplified traffic control,
and synchronous timing to reduce the necessary routing logic operations and
buffering. These features drastically simplify the optical packet routing and
facilitate the implementation the Data Vortex with commercially available
photonic components. The optical packets are encoded in a wavelength division
multiplexed (WDM) fashion to provide the optical data rate interfacing with the
routing control and to achieve a minimum latency data exchange between
physically separated memory and processor. Optical packets propagate through
semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) switch elements optimized for switching
speed and minimal cross gain modulation. The integrated system will include the
interfacing between the electronic processor/memory elements and the optical
data streams in the switching fabric. Various traffic patterns will be tested
and demonstrated including asynchronous and bursty packet distributions.

The research program will provide unique graduate students training in a
multifaceted complex systems program. The participating students will carry out
the research as a team with each owning responsibility for the various
subsystems or network levels. The close interdependence between the sub-projects
will require each student to gain an understanding of all the system aspects. In
this environment the students necessarily depend on each other to succeed
fostering teamwork. Additionally, a new course on optical and computer
networking for undergraduates is being introduced to the Computer/Electrical
Engineering curriculum. This new course will be geared toward undergraduates
with backgrounds in Electrical or Computer Engineering but not necessarily in
optics. Interested undergraduate students particularly those from
underrepresented groups will be drawn from the course to participate in this
research program.

