* 0322781
* Collaborative Research:  Relationship Among Demographic, Social and Genetic Structure
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Jeanne Altmann, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 367,437.00

Susan C. Alberts and Jeanne Altmann: &lt;br/&gt;Proposal number
0322781(Altmann)/0322613(Alberts), Collaborative Research:
&lt;br/&gt;Relationship among demographic, social and genetic structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavior plays a pivotal role in survival and
reproduction. Its immediate, short-term impact is in maintaining homeostasis and
organismal integrity as behavior provides the individual with a mechanism of
rapid and flexible response to changes in its internal and external
environments. Even more profound is behavior's long-term impact on the lives of
individuals and on the evolutionary trajectories of populations. The main long-
term objective of the investigators is to develop a comprehensive picture of how
behavior shapes fitness outcomes and population processes in one population of
wild mammals - the savanna baboons of the Amboseli basin in east Africa. The
proposed work not only will accomplish important short-term goals but will reach
overtly toward the long-term ones as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
conceptual framework is an integrative socioecology that is sensitive to the
intrinsic interdependencies among behavior, physiology, genetic structure, and
demography. During the next three years, the research will (1) probe more deeply
into the function and lifetime development of relationships through individuals'
paternal as well as maternal lineage and (2) continue to delineate sources of
lifetime fitness differences for both sexes. This will be accomplished by
testing eight explicit predictions derived from three hypotheses. For females,
these relate to the impact of social status and of paternal and maternal
relatives on fitness. For males they address the relationship between mating
success and paternity success, the role of male mate choice in paternity
success, and the direct behavioral contributions that males make to the survival
of their offspring. Genetic and physiological analyses are based on non-invasive
biological sampling and associated assay and genotyping techniques, the
development and refinement of which have been a cornerstone of these research
groups. &lt;br/&gt;