* 0322275
* Dissertation Research:  Performance Tuning: The Evolution of the American Automotive Speed Equipment Industry, 1925-1985
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Merritt Smith, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2004
* USD 7,922.00

Academic historians have treated the history of the automobile in America as a
story of big business, mass production, and mass marketing. A number of scholars
have also sought to highlight some of the other critical themes and issues which
emerge from a careful consideration of this history, including the construction
of the Interstate Highways, the growth of suburbia, and the relationship between
mass automobility and environmental degradation. Nevertheless, much work remains
to be done on the role of the automobile user in the making of this history.
This STS dissertation improvement grant supports field work for a dissertation
which focuses on the pursuits of a particular subset of automobile users whose
absence from the standard histories defies easy explanation: hot rodders, those
who seek to modify their standard production automobiles for improved
performance. NSF funding will support a series of trips to archival collections
in California, Florida, and Washington, DC. These archival research excursions
will help to flesh out the body of the dissertation by providing the principal
investigator with evidence regarding the manufacture of speed equipment, the
background and training of the industry's pioneers, and the relationship between
the high-performance industry and governmental regulators which would otherwise
be unavailable. In addition, funding will support oral interviews in California
with the surviving pioneers of the speed equipment industry, interviews that
will provide the principal investigator with first-hand insights which would
otherwise be unknowable. This dissertation will shed new light on the history of
the automobile in America in four ways. It will highlight the survival of a
flexibly oriented, consumer-driven automotive industry in the shadow of the Big
Three. It will emphasize the lingering importance of technological enthusiasm in
the evolution of automobility. It will use the experience of the speed equipment
industry to reexamine and revise our understanding of the mistakes made by the
Big Three in its dealings with governmental regulators in the 1960s and 1970s.
And, finally, it will challenge the longstanding notion that the automobile had
become a "black box" by the 1920s, documenting the extent to which the social
constructivists "end-user interpretive flexibility" has instead remained quite
strong throughout the history of the automobile.

