* 0322762
* Semiconductor Surfaces Free of Surface States for Nanoelectronic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Meng Tao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This proposed research investigates semiconductor surfaces free of surface
states and their applications in nanoelectronic fabrication. The uniqueness of
this research is that it adopts the concept of valence-mending, which eliminates
both dangling bonds and strained bonds, and thus surface states, on a
semiconductor surface with an atomic layer of valence-mending atoms. This
research will fundamentally improve our knowledge of semiconductor surfaces and
interfaces and lead to new nanoelectronic devices and new fabrication methods.
For example, low Schottky barrier heights are realized on n-type silicon (001),
which enable a terahertz nanoelectronic device, the Schottky source/drain
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor. Other important
applications include reduction of silicon consumption over the source/drain
regions and suppression of interfacial oxidation between hafnium dioxide and
silicon in next-generation complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
transistors. On the basic science side, a clear link between different types of
surface states and their corresponding dangling bonds will be established. The
decades-old data on Schottky barrier height between metal and silicon (001) will
be updated. Major educational activities proposed include curriculum development
by the PI, participation in workforce development for economic development of
the community, and participation in the new Nano-at-the-Border initiative to
promote nanotechnology education and research to the Texas-Mexico border. The
proposal describes the detailed plan for these activities, including the
incorporation of recent results from this research to the electrical engineering
curriculum; the development of web-based instruction for the educational
component of the Nano-at-the-Border initiative; curriculum development and
faculty training for community colleges as part of the workforce development
plan; and proposal development to secure funds for supporting community-wide
initiatives in workforce development.