* 0322580
* Next-Generation Servers for Optimization as an Internet Resource
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jorge More', Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2007
* USD 392,789.00

The primary impediment to broader use of optimization models and methods today
is one of communication. Increasing numbers of solvers are implemented
increasingly well, but prospective users are unaware of them or do not see the
benefit that would justify installing them. Modeling systems also tend to be
slow to support new solvers, especially ones that address new problem types.
Sending optimization problems over the Internet, to a solver at some remote
site, is an increasingly practical way of addressing communication problems in
large-scale optimization. A remote optimization server can accommodate numerous
problem types and can provide varied solvers for problems of each type, giving
modelers much more of a choice than they have locally. Yet current optimization
servers only begin to address the communication challenges of large-scale
optimization with respect to solver choice, scheduling, benchmarking, and
modeling system interaction, and are limited by early design decisions. The
planned research is motivated by a vision of a next-generation server that
addresses outstanding challenges of communication in large-scale optimization.
This work will address design as well as implementation issues posed by
standardizing problem representations, automating problem analysis and solver
choice, working with new web-service standards, scheduling computational
resources, benchmarking solvers, and verification of results - all in the
context of the special requirements of large-scale optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Network Enabled Optimization System (NEOS) project
seeks to make optimization a part of the worldwide software infrastructure that
supports science, engineering, and commerce. Optimization analyzes complex cost-
minimization and profit-maximization problems that involve large numbers of
distinct but interrelated decisions. The analysis is accomplished by
representing problems as mathematical models that are communicated with data to
a variety of computational solvers. The NEOS Server provides remote access to
about 50 solvers and hence is the focus of the planned research. The ready
availability of optimization tools has widespread benefits, both directly to
practitioners, and indirectly by improving the quality of research and education
in optimization techniques. By encouraging comparison between solvers, moreover,
the NEOS Server's variety of solvers and interfaces also serves as a spur to
further improvement of optimization software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;