* 0322760
* Global Summit on Issues in Performance-Based Building Regulations, Washington DC, Fall 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Brian Meacham, Ove Arup & Partners Massachusetts Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

Many countries around the world have either introduced performance-based
building regulations or are in the process of doing so. Rationales range from
downsizing of government, deregulation, and facilitation of trade, to increased
design flexibility and reduction in unnecessary costs. With the global
transition to performance-based building regulatory systems, there is a need to
understand the impacts such a transition will have on the construction industry,
on society and on the regulatory environment. Among the complex questions are:
What does performance mean? How is it measured and regulated? What might be the
impacts of a global performance-based building regulatory system on national
economies and populations? What must be done to "get things right" in this new
environment? Are the new regulations adequately addressing societal expectations
and requirements for the performance of buildings, and more fundamentally, what
are societal expectations for buildings and how are they incorporated and
regulated? Additionally, policy initiatives may converge on the building
regulatory system, such as sustainability, security, and housing affordability.
Although these issues vary somewhat by country, the challenges are similar, and
there is much to be gained by discussing the challenges and lessons learned from
countries that have implemented performance-based building regulatory systems,
to see how we should plan for the future. As a means to advance our knowledge
base and encourage further discussion on the issues from international,
national, and local perspectives, the IRCC (Inter-jurisdictional Regulatory
Collaboration Committee) will hold a global policy summit in Washington, DC, on
3-5 November 2003. The Summit provides the opportunity to better understand the
breadth and depth of policy issues and research needs associated with
performance regulation and associated impacts on society. Bringing together
academic experts, high-level policy makers and regulatory officials, and
interested and affected stakeholders from across the United States and around
the world, to discuss key issues, identify potential solutions, and draft a
roadmap for undertaking research and addressing policy challenges of performance
building regulatory systems will broaden understanding of critical issues and
stimulate research in a variety of key performance regulatory policy areas. A
key outcome of the Summit will be a roadmap for understanding and addressing the
policy needs for these regulatory systems at national and intemational levels.
The roadmap will be sent to building regulatory agencies and researchers
worldwide, with the aim for each country to implement, study, or utilize as
appropriate. The target size for the Summit is 200 -250 people. The format is a
combination of presentations and panel discussions, with dedicated evening
discussion sessions, over a two and a half day period. The speakers and the
majority of the participants will be invited, and will include
congressional/ministerial, national, state/province, and local government policy
makers and regulatory developers, representatives of key special interest and
key stakeholder groups, and leading policy experts and analysts from academia,
research institutions and the private sector. The Summit will be facilitated by
the National Research Council and will be held at the National Academies
building in Washington DC.