* 0322544
* Scientific Basis of Qualitative Research, Workshop, Washington, DC, July 2003
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Charles Ragin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2004
* USD 57,891.00

This grant supports a two-day workshop on "The Scientific Foundations of
Qualitative Research" to be held in Washington, D.C. in July 2003. The workshop
brings together a group of experts on qualitative methodologies and their
relation to more established and better funded approaches. Workshop participants
will address the place of qualitative methods in the social sciences and their
role in advancing scientific knowledge. The workshop will develop a research
agenda that includes strategies for more effectively integrating qualitative
approaches in the basic social science research enterprise. Key questions to be
addressed in the workshop include: (1) What is qualitative methodology? (2) Does
qualitative methodology respond to distinctive goals? (3) Does qualitative
research have a distinctive relationship to theory? (4) What is different about
data analytic techniques specifically designed for qualitative data? (5) Does
qualitative research have a definable analytic basis, and if so, how does it
differ from that of quantitative approaches? (6) What standards should be used
to evaluate the results of qualitative research? (7) What are the most
productive, feasible, and innovative ways of combining qualitative and
quantitative research methodologies? For the past several decades quantitative
methodology has been dominant in sociology and related social sciences. Overall,
this dominance has made these disciplines more rigorous and more sensitive to
standards of proof. The emphasis on quantitative methods, however, also has
highlighted the limitations of this approach and the need for balance within
social research. This workshop's research agenda and supporting report will be
widely disseminated through disciplinary websites and sessions at relevant
professional association meetings.