* 0322279
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Comparative Transcript Analysis of Oryza and Porteresia during Salinity Stress
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Hans Bohnert, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2006
* USD 51,870.00

Description: This award supports the US-India cooperative research "Comparative
Transcript Analysis of Oryza and Porteresia during Salinity Stress." Professors
Hans J. Bohnert, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and A. N. Lahiri
Majumder, Bose Institute, Kolkata will collaborate on exploring salinity
tolerance in monocots using two species, Oryza and Porteresia. The researchers
propose to exploit the genome sequence and genomic resources readily available
for Oryza to dissect salt tolerance in Porteresia. The findings should provide a
new set of genes important for salt tolerance and a platform for future
manipulations of cereal crops with this attribute. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This
project will foster ties with Indian scientists in an important research area
&lt;br/&gt;and provide training in genomics and plant molecular biology in the
US and India. The investigators are highly experienced in areas that compliment
each other and the combination of molecular and biochemical studies will result
in broader understanding of salt tolerance in cereals. Mutual benefits with
respect to scientific exchange and graduate student development are expected for
both countries. This research is supported by the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Plant Genome Research Program and the Government of India's Department
of Science and Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.