* 0322312
* Pan American Advanced Studies Institute:  Knowledge Discovery in Genomic Databases on Data Mining Applications for Genomics and Bioinformatics; Montevideo, Uruguay, November 2003
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey F Dean, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2004
* USD 91,380.00

0322312&lt;br/&gt;Dean&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place in Montevideo, Uruguay, November 2003, on the
topic of data mining applications for genomics and bioinformatics. Organized by
Dr. Jeffrey Dean of the University of Georgia, the institute will involve
approximately 30 students and 10 graduate/post-doc researchers from the U.S. and
Latin America, and 12 lecturers from the USA, Brazil, Argentina,
&lt;br/&gt;Venezuela, Chile and Uruguay. The PASI has two principal goals: 1)
educate participants about the state-of-the-art in knowledge discovery as
applied to genomic databases; and &lt;br/&gt;2) improve networking approaches
and applications of genomic data mining tools in &lt;br/&gt;agriculture and
biosciences research. Speakers, lecturers and hands-on workshops will emphasize
leading edge developments across several fields that impinge on bioinformatics.
Discussions will focus on the use of knowledge discovery technologies to
elucidate patterns hidden in the vast stores of data being generated by high-
throughput genomics techniques. Two case study workshops focused on structural
genomic and gene expression databases will be used to demonstrate the
application of concepts introduced in the courses. Up-to-date results on the
PASI will be made available at
http://fungen.botany.uga.edu/Projects/Pine/Pine.htm. &lt;br/&gt;