* 0322776
* Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location and Scatter Estimators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Yijun Zuo, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marianthi Markatou
* 07/31/2003
* USD 1,947.00

TITLE:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finite Sample Performance of Multivariate Location
&lt;br/&gt;and Scatter
Estimators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
develops new methodology and theory in the &lt;br/&gt;performance evaluation of
multivariate location and scatter &lt;br/&gt;estimators. The research is to
propose finite sample performance&lt;br/&gt;criteria of multivariate location
and scatter estimators based on &lt;br/&gt;their ``tail behavior'', to
investigate and assess the performance &lt;br/&gt;of existing and new
multivariate location and scatter estimators &lt;br/&gt;with respect to the
proposed criteria, and to provide guides to &lt;br/&gt;statistical practices in
applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Given an estimator of some unknown
parameter, a natural question&lt;br/&gt;is -- how good is the estimator? or how
should one measure its &lt;br/&gt;performance? These questions are fundamental
in statistical &lt;br/&gt;estimation and inference. To answer these questions,
various &lt;br/&gt;performance criteria have been proposed and studied. Among
the &lt;br/&gt;existing performance criteria, asymptotic approaches including
&lt;br/&gt;Fisher consistency and large sample normality are the most prevalent
&lt;br/&gt;ones. These approaches have been based on the behavior of the
&lt;br/&gt;estimator as the sample size approaches infinity. This, however,
&lt;br/&gt;raises some serious concern about the relevancy of the asymptotic
&lt;br/&gt;results in practice, where the sample size is always fixed and
&lt;br/&gt;finite. The study of the finite sample performance of multivariate
&lt;br/&gt;location and scatter estimators thus is not only practically
&lt;br/&gt;significant but also theoretically interesting. In sharp contrast
&lt;br/&gt;with the asymptotic approaches, in this research the performance
&lt;br/&gt;of multivariate location and scatter estimators is studied for
&lt;br/&gt;fixed and finite sample size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
develops new methodology and valuable insights &lt;br/&gt;into the comparison of
estimator performance particularly from &lt;br/&gt;robustness standpoint.
Inherent connections of our finite sample &lt;br/&gt;performance measures with
two most crucial and promising notions &lt;br/&gt;in the robust and
nonparametric statistical analysis and inference, &lt;br/&gt;the finite sample
breakdown point and the data depth (especially&lt;br/&gt;Tukey-Donoho halfspace
depth), are to be explored and illuminated. &lt;br/&gt;It is to be shown that
the estimators with high breakdown point or &lt;br/&gt;halfspace depth possess
remarkable finite sample tail performance. &lt;br/&gt;Findings like this in the
research offer new insights into and deepen &lt;br/&gt;our understanding of the
notions of breakdown point and halfspace depth, &lt;br/&gt;and establish the
important role of the finite sample tail behavior as a &lt;br/&gt;quantitative
assessment of robustness of estimators. The research has &lt;br/&gt;profound
impact on statistical applications in various disciplines of &lt;br/&gt;sciences
such as social, behavior and life sciences, environmental and &lt;br/&gt;biology
sciences, industry, and economics. The research suggests, &lt;br/&gt;for
example, that location estimators with appealing tail performance
&lt;br/&gt;(e.g. depth-based multivariate medians) should be preferred in
practice&lt;br/&gt;to traditional least-squares estimators (e.g. the
multivariate mean) &lt;br/&gt;for robustness against the influence of
extremities of observations in &lt;br/&gt;multivariate data analysis. The
research also benefits education through &lt;br/&gt;the training of graduate
students and the incorporation of the developed &lt;br/&gt;methodology in
statistics courses.&lt;br/&gt;