* 0323307
* US-Jordan Cooperative Research:  Second Harmonic Imaging of Cells Using Silicon Nanoparticles
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Munir Nayfeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0323307 &lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research between Professor Munir Nayfeh, Department of
Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois and Dr. Laila Abu-
Hassan, Department of Physics, University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan. They plan to
study the semiconductor nature of nanoparticles that are synthesized at Dr.
Nayfeh's laboratory, and their use as biosensors with applications in medical
diagnosis and healthcare delivery. They will focus on the development and
characterization of highly luminescent silicon nanoparticles and their potential
use as ultrasensitive biological markers. This includes the synthesis,
characterization and application of silicon nanoparticles for the second
harmonic imaging of cells, with a focus on exploring the second harmonic
generation of silicon nanoparticles in thin films for detection in cell
research. They plan to develop efficient methods for coating silicon
nanoparticles on flexible substrates including cells for subsequent fluorescent
or second harmonic imaging of the cells. This will help in developing the
understanding of quantum size effects in semiconductor nanoscale materials, in
general, and specifically, the mechanisms of photoluminescence and second
harmonic generation in silicon nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
project provides an international dimension to research the PI is conducting
under a current NSF award-BES-0118053. This project may have a significant
impact on the progress in the field of biophotonics and biosensors. It may
result in developing novel, reliable, cheap, sensitive and environmentally safe
biosensors with significant applications in biomedical research. This project
will provide for training graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in this
interdisciplinary field of biophotonics, within an international
setting.&lt;br/&gt;