* 0323364
* Climate change and latitudinal patterns of body temperature in rocky intertidal invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Brian Helmuth, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 257,344.00

&lt;br/&gt;Species inhabiting rocky intertidal environments are of marine
origin, but must regularly contend with the terrestrial environment during low
tide. As a result, these invertebrates and algae are thought to live very close
to their thermal tolerance limits, and increases in thermal stress due to
climate change could lead to changes in their growth, survival, and distribution
patterns. Recent physiological studies have emphasized that thermal damage to
many intertidal organisms occurs primarily during aerial exposure at low tide,
when body temperatures are driven by multiple climatic factors. Temperatures
experienced during aerial exposure far exceed those during submersion, and are
often substantially different from air temperature. Our ability to extrapolate
from physiological responses to temperature to community?scale processes is thus
hampered by our limited knowledge of what body temperatures are under field
conditions, how body temperatures change in space and time, and how patterns
might vary between species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Helmuth's previous work has
focused on latitudinal?scale patterns of body temperatures of the mussel Mytilus
californianus, a competitive dominant in rocky intertidal ecosystems.
Measurements in the northeast Pacific show that latitudinal patterns are highly
complex, and that, because of consistent patterns in the timing of low tides,
northern sites are often more likely to be thermally stressful than are southern
sites. Furthermore, models of interannual variability in tidal regimes suggest
that in the next 2?5 years levels of thermal stress at these northern "hot
spots" may be approaching a 20?year maximum. These results have significant
consequences for where and when we look for evidence of the effects of climate
change in intertidal ecosystems, and suggest that impacts may potentially be
observable in the near future at several sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will extend on ongoing study of temperature patterns at 15 sites spanning a 160
range of latitude, and will produce a continuous 6+ year record of temperatures
relevant to an ecologically important intertidal species. The study will address
several explicit predictions stemming from my previous research, regarding
spatial and temporal patterns of mussel body temperatures. As a means of
assessing the ecological impacts of these changes in thermal stress, Dr. Helmuth
will monitor zonation heights of mussels, and predict downward shifts in
zonation at several northern "hot spots." Finally, he will apply biophysical
techniques used for mussels to explore the thermal ecology of the gastropod
Nucella, and important predator of Mytilus. The project has produced a unique
data set of temperature patterns over a wide geographic scale, and is currently
the best means available for monitoring and predicting the potential effects of
climate change on intertidal body temperatures in the NE Pacific. Because
exposure times at northern "hot spots" are predicted to reach a 20year maximum
within the next 2?5 years, there is a critical need to maintain the continuity
of the data stream that will be produced during the course of this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As part of an ongoing
collaboration, students in the Helmuth lab will work with a K?12 teacher to
develop lesson plans based on their research, grading rubrics and assessment
protocols. Specifically, they will create activities that allow students to
investigate concepts related to climate change, the effects of temperature on
organisms, species distribution patterns, and the dynamics of tidal cycles.
Materials will be explicitly linked to state and national K?12 science and math
standards, and will be posted on a outreach website. The teacher will work with
the Helmuth lab in the field in year one to set up experiments, and will remain
in contact with the group during the course of the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;