* 0323894
* A Program to Increase the Representation of Native Americans and Latinos in Mathematics, Computer Science, and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* James Falco, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 343,748.00

The project aims to increase the number of Native Americans and Latinos in the
areas of mathematics, computer science, and engineering. This project is not
only helping to relieve the financial burden students face, but it is also
helping to address and remove specific barriers to their academic success. The
program is offering services for the students and their families and
professional activities that include mentorship, internships, and specific
preparations for graduate study. This program is providing a total of 25
scholarships are awarded to students majoring in mathematics, computer science,
and pre-engineering. The students' eligibility criteria are determined as a
composite of their academic potential, their financial need, and their desire to
complete the degree program. Students apply to the program following their
successful completion of one semester of college level coursework with a GPA of
3.0 or greater. The specific project goals of the project are as follows: 1. To
provide the resources for undergraduate students and their families to promote
the students' academic success in the fields of mathematics, computer science,
and engineering. 2. To increase the representation of Native Americans and
Latinos in the workforce and in graduate schools in the fields of mathematics,
computer science, and engineering. 3. To evaluate the merits of this program and
disseminate the results locally, regionally, and nationally.

Heritage College serves a high percentage of Native American and Latino
students.