* 0323505
* GOALI: A Symmetry-Based Group Theory Approach to Data Reduction for Micro-Optics Manufacturing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Thomas Suleski, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 236,251.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award provides
funding for the development of a symmetry-based data analysis strategy for
imaging processing in micro-optics manufacturing. Reducing each image to a small
set of numbers based on the symmetry properties of the image will enable a
strong correlation between the metrology and both the key manufacturing
variables and component performance. The analysis strategy will be based on
removing the intended shape of the lens from the measurement, followed by
symmetry operations and data reduction methods. Working with industry, the
analysis tools will be developed and applied to interferometric measurements of
micro-refractive lenses that are photolithographically manufactured to allow
correlation between part characterization and performance such as coupling
efficiency, in addition to key manufacturing parameters such as photo resist
thickness and etch rates. A corresponding measurement and analysis uncertainty
will also be a critical component of the research.

If successful, the work will allow the physics of the manufacturing process to
be correlated to the measurement, leading to optimum process feedback. This will
significantly improve the manufacturing of micro-refractive lenses, improving
device yield, reducing testing time and cost, and ultimately reducing device
cost. Broad dissemination and acceptance by the manufacturing community is
ensured by ultimately incorporating the methodology into commercial
instrumentation software; demonstrating viability through journal publications,
conference presentations, and industry-sponsored technical seminars; developing
a continuing education workshop and an advanced laboratory module for
undergraduate and graduate education through the Education and Training Facility
under the Center for Optoelectronics and Optical Communications at UNC
Charlotte; and incorporating the work onto a future micro-optics replication
foundry at UNC Charlotte. Material properties and component geometries are
strongly influenced by the manufacturing process in replication, and this work
will provide an analytical tool to connect part inspection to the physics of the
replication process.