* 0323725
* Economical High Strain Rate Superplastic Forming via Friction Stir Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Rajiv Mishra, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 08/31/2007
* USD 279,648.00

Superplastic forming is used to produce complex shaped components and unitized
structures. Friction stir processing has demonstrated a strong potential to
overcome two major drawbacks of conventional superplastic forming: (a) slow
superplastic forming rates, and (b) high cost of starting material for
superplasticity. The proposed research will focus on the fundamental
microstructure-property-forming correlations with overlapping scheme and larger
tool geometry. Such study is crucial to promote the initial concept and develop
breakthrough enabling superplastic technologies based on friction stir
processing.

The basic concept of friction stir processing for enhanced superplasticity is
based on the very fine microstructure that develops during solid-state friction
stirring. This new processing technique will be used as a means to achieve a
three-step-near-net-shape manufacturing route: casting of sheet + friction stir
processing + high strain rate superplastic forming. The critical issues that
need to be understood for successful development of friction stir processing for
enhanced superplasticity include: (i) influence of friction stir processing
parameters and tools on the microstructural development; (ii) the effect on
microstructure of overlapping passes during friction stir processing; (iii) the
mechanism of abnormal grain growth and ways to suppress/avoid it; and (iv)
microstructure-superplastic property correlations in multi-pass friction stir
processed materials. These issues will be investigated in heat treatable (7475
Al) and cast Al-Zn-Mg-Sc alloys. The proposed research involves an ideal
combination of university (UMR) and industries (Rockwell Scientific and
Superform).

The broader impact of the proposed study includes bringing innovative ideas to
undergraduate courses such as metal deformation processing and metals structure-
property laboratories. On the industrial front, Superform is the world's leading
manufacturer of superplastically formed components and their involvement will
result in technology transfer and implementation if this concept can be
successfully developed. Superplastic forming is an energy-efficient and
environmentally friendly technology, and expansion of its applicability to a
wider range of products will help in promoting environmentally benign
manufacturing.