* 0323630
* Wireless Test-bed for Mobile Computing Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sanjay Madria, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 78,667.00

This project, creating a wireless research test-bed and integrating the existing
wired distributed computing facilities and multimedia lab, enables research to
be tried out in a wireless environment. Current research projects are in areas
of adaptive power aware hierarchical routing schemes, fault-tolerant
authentication, dynamic resource allocation, and design and evaluation of push-
pull delivery of video data in mobile/wireless networks, and robust mobile
agents. The facility, including a number of mobile nodes (some mobile robot
nodes), will allow exploration and enhancement to the existing research,
initially focused on wired and distributed computing, on a wireless platform.
Because some of the assumptions made in a wired distributed system, such as
negligible loss of information, rate of error, fault tolerance, and available
resources, are no longer valid, algorithms that look robust in a fixed network
distributed environment, behave totally different on a wireless platform. The
project aims at evaluating, studying, and experimenting with prototypes and
analytical results on the new platform to understand the parameters that can
affect the efficiency and design of those algorithms in terms of power,
bandwidth utilization, communication, storage cost, latency, and delays in a
wireless medium. Specifically, the infrastructure supports the following
projects:&lt;br/&gt; Adaptive Routing Protocols,&lt;br/&gt; Fault Tolerance and
Secure Authentication,&lt;br/&gt; Robust Mobile Agents, and&lt;br/&gt; Efficient
Transfer of Multimedia Data in Mobile Networks.&lt;br/&gt;The first project
looks into adaptive power efficient routing schemes for the next generation
wireless networks, power control and efficient routing for self organizing
wireless sensor networks, hierarchical routing algorithms, data dissemination
and aggregation. The second features virtual agent modeling, hierarchical
authentication of the mobile base stations, and replicated mobile agents. The
third looks at operation in the presence of faults; and the last, at design
evaluation of push-pull delivery of video data in mobile/wireless networks and
dynamic resource allocation to support mobility in wireless multimedia
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New courses are being proposed and developed in
two departments by the PIs, including Mobile and Sensor Data Management, High
Speed Networks, MEMS and Wireless Sensor Networks, Wireless Communication
Systems, Distributed Systems, Computer Security, and Advanced Computing. The new
facilities will also be used for doctoral, masters, and senior undergraduates.
The students will complement their projects on wireless and sensor network
infrastructure getting hands-on experience. The project also explores homeland
security and commercial applications. In a military environment the work
explores hierarchical mobile architecture with movable base stations.&lt;br/&gt;