* 0323055
* Collaborative Proposal: The Relation of Behavior of Copepod Juveniles to Potential Predation by Omnivorous Copepods
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Gustav-Adolf Paffenhofer, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 169,101.00

During a planktonic copepod's life cycle the effects of predation can be
particularly pronounced during the early naupliar stages. Among the major
predators are omnivorous copepods. The processes leading to such predation have
been evaluated but rarely demonstrated. These processes include fluid dynamics
near both prey and predator, recognition of hydrodynamic signals by both, and
the respective responses with either attack and/or escape, and the eventual
outcome.

The objective of this research project is to determine the various mechanisms
that can lead to predation by omnivorous copepods on nauplii of different
abundant species of planktonic copepods, and on an early copepod stage of one of
those species. Our hypothesis is that predation rates are a function of a
juvenile's motion and perception behavior, and the predator's perceptive and
capture capabilities. We will determine these mechanisms by combining modeling
studies with empirical observations. Published, unpublished, and newly obtained
empirical results on copepod motion will be used to develop fluid dynamics
models of free?swimming prey and predators as they approach and encounter each
other. The same empirical data will be used to verify the modeling results. The
modeling results will suggest new, additional empirical work. We feel that
coupling modeling with empirical studies presents a promising opportunity to
unravel the mechanisms leading to predation, in relation to the behavior of prey
and predator. The ecological significance of the proposed studies is related to
in situ mortality of copepod juveniles. Since this variable, mortality, is
usually impossible to quantify in situ, our proposed research can be seen as an
attempt to use results at small scales towards an understanding of a bigger
picture i.e. the relation of behavior to mortality in the ocean.

Intellectual Merit. The idea of combining this type of behavioral observations
with the proposed hydrodynamic modeling is original. The modeling focuses on a
self?propelled body, as compared to nonswimming particles used in previous
studies. The empirical effort provides initial information for modeling, such as
the various behaviors of the different prey and of the predator; and is later
used to verify it. The expected results will provide insights on the comparative
ability of early juveniles of different copepod species to minimize predation by
co?occurring omnivorous species, including their own species.

Broader Impact. We will provide with our empirical?modeling studies detailed
information to undergraduate and graduate students at the Institute of Ecology
and the School of Marine Sciences, University of Georgia, emphasizing the
significance of interdisciplinary research in ecological studies. We will
recruit at least 2 undergraduate students each year to cooperate closely with
us. These undergraduate students will be trained for at least 3 months per year
in copepod process studies, and advanced small?scale modeling of fluid dynamics.

The significance of the proposed research is to develop a general understanding
of the probability of predation on early copepod juveniles by adult omnivorous
copepods.