* 0323914
* NSF Post-Earthquake Geotechnical Reconnaissance Working Group
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2003,05/31/2010
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2010
* USD 172,705.00

Documenting and compiling the key lessons learned from major earthquake events
around the world contributes significantly to advancing research and practice in
geotechnical earthquake engineering. Many of the current design procedures are
based on empirical methods that require re-evaluation and updating as important
case histories emerge. However, much of the data and information generated by
major earthquake is perishable and therefore must be collected within a few days
or weeks of the occurrence of the earthquake.

This action is to support the formation of the Post-Earthquake Geotechnical
Reconnaissance (GeoRecon) Working Group, a small working group of researchers
with experience in post-earthquake geotechnical investigations. The activities
of this working group will rely heavily on telecommunication and Internet usage
- such as teleconferences, e-mail, and posting to web sites; however it will
also meet twice a year for face-to-face discussions. In addition, the GeoRecon
Working Group will receive guidance from a broad-based Advisory Panel, a larger
group of prominent geotechnical engineers, earthquake engineers and scientists
in related fields, and personnel belonging to organizations that also actively
participate in post-earthquake reconnaissance. The GeoRecon activity will
broaden, diversify, and train a new generation of geotechnical engineers in
post-earthquake reconnaissance and learning from such earthquakes. It will also
consider new technologies and techniques that can effectively contribute to
post-earthquake reconnaissance, such as GPS (Global Positioning System),
Airborne LIDAR (LIght Detection And Ranging), and satellite SAR (Synthetic
Aperture Radar).

NSF has regularly supported geotechnical earthquake engineers, and separately,
tsunami coastal engineers, who have self-assembled to form effective post-
earthquake and post-tsunami reconnaissance teams. The goal of the GeoRecon
Working Group is to better define these activities, and to interface more
effectively with other teams and organizations that also participate in post-
earthquake reconnaissance visits. For example, the Earthquake Engineering
Research Institute (EERI), and the US Geological Survey (USGS) are other
organizations that actively engage in post-earthquake investigations. These
organizations each have a particular mission; but do not focus on geotechnical
issues. Past geotechnical reconnaissance teams have interacted and collaborated
effectively with other reconnaissance teams, and it is expected that this
interaction will be more effective with the formation of the GeoRecon Working
Group.

Moreover, the GeoRecon activity will serve as a model for other disciplines
regarding the valuable data that can be captured immediately after a natural
hazard. By joining with other professions who have also developed effective
procedures and sharing the results of this research with other communities,
documentation of the effects of natural hazards will improve overall.