* 0323264
* A Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Role of Twins in Regulating Postembryonic Neurogenesis in the Fly Drosophila Melanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Ronald Booker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2007
* USD 425,405.00

The nervous system of all animals is composed of cells called neurons. These
neurons communicate with each other by releasing (secreting) packets of
chemicals called neurotransmitters and neuropeptides which signal other neurons.
This interneuronal communication is the way the nervous system processes
information, and modulation of this process underlies learning and memory. The
release of neurotransmitters and neuropeptides is thought to be controlled by a
set of proteins called the SNAREs. Just how these SNARE proteins function has
remained elusive despite intensive study. The SNARE proteins are highly
conserved in all animals and similar proteins have even been identified in
yeast. Thus, by studying SNARE function in the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster, the function of the SNARE proteins can be applied to the secretory
process in all animals. With the use of selected SNARE mutants, transgenic
expression of SNARE genes in Drosophila, and a novel neuropeptide release assay,
the function of these proteins in neurotransmitter and neuropeptide release will
be determined.

Elucidating the process of neurotransmitter and neuropeptide release is
essential for understanding behavior. More complex functions in the nervous
system such as learning and memory involve alterations in synaptic strength. One
major way of altering synaptic strength is by modulating the process of
neurotransmitter release. Without a clear understanding of the fundamental
mechanism of neurotransmitter release (the goal of this proposal), there is
little chance of truly understanding the fascinating nature of learning and
memory. Neuropeptides have other crucial functions in maintaining organismal
homeostasis. Water balance, reproductive behavior, thirst, hunger, metabolic
regulation, stress, sleep, and circadian rhythms are all controlled by
neuropeptide release.

Neuropeptide secretions from the nervous and endocrine systems are used to
precisely coordinate organ systems within the animal so that they function
together, leading to a state of balance. Thus, determining how neuropeptide
release is governed will greatly improve our understanding of how all animals
regulate these complex organ systems. In light of evidence that environmental
pollutants are capable of disrupting endocrine function by mimicking hormones,
the studies in this proposal are crucial for defining normal endocrine function.
These studies will also contribute to the defining the basic process of
secretion on which all eukaryotic cells need for survival. The results of this
work will be published in widely read journals for scientists and the scientific
materials produced will be readily available to the scientific community. In
fact, one such strain has already been donated to the Bloomington Drosophila
Stock Center, making it readily available to all researchers. Furthermore, at
Cornell University, two courses will include material from these studies to
extend the educational goals of this research. Cornell's diverse student body
ensures that scientific training will extend to underrepresented minorities in
the sciences.