* 0323917
* Computer Science and Mathematics Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Chia-Lin Wu, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 09/30/2008
* USD 395,934.00

Interdisciplinary (99)-This project is providing scholarships for 30 talented
but financially disadvantaged students to encourage and enable their achievement
of baccalaureate degrees in Computer Science and Information Systems (CSIS) or
Mathematics. In addition to financial support, the students are receiving
academic and nonacademic support in order to improve their knowledge and skills,
to increase their retention, to improve their professional development and
preparation for employment, and to increase their placements in graduate school.
Academic support is being provided by a new, 1-credit course "Bridges Connecting
Computer Science and Calculus", an existing "Women in Computing" course, new
tutoring support in computer programming, internship opportunities, and a
research seminar. Two mathematics professors designed the "Bridges" course
especially for CSIS majors to complement and to be taken in conjunction with the
standard Calculus course. The purpose of the new course is to clearly
demonstrate connections between calculus and computing, and give students extra
practice and motivation in a female and minority friendly setting. The "Women in
Computing" course targets freshmen and serves to recruit women into CSIS.
Nonacademic support is being provided by several activities: a new mentoring
program, the Computer Society, and other existing on-going programs. The
mentoring program is the hallmark activity of the nonacademic support. Five
mentors from the CSIS Math faculties have groups consisting of 6 students each
and they meet monthly. The group meetings are providing the students the
opportunity to bond with each other, to share problems and solutions, and to ask
questions. The students, in consultation with their mentors, are preparing
Individual Educational Plans (IEP) that include academic courses to be taken,
internships, club memberships, leadership roles, and preparation for graduate
school. The project team personnel select the students with inputs from
Financial Aid Office personnel. The students are selected for the program based
on their financial need and the other CSEMS eligibility criteria. Specifically,
the program is intended for all currently enrolled Math and/or CSIS majors with
a cumulative GPA of 3.0+, and new academically talented students. Special
consideration is given to members of groups that are typically
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project improves
students' learning in computer science through participation in a seminar that
bridges the gap between calculus and computer science, and enrollment in a
course on "Women in Computing". Students will gain deeper understanding of
computer science content areas through a new tutoring program and special
seminars. The project results from a team effort among computer science and
mathematics faculty who together have organized its activities for synergistic
effects that improve students' cognitive and affective
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The diversity of computer science
students will be increased as a result of this project. Additionally, this
endeavor will draw together faculty and students from several disciplines,
creating new alliances for a common goal of improving computer science and
mathematics graduation rates. The mentoring and tutoring programs will increase
retention of students. Placement in graduate school will be increased by the
capstone research project. All of these features will produce better-prepared
students and graduates which will enhance their employability.&lt;br/&gt;