* 0323359
* Design and Operation of Community Based Resource Recovery Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mercedes Rivero-Hudec, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 203,627.00

As a result of growing public concerns and increased legislation, more emphasis
is being placed on the end-of-life-disposition of and resource recovery from
manufactured products. This means that more pressures are being put on
businesses and households to dispose of retired products in ways that are more
beneficial to society and the environment. The recovery of selected materials
from municipal solid waste is now commonplace, with most States operating
material recovery facilities (MRFs). These facilities generally rely on
householders for the initial separation of target materials (paper, cans,
bottles and some plastic containers). The situation with respect to manufactured
goods, particularly business and consumer electronic appliances, is much less
well developed. A long established infrastructure for the processing of scrap
automobiles is in existence, leading to the recovery of a high proportion of the
materials in motor vehicles and to the remanufacturing of many components.
However, the widespread development of a service infrastructure and facilities
for the recovery of resources from other products is still in the relatively
early stages of development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the end-of-life
processing of products, larger companies have established in-house resource
recovery services. These services ensure proper disposal of all of the
respective company's retired equipment, including items taken back from
customers. These facilities may also contract to provide disposal services to
other companies. Similarly, some larger scale facilities have been independently
established that contract with organizations to accept and process end-of-life
products. These companies provide contract service for larger enterprises that
have not established in-house resource recovery facilities. While these larger
facilities are having some impact on end-of-life disposition from larger
companies, the effective recovery of products and materials from the millions of
small businesses distributed throughout the country, that individually are of
little interest to large scale processing centers needs to be addressed.
Collectively these small businesses and enterprises represent an enormous source
of materials and products for recycling. Effective processing of materials from
this sector will have to be done in smaller community based service enterprises.
These service enterprises should set up to deal with the wide variety of
products and materials from smaller sources. A number of such service
enterprises are in existence, but many more are needed. The processing of end of
life products is necessarily labor intensive, and these services frequently
employ persons with disabilities for some of the disassembly and sorting of
materials. These types of organizations must be in a position to react quickly
to changing inputs of products in a way that will keep collection,
transportation and inventory costs low. &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
fundamental problems to determine the most effective ways of operating community
based resource recovery services through modeling of the collection logistics,
optimum disassembly sequences and the design of facilities involving such
activities. The investigation will be carried out in collaboration with
community based resource recovery service, and metal recovery services providing
guaranteed end-of-life product disposal services. This research will lead to the
development of decision tools that will improve the economic viability of
recycling and environmentally sustainable manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;