* 0323299
* Mixed Integer Programming Approaches to Production Planning Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Andrew Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 202,888.00

While the application of operations research has aided manufacturing companies
to cut costs and improve efficiency, fundamental problems in production and
supply chain planning remain challenging to solve. These problems involve the
interaction of factors such as external demands, internal bill-of-material
structure, production capacities, holding costs, and setup times. Most systems
implementing Manufacturing Resources Planning (MRP II) and related methods solve
only rough approximations of these problems. The resulting plans are not as
efficient and cost-effective as may be possible, and they also often do not
accurately account for basic restrictions such as production capacity. This
project will develop basic mixed integer programming (MIP) methods that can
solve such problems. This project aims to develop fundamental results to
strengthen the MIP formulations of these problems so as to improve branch-and-
cut algorithms designed to solve them. In addition, the project will incorporate
these into MIP-based heuristics in order to optimize the performance on large
practical problems. The theoretical results and heuristics developed will apply
not only to broad families of production planning problems, but also to supply
chain planning problems incorporating transportation and distribution as well as
production decisions. Moreover, the results of this project will be incorporated
into classes in the University of Wisconsin curriculum. This will expose
students to the possibilities of, and challenges involved in, using MIP methods
to solve these kinds of problems. This research will allow new kinds of
industrial problems to be solved efficiently. The successful completion of the
goals of this project will make it possible to consider implementing these ideas
in planning systems for many practical situations in manufacturing and supply
chain enterprises. It will also contribute to general industrial
engineering/operations research methodology, particularly to solving problems in
the field of mixed integer programming that occur in a wide variety of
engineering applications. Finally, this project will add breadth and depth to
the curriculum of the University of Wisconsin, and it will contribute to the
professional development of the research assistant who will be supported through
it.