* 0323874
* Interaction of the Goldfish Kainate Receptor with G Proteins in a Novel Model System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Robert Oswald, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2008
* USD 414,961.00

Information in the brain is transmitted from one nerve cell to another by the
release of a messenger, called a neurotransmitter, from the presynaptic cell
which diffuses across the small space and interacts with a receptor imbedded in
the membrane of the postsynaptic cell. The amino acid glutamate is the most
prevalent excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Glutamate binds to a
receptor protein, which responds by opening a channel between the outside and
inside of a cell allowing positively charged ions to flow across the cell
membrane. Dr. Oswald is characterizing the structure, dynamics, and regulation
of glutamate receptors using NMR spectroscopy, which provides details on the
level of individual atoms. The first half of the project will focus on the
glutamate-binding site, using a soluble form of the portion of the protein that
interacts with glutamate. Specific dynamic processes will be studied, which are
hypothesized to control the kinetics aspects of channel opening and closing.
This is of particular interest because different kinetic processes for different
glutamate receptors control many aspects of neuronal function, in particular
learning and memory. The approach used in these studies is unique in that
kinetics can be related directly to individual atoms. The second half will focus
on the interaction of intracellular portions of one glutamate receptor, the NMDA
receptor, with intracellular control factors. The structure of the NMDA receptor
bound to a control factor will be determined which in turn has relevance to
understanding the complex events associated with processes underlying learning
and memory. Undergraduate students, underrepresented minorities, and a
collaborator from an undergraduate institution will be involved in all aspects
of this project. The molecular characterization of glutamate receptors will have
broad importance to society. This includes such diverse areas as learning and
memory and the development of biologically-based sensor technology.

