* 0323139
* Americas Program Dissertation Enhancement: The Importance of Colorado River Flow to Endemic Fish of the Northern Gulf of California: Evidence from Stable Isotopes in Fish Otoliths
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Karl Flessa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,155.00

0323139&lt;br/&gt;Flessa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program thesis
enhancement project will support thesis dissertation research by Kirsten Rowell
under the supervision of Dr. Karl Flessa of the University of Arizona. The
research, which will involve collaboration with Dr. Conal True of the
Universidad Autonoma de Baja California, Ensenada, Mexico, aims to correlate
oxygen and carbon content with water and food by studying their isotopic
variation in small structures found in the head of most fish (otoliths).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before upstream dams and water diversion, the Colorado
River was a major influence on northern Gulf of California habitats. River
regulation and impoundment are hypothesized to have altered the estuarine
habitat, negatively affecting two endemic fish types. Specific goals of this
study include: 1) comparison of the pre-dam and post-dam environmental
conditions recorded by the stable isotopes of oxygen and carbon in the otoliths;
2) comparison of growth rates in pre-dam and post-dam specimens of both fish
species; and 3) comparison of the habitat, timing and frequency of spawning in
pre-dam and post-dam specimens of the two species of fish. By using baseline
data stored in fish otoliths in the forms of stable isotopes of oxygen and
carbon, growth increments, and spawning frequencies, this study will
significantly enhance the dissertation research of a female graduate student,
initiate international collaboration with a Mexican colleague, and provide
fisheries managers with techniques to detect and measure long-term historical
changes in food webs and habitats. The Americas Program and the Geography and
Regional Science Program of NSF are jointly supporting this thesis enhancement
project.&lt;br/&gt;