* 0323637
* Little Big Horn College TCUP Implementation Grant
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2010
* Lois Howe, Little Big Horn College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 12/31/2010
* USD 2,497,645.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little Big Horn College's Mission with this
endeavor is to significantly improve our recruitment and retention of STEM
majors, provide them with an excellent education and career skills, double the
number of our STEM majors who graduate or transfer on into four year
institutions, and assist them in making a successful transition to bachelor's
degree program or into the workforce, so that they succeed in achieving their
educational and professional goals in STEM fields. Greater infusion of
technology throughout the STEM curriculum will be a major tool for accomplishing
our goals. To improve retention, our STEM Student Advisor will support and
advise STEM students in navigating LBHC; supervise them in jobs as peer tutors
and community workers; lead "Bridge" visits to transfer campuses, coordinate the
Honors Academy and, overall, will be committed to their success. &lt;br/&gt;We
believe that solid academic preparation, informed by good advising, is also
critical to our STEM students' &lt;br/&gt;success. We will have an active
program of course and curriculum revision, based on current research in Native
American education, which gives priority to revising bottleneck courses, and
develops our new forestry curriculum as well as courses which "round out" our
current STEM degree programs. We will invest in the professional development of
STEM faculty, both in discipline and in pedagogy. With the Center for Learning
and Teaching in the West (CLTW), will host an annual STEM education research
conference, emphasizing Indian education, for our STEM faculty and area teachers
to learn and to share ideas and materials. To promote high student engagement in
science courses, we will increase field and lab activities, and add residential
field camps for incoming freshmen and for sophomores. Peer tutoring will support
students in improving their academic performance. &lt;br/&gt;Financial
incentives help retain students; STEM majors will have competitive opportunities
to tutor or perform community service work; and will be assisted in identifying
and applying for external scholarships, summer internships, research
opportunities, and relevant summer jobs. These training opportunities will be
another avenue for active learning, and will help students develop valuable job
skills and/or an appreciation for research. &lt;br/&gt;How can the infusion of
technology help our students to succeed? We.ll use technology to improve
&lt;br/&gt;communication, e.g., by adding course information to the LBHC
website, along with a database of scholarship and internship opportunities.
Students will be given the option of computer assisted instruction for their
lower level math courses. STEM students will have every opportunity to develop
the technical skills they will need: in addition to the required I.S. course (3
cr.), we will develop 1-2 cr. courses in GPS, scientific presentations, graphing
calculators and information literacy. A variety of upper level courses will have
assignments that will require students to use their technology skills. We will
also use CD-ROMs and Smartboards to enhance instruction. In order to accomplish
these technology infusion objectives, we will upgrade and expand our technology
infrastructure, and provide training and technical support to our faculty in the
use of educational technology. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, we will ensure the
effectiveness of this TCUP endeavor through excellent project management,
&lt;br/&gt;including collaborative planning, effective evaluation, broad
dissemination of results and attention to long term sustainability, and with the
guidance of an external Advisory Committee. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: LBHC
serves a 98% Native American student body. Since we expanded our I.T. curricula
&lt;br/&gt;and added natural resource and environmental science (NR/ES) degree
programs in 1996, our alumni have gone on to double the number of Crow Tribal
professionals in NR/ES and IT fields. They are beginning to expand the sense of
what is possible for students who are coming up behind them; we are seeing and
feeling a significant ground swell of interest in these career fields, as well
as the first small cohort of math/engineering majors. The broader impact of this
project will be to support, sustain and expand this movement towards careers in
STEM fields among our Crow and other Native American students. Our alumni are
starting to bring their skills back to our community, working for the Tribe and
LBHC, and are also changing the region, e.g., by diversifying the professional
staffs of BLM and BOR. In addition, we are building relationships between LBHC,
our area teachers, and CLTW. With CLTW.s assistance we plan to offer area
teachers the option of taking our STEM short courses for graduate credit, and
will open our annual STEM educational research conference to them as well as to
our STEM majors and pre-service teachers. We are working to create a future in
which our Crow children are learning from Crow STEM teachers, and have Crow role
models in STEM professions. Although each Tribe is unique, what we learn here
will likely be useful to other Tribal Colleges, and perhaps also to other
colleges and universities with significant Native &lt;br/&gt;American
enrollment. These audiences will be the focus of our dissemination efforts..
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project addresses a significant nation wide
shortage of Native American STEM &lt;br/&gt;professionals, and takes an
innovative, integrated approach towards increasing the numbers and improving the
preparation of TC STEM graduates. The piloting of computer assisted instruction
(CAI) in TC math courses, the integration of traditional ecological knowledge
into TC science courses, collaboration with our regional CLTW, and the use of
DACUMs for TC curriculum development are all innovative project components -
which will advance our knowledge and understanding of effectively educating TC
STEM majors. The Project leadership &amp; STEM faculty bring many years of TC
teaching and program administration experience to this project, including
managing earlier LBHC grants for STEM curriculum development, faculty
development, undergraduate research &amp; scholarships.