* 0323155
* MyBEST:  Mentored Youth Building Employable Skills in Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kristen Murray, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 847,819.00

The "Mentored Youth Building Employable Skills in Technology (MyBEST)" project,
a collaboration of the Youth Science Center (YSC) and Learning Technology Center
(LTC) at the Science Museum of Minnesota, is a three-year, youth-based proposal
that seeks to engage 200 inner-city youngsters in learning experiences involving
information and design technologies. The goal of the project is to develop
participants' IT fluency coupled with work- and academic-related skills. The
program will serve students in grades 7 through 12 with special emphasis on
three underrepresented groups: girls, youngsters of color, and the economically
disadvantaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project participants will receive 130
contact hours and 70% will receive at least 160 hours. Each project year,
including summers, students participate in three seasons consisting of five two-
week cycles. Project activities will center on an annual technology theme:
design, engineering and invention; social and environmental systems; and
networks and communication. The activities that constitute project seasons
include guest presenter workshops; open labs facilitated by guest presenters,
mentors and adult staff; presentations of student projects; career workshops and
field trips. The project cycles feature programming (e.g., Logo computer
language; Cricketalk), engineering and multi-media production (e.g., digital
video; non-linear editing software). Each cycle will interface with an existing
museum-related program (e.g., the NSF-funded traveling Cyborg exhibit). Mentors
will work alongside participants in all technology-based activities. These
mentors will be recruited from university, business, community partners and
participant families. Leadership development is addressed through teamwork and
in the form of internships and externships. Participants obtain work experience
related to technology in the internship and externship component.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "MyBEST" project will serve as a prototype for the
Museum to test the introduction of technology as central to the design and
learning outcomes of its youth-based programs. An advisory board reflecting
expertise in youth development, technology and informal science education will
guide the program's development and plans for sustainability. Core elements of
the "MyBEST" program will be integrated into the Museum's youth-based projects
sponsored by the YSC and LTC departments. The Museum has a strong record of
integrating prototype initiatives into long-standing programs. &lt;br/&gt;