* 0323872
* NSF Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Mohamad Ahmadian, Eastern New Mexico University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 08/31/2007
* USD 274,520.00

The Department of Mathematical Sciences at Eastern New Mexico University
provides 20 scholarships for students in the targeted areas of mathematical
sciences, computer science, and electronics engineering technology. This project
develops develop sustainable infrastructure and assessment-based methodologies
for improving the graduation chances, employment opportunities, and quality of
learning for the ENMU Department of Mathematical Sciences
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of this program promotes
success through the Department of Mathematical Sciences' dedication to student
learning and its focus on student centered learning. The project provides a
comprehensive, sustainable, assessment-based, academically progressive plan for
project implementation. The project implementation plan includes recruitment, a
candidate selection process, a retention-based educational process, work
placement skills instruction, optional internship opportunities, and an internal
and external dissemination plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes
effective use of existing ENMU support structures, creates new structures, and
enhances existing structures to meet project needs. The project utilizes and
enhances existing student support structures during the process of recruitment
and admissions, tutoring, advising, retention, internship, and high-technology
job placement of graduates. By using and enhancing existing ENMU resources, the
quality and efficiency of the project increases, the sustainability of the
project methodologies is improved, and it allows the CSEMS Principal
Investigators to focus on other project functions. The program creates a
Learning Community composed of CSEMS scholars and other Department of
Mathematical Sciences students. The CSEMS Learning Community is implemented
within the Eastern Learning Community program. Working together with instructors
and other students in a collaborative learning environment enables students to
make connections, form friendships, and accomplish their educational goals. The
integration between courses and increased opportunities for interaction outside
the classroom makes the learning communities a valuable learning experience for
the CSEMS scholar.&lt;br/&gt;