* 0323096
* Planning Grant for the Enhancement of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics at Dine College
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Anwar Shiekh, Dine College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2007
* USD 55,916.00

&lt;br/&gt;Planning Grant for the Enhancement of Science, Technology,
Engineering, &lt;br/&gt;and Mathematics at Dine' College &lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Dine' College seeks a TCUP planning grant to
evaluate its science, technology, engineering &lt;br/&gt;and mathematics (STEM)
curriculum with the objectives of: (a) improving as needed upon existing
&lt;br/&gt;strengths in the health, biological and physical sciences together
with mathematics; (b) expanding &lt;br/&gt;our capabilities in engineering and
computer science, and (c) working with the College's Center for &lt;br/&gt;Dine'
Teacher Education and articulating universities to develop an effective
discipline-based &lt;br/&gt;STEM Education curriculum. That study will then be
used as the basis of an action plan for &lt;br/&gt;developing a full
implementation grant--to be submitted the following year--leading to an improved
&lt;br/&gt;and expanded STEM program, ranging from a revised curriculum to
improved classroom and &lt;br/&gt;laboratory infrastructure, added faculty, and
an upgraded working relationship with Reservation &lt;br/&gt;employers and
regional universities. The planning period will be for 12 months and will
include &lt;br/&gt;four phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Phase 1 (August
15-November 15, 2003): An overall assessment of the present STEM
&lt;br/&gt;program within the College infrastructure. It will include the
aggregate impact on students &lt;br/&gt;of course offerings in STEM; of STEM
faculty; and of such physical resources as laboratory &lt;br/&gt;and classroom
space, laboratory equipment, and computer resources. &lt;br/&gt;* Phase II
(November 16-February 14, 2004): A course by course evaluation of the STEM
&lt;br/&gt;curriculum, including content, student preparedness and achievement,
student demand, and &lt;br/&gt;teaching effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;* Phase III
(February 15-May 15, 2004): Development of an institutional plan leading to the
&lt;br/&gt;preparation of a full implementation grant to facilitate growth and
improvement. &lt;br/&gt;* Phase IV (May 16-August 15, 2004): A preliminary
analysis of Phases I, II and III, leading &lt;br/&gt;to the development of a
plan for evaluating progress during the implementation period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning process and the implementation to follow
will have the intellectual merit of &lt;br/&gt;advancing STEM literacy within a
significantly underserved population, Native American students. &lt;br/&gt;Their
broader impacts will be derived from the development of a model academic STEM
program &lt;br/&gt;that other Tribal Colleges will be able to use as a template
in developing their own programs.