* 0323160
* Maskless Solid Freeform Fabrication of Dense Metal Micro- and Meso-scale Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 316,692.00

The objective of this research is to create a software reconfigurable solid
freeform fabrication tool capable of manufacturing dense metal structures with
dimensions below 100 micrometers. The approach is to develop and optimize a tool
comprised of a high resolution, multiple anode, electro-deposition print head
that can be micro-positioned above a cathode substrate. Each anode in the
electro-deposition print head possesses a complementary electrolyte injector
with a diameter below 100 micrometers, allowing metal electro-deposition to be
highly localized. Rastering the head above the substrate, while simultaneously
controlling the deposition current and electrolyte flow, permits the layer-by-
layer growth of three-dimensional multi-material structures. Fundamental studies
of the head durability, interaction of the flow and current at the cathode
substrate, as well as the release of built structures, will guide the tool
design and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of
this research include the development of a new, flexible, approach for
manufacturing metal microstructures. The layer-by-layer build process of this
tool is strictly additive, and involves materials with a wide range of
functional properties, allowing substantial design flexibility. The success of
this work will impact numerous industries, including aerospace, communications,
health care, information technology, security, and defense sectors. Upon
graduation, the two advanced degree students working on this research project
will likely contribute to the manufacturing competitiveness of the United
States.