* 0323622
* GOALI: Improvements Spray Drying Manufacturing Through Control of Drop Size Distributions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Warren Nehmer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 08/31/2007
* USD 430,929.00

The goals of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project are: (1) to improve spray dryer manufacturing processes by developing
fundamental models for the design of advanced spray units that produce well-
controlled drop size distributions; and (2) to address a current issue of
fundamental concern to the spray research community, determining whether the
maximum entropy formalism (MEF) or the discrete probability function method
(DPF) is most appropriate for predicting drop size distributions under typical
industrial conditions. Spray drying is a critical materials processing
technology used in areas as diverse as pharmaceutical processing, pigment
manufacture, and production of fertilizers and foodstuffs. While the range of
product specifications (i.e., particle sizes) differs in each case, the
underlying goal is to produce products having a narrow distribution of sizes
centered about a targeted mean. Currently, procedures for designing spray dryers
are ad hoc and require considerable trial and error, especially when scaling up
from pilot to full-scale production. To accomplish the goals of this project,
the aim is to fabricate a unique micro-spray system having well-controlled and
measurable initial and boundary conditions so that model inputs describing
fluctuations in manufacturing process operating variables (liquid supply
pressure and unsteadiness in the surrounding gas environment), manufacturing
tolerances associated with the machinery itself (variations in atomizer channel
width and height), and material property differences (arising from compositional
changes) can be evaluated.

This work will have broad impacts on education, environment, energy, and the
economy. The PhD students will gain from extended industrial experience in
corporate R&D and design/production environments. Wastage in the production of
foodstuffs will be reduced, which lowers both energy costs and pollutant
emissions. Spray drying production efficiency will be enhanced, which lowers
costs, thereby strengthening the US competitive position. The end result will be
immediately useful design tools for the food processing industry.