* 0323536
* EPNES: Collaborative Research Project: Power System Security Enhancement via Equilibrium Modeling and Environmental Assessment
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Frederic Murphy, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2007
* USD 117,103.00

The main goal of this research project is to develop a comprehensive framework
for improvement of security and efficiency of modern power systems in a market
context. We focus on the level of an Independent System Operator (ISO) as a
natural level for control and security assessment, as it has emerged after
energy system deregulation.

Our program consists of three components: 1) power system component, centered at
Northeastern University, 2) environmental component, centered at Syracuse
University, and 3) market component, centered at Temple University.
Specifically, we plan to explore use of modern convex optimization and
equilibrium methods in improving security aspects of generator scheduling on the
ISO level and to perform detailed (hourly) generator plant simulations. Results
of these simulations will be used in environmental models to assess effects of
variations in plant loadings on the environment in the Northeast. The results of
environmental studies will be fed back to power system models used to assess the
sensitivities of the ISO operation to possible regulatory and policy changes.
The program includes an integral educational component, built around
undergraduate and graduate student internships at our industrial partners,
course development and outreach. The project team includes industrial partners
(ISO New England) who will serve as technical advisors and as a host to our
students, and provide realistic test cases for all models involved.

In terms of intellectual merit, this program has several features distinguishing
it from existing activities, as it: 1) provides for systematic links among power
system, electricity market, and environmental modeling tools; 2) provides for
much needed sensitivity studies with respect to inevitable model uncertainties,
changes in economic and emergency response policies; and 3) includes
undergraduate and graduate students in the same project at the same host
organization. The project will establish new links with methods for describing
uncertainty in robust control theory, and develop procedures for guaranteeing
compatibility among models used in various domains (power systems, economics,
environmental engineering). The project organization includes participation of
Deans at all three sites, while remaining flexible and responsive to the
evolving needs of the project.

In terms of broader impact, this project will develop a model of research
coordination among three distinct research areas (power engineering, regulatory
economics, and environmental engineering) that are closely coupled in issues
like ISO system efficiency and security. It will allow for reexamination of
modeling assumptions and practices in each area given the insight from the other
two, thus enabling a better flow of ideas and people. We also plan to build on
the track record of all three institutions in attracting and retaining students
coming from under-represented groups, and the Director of multicultural
engineering programs at Northeastern will coordinate this effort. Educational
benefits of the program include development of courses and teaching material,
outreach activities involving undergraduate students, and training of PhD
students who will be uniquely positioned for productive work in the areas of
energy processing systems, environmental engineering and regulatory economics.