* 0323747
* An Exploration of Risk, Information, and Model Validity in Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Martin Wortman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,791.00

The research activities to be conducted for this project focus on investigating
principal questions that must be resolved if Decision Based Design (DBD) is to
gain currency within the community of design researchers. DBD is a controversial
conjecture that asserts that engineering design is a decision making process and
thus can be framed within well-established tenets of decision theory. This
conjecture is founded on the premise that the practice of engineering design is
directly analogous to rational economic behavior. As yet, however, DBD is not a
viable normative theory in that its axiomatic foundation has not lead to the
development of subsequent analytical methods. While researchers can pose
numerous questions regarding designing under uncertainty, this project will
focus first on examining whether it is possible, and subsequently practical, to
map spaces of design alternatives into a domain that satisfies the axioms of
DBD. To answer the question, tasks will include the investigation of
constructing probability spaces that capture design alternatives (both design
parameters and design configurations). This question must be addressed to assess
model validity; as the research team holds that validity is more than simply
satisfying axioms of rationality. &lt;br/&gt;The expected impact of the results
attained from this effort will be to establish a valid logical connection
between constructs of a basic probability space associated with engineering
models and the expected utility theorem. Such a result will offer direct
analytical characterization of elements of uncertainty within a valid
engineering design space. The researchers will also explore a collaborative
research activity with a group of faculty at the University of Texas at Austin.
This collaboration will investigate possible connections between this work in
probability modeling of design spaces with the characterization of uncertainties
arising in the empirical similitude research being conducted at the University
of Texas.