* 0323621
* RUI: Mechanisms of Resonant Infrared Pulsed Laser Ablation and Deposition of Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Stephen Kelty, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 04/30/2006
* USD 338,153.00

Polymer thin films are required for a variety of applications in such diverse
areas as biomedical engineering, chemical sensing, and organic electronics.
Organic electronics are extremely attractive, among other reasons, because they
are much lighter than conventional electronics, and require less power and as
such represent next generation possibilities. The technique that will be used to
deposit films in this study uses high power infrared lasers that efficiently
vaporize polymers and will enable unique studies in fields such as organic
electronics that are difficult or impossible by other means. For example, many
polymers of interest suffer from poor solubility and therefore are difficult to
process, while the method in this proposal does not require polymers to be
soluble. In this case, the laser material-interaction requires further
understanding in order to understand the mechanism of favorable volatilization,
and the value of these studies is of general scientific interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin film processing of polymers presents many challenges.
The novel approach here uses an infrared laser that is tuned to a vibrational
mode in the polymer starting material. This provides a means to efficiently
vaporize polymers without chemical alteration and a minimum of bond breaking,
and is similar to the established technique of pulsed laser deposition, except
that a UV laser is not used because of the intense photochemical interactions of
UV photons with organics. We are guided by promising preliminary results, having
observed that the efficiency of the process and even the physicochemical
properties of the deposited films can depend on the particular vibrational mode
that is excited by the laser. Such mode specific behavior with lasers has long
been sought.&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary nature of these studies naturally
facilitates the participation of a wide group of students. Secondary students in
Project SEED who are already participating in summer research at Seton Hall will
tangentially benefit. Students from the biology, chemistry, and physics
department at Seton Hall will be presented with research opportunities that will
teach students to cooperate across disciplinary lines and to effectively
communicate with each other. Finally, there is an established collaboration in
this area of research between Seton Hall University (an RUI institution),
Vanderbilt University, and the Naval Research Laboratory, which will present
unique opportunities and benefits to all involved.&lt;br/&gt;