* 0323564
* Electrohydrodynamics of Atomic Force Microscopy Imaging of Biological Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Andrei Fedorov, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 12/31/2006
* USD 49,997.00

Abstract CTS-0323564 A. Fedorov, Georgia Tech

Original research is proposed in several areas of fluid mechanics and mass/ion
transport which are significant to data interpretation and instrument
optimization of the atomic force microscopy (AFM) with application to in-situ,
high spatial and temporal resolution imaging of biological cells. The series of
increasingly complex models of the electrohydrodynamics of AFM tapping mode
operation are proposed, which are based on the continuous transport theory and
applicable for the AFM tip radius greater than 10nm and the sub-millisecond
temporal resolution. Specifically, based on the first-principles, (1) the effect
of the fluid mechanics of the inner and outer cellular fluids and the cell
membrane deformation during an AFM tapping mode probing process will be
quantified, (2) the effect of the charge double layer at the cell membrane
surface on the AFM tip-biomembrane interactions will be assessed in a
physiological system under conditions of local electrochemical equilibrium, (3)
fundamentals of the ion transport across the flexible biological membrane will
be investigated to establish the effect of electrochemical non-equilibrium on
electrohydrodynamics of AFM tip-biomembrane interactions, and (4) the boundary
integral solution methodology will be extended to simulation of a complex
multiphysics problem such as AFM imaging of flexible biological specimens.

The scientific impact of the proposed research is beyond the realm of fluid
dynamics and is expected in every field where atomic force microscopy is being
used to investigate properties of soft samples in liquid environment. A success
in the proposed theoretical analysis of electrohydrodynamics of AFM has a
greatest potential to lead to almost immediate improvements in the fields of
cellular biology, biomedical imaging, and scanning nanoprobe development.
Specifically, this research will result in (1) quantitative interpretation of
the AFM imaging data in order to predict the cell morphology, membrane
structure, surface charge, mechanical properties and molecular level
interactions, (2) optimization of the AFM instrument operational characteristics
(e.g., shape and size of the AFM tip and optimal tapping mode frequency and
amplitude) that result in optimal functionality (i.e., highest spatial and
temporal resolution of imaging), and (3) development of new imaging modalities
through "virtual" computer experiments for next generation of the integrated
AFM-based multifunctional scanning probes.

An outreach program focused on demonstration and discussion of physical
principles underlying the atomic force microscopy is also proposed in order to
facilitate dissemination of research results and to promote understanding of
latest advances in science and technology by pre-college students and general
public. Owing to simplicity of physical principles underlying operation of the
atomic force microscopy (i.e., an atomic-scale stylus working based on mass-and-
spring physics), we will develop a set of internet-based lectures describing
fluid mechanics aspects of AFM tapping-mode imaging of soft membrane-bound
samples for presentation to a wide audience, including students at Georgia Tech
and high schools in the Atlanta area which are operated under the Georgia Tech
academic mentorship. The lecture material will also be made available to general
public by being videotaped and placed on the website of the Georgia Tech's
Center for Enhancement of Teaching and Learning (CETL). Further, the computer
visualization will be accompanied by a simple, "macroscale" experimental
demonstration of the fluid motion induced in the liquid by tapping mode action
of the cantilever when "a large AFM" tip probes the flexible, membrane-like
surface of the balloon filled with a heavier liquid (e.g., water) and placed
inside of a container filled with a transparent, lighter fluid (e.g., silicon
oil) and seeded with tracer particles for flow visualization. Such an
experimental demonstration would provide an opportunity to convey in a simple
manner some of the most fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics even beyond AFM
applications such as, for example, the scaling of the flow phenomena and design
of engineering experiments.

