* 0323815
* Assessing and Planning for STEM Development at Kapi'olani
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Leon Richards, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Kapi'olani, one of ten
public colleges in the University of Hawai.i (UH) system, is an urban
institution offering comprehensive programs in integrated liberal arts and 21st
century career education. The College is now widely recognized for learning-
centered excellence and for integrating a coherent curriculum that connects and
reinforces learning across classroom, campus, community and cyberspace. Our
Goals and Objectives for this TCUP Planning Grant are: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1 To conduct a detailed institutional assessment of STEM
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Objective A Identify specific areas of
strength and weakness in the institutionalization of STEM at the College using
an existing and proven .Institutional Assessment Rubric..
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective B Assess strengths and weaknesses in the
retention and academic performance of Native Hawaiian students in STEM programs
at the College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective C Conduct a thorough literature
review of STEM programs at Tribal Colleges, Native Alaskan, and Minority-Serving
Institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective D Conduct a thorough literature
review related to the strengthening of STEM infrastructure in American higher
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective E Identify existing UH system
databases that can provide cyclical assessment data in monitoring STEM strengths
and weaknesses, gains and losses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective F Identify
gaps in existing UH system databases and engage in UH system dialogs to
eliminate these gaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective G Develop a campus site
visit protocol to gather consistent and comparative data on STEM programs and
active learning strategies during campus site visits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective H Employ the protocol instrument in examining
exemplary STEM programs and active learning strategies at identified leadership
colleges and universities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2 Develop an
institutional plan to enhance the College.s STEM program. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Objective A Identify STEM curriculum development needed to enhance
student &lt;br/&gt;achievement of Quantitative Reasoning and Information
Retrieval and Technology learning outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective B
Identify STEM curriculum developments needed to enhance student
&lt;br/&gt;academic success in STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective C
Identify best practices in enhancing the STEM academic performance of Native
Hawaiian, Native American, Native Alaskan, and Minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective D Identify best practices in STEM faculty
professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective E Explore and
determine most appropriate and effective active learning strategies (inquiry-
based, web-based, community-based, learning communities) for integration into
STEM program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective G Identify key UHM faculty,
community and business partners, and their roles in strengthening the STEM
program at the College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective H Identify key K-12
school collaborations in STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;