* 0323332
* Biocomplexity: Collaborative Research: Oceanic N2 Fixation and Global Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Scott Doney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 232,339.00

Oceanic N2 fixation has recently been identified as a significant part of the
oceanic nitrogen (N) cycle and may directly influence the sequestration of
atmospheric C02 in the oceans by providing a new source of N to the upper water
column. The prokaryotic microorganisms that convert N2 gas to reactive N are an
unique subcomponent of planktonic ecosystems and exhibit a variety of complex
dynamics including the formation of microbial consortia and symbioses and, at
times, massive blooms. Accumulating evidence indicates that iron (Fe)
availability may be a key controlling factor for these planktonic marine
diazotrophs. The primary pathway of Fe delivery to the upper oceans is through
dust deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N2 fixers may therefore be directly
involved in global feedbacks with the climate system and these feedbacks may
also exhibit complex dynamics on many different time?scales. The hypothesized
feedback mechanisms will have the following component parts: The rate Of N2
fixation in the world's oceans can have an impact on the concentration of the
greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide (C02), in the atmosphere on time?scales of
decades (variability in surface biogeochemistry) to millennia (changes in the
total N03 ? stock from the balance of N2 fixation and denitrification). C02
concentrations in the atmosphere influence the climate. The climate system, in
turn, can influence the rate Of N2 fixation in the oceans by controlling the
supply of Fe on dust and by influencing the stratification of the upper ocean.
Humans also have a direct role in the current manifestation of this feedback
cycle by their influence on dust production, through agriculture at the margins
of deserts, and by our own production Of C02 into the atmosphere. The circular
nature of these influences can lead to a feedback system, particularly on longer
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves studying each of the
components of this system and then modeling the hypothesized feedback processes.
Because of the interaction of the various parts of this system, keyed around the
unique behavior and biogeochemistry of the prokaryotic microorganisms that can
fix N2, this feedback loop should exhibit complex behaviors on a variety of
time?scales. The research will be conducted through a targeted series of
experiments and field observations to understand and parameterize each of the
pieces of this global process including the direct control of marine N2 fixation
by dust deposition. This understanding will then feed a modeling process that
examines the complex dynamics of this system on time?scales of years to
millennia. The modeling process will be evaluated by comparison with data on the
time?dependent behavior of ocean biogeochemistry as available from ocean
time?series studies and sediment cores.&lt;br/&gt;