* 0323167
* Biochemistry of Two FADH2-Utilizing Trichlorophenol 4-Monooxygenases
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Luying Xun, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 246,000.00

Polychlorophenols are a major group of pollutants, which have been introduced
into the environment over the last century through their applications in
consumer products, wood industry, and agriculture. Due to special uses for
compounds with particular substitutions and due to lack of specificity in some
of the manufacturing processes, many polychlorophenol isomers exist. Often the
importance of a halide substitution is that it increases the persistence of a
compound by making it relatively recalcitrant to microbial degradation. Too much
success in making a persistent compound has led to its accumulation in the
environment. Efforts are underway to identify and develop microorganisms that
can degrade some of the more problematic polychlorophenols. Research from the
PI's group has significantly contributed to the complete elucidation of
degradation pathways for three important polychlorophenols:
2,4,6-trichlorophenol (2,4,6-TCP), 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (2,4,5-TCP), and
pentachlorophenol. A novel group of FADH2-utilizing monooxygenases that oxidize
polychlorophenols has been discovered. Two closely related FADH2-utilizing
monooxygenases, TcpA and TftD, initiate the degradation of 2,4,6-TCP and
2,4,5-TCP, respectively. Recent data suggests that TcpA catalyzes both oxidative
and hydrolytic reactions for two dechlorination steps, whereas TftD sequentially
dechlorinates 2,4,5-TCP by two oxidation reactions. The first research objective
is to demonstrate the proposed dechlorination mechanisms. The second objective
is to localize the amino acid residues responsible for the altered catalysis of
the highly homologous TftD and TcpA by a tailored domain swapping and site-
directed mutagenesis strategy. The results would lead to a more complete
description of the way, in which enzymes are recruited by mutation and selection
to degrade novel compounds. The proposed research aims to provide scientific
guidance for applying FADH2-utilizing monooxygenases in bioremediation of
environmental pollutants. The project investigates how microorganisms are
evolving to degrade various isomers of polychlorophenols, a group of highly
toxic pollutants. The project also studies the reaction mechanisms employed by
microorganisms to degrade these compounds. The research will have a broad impact
on society because the results will provide scientific guidance for the
remediation of polychlorophenols. The research will also have a direct impact on
biochemistry, microbiology, and evolution theories. Through this research, a
graduate student will be trained to perform independent research in biochemistry
and microbiology. Several undergraduate students will work on some aspects of
the project to gain research experience. These educational efforts will prepare
students to meet new challenges in biological and environmental sciences.