* 0323648
* Generation and Validation of Synthetic Internet Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Kevin Jeffay, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2007
* USD 470,000.00

This research project focuses on a critical problem in network simulations, i.e.
the gener-ating of application-dependent, network-independent synthetic traffic
that corresponds to a valid, contemporary model of application or user behavior.
Specifically, an abstract rep-resentation of network connections will be
investigated that captures the dynamics of both end-user interactions and
application-level protocols. The representation, called an a-b-t trace, models
connections as a series of request/response exchanges separated by inter-
exchange think times. Network packet traces are "reverse compiled" into a
collec-tion of a-b-t traces that serve as inputs to a synthetic traffic
generation engine. The engine will, through a variety of techniques, sample from
a collection of a-b-t traces to generate network-independent synthetic traffic
that is statistically similar to the original packet trace. This project will
investigate a variety of traffic generation techniques and will em-pirically and
mathematically validate each. Furthermore, the use of statistical cluster
analysis to identify subsets of a-b-t traces will be investigated that
correspond to applica-tion connections that are generating statistically
homogeneous traffic. The premise of the proposed cluster analysis work is that
while literally tens of thousands of port pairs are in use at any one time, the
number of distinct types of applications that are in use is far smaller. Beyond
enabling better-controlled simulations, the proposed cluster analysis techniques
will likely allow providers to better understand the fundamental make-up and
structure of traffic currently seen on their networks. For example, instead of
seeing 20 thousand active connections on seemingly random port pairs they can
identify the 5-10 fundamental traffic classes present. The results of this
research will contribute to more accurate and realistic simulations and hence a
deeper understanding of the merits of pro-posed network technologies. Finally,
the abstract network-independent characterization of network connections can be
used to understand the fundamental makeup and evolution of Internet traffic.