* 0323604
* A Cluster Infrastructure to Support Retrieval, Management and Visualization of Massive Amounts of Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Juliana Freire, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2005
* USD 110,000.00

This project, developing an infrastructure for data intensive applications, aims
at establishing a cluster and display-wall infrastructure to facilitate
experimental research in systems that support retrieval, querying, modeling, and
visualization of massive amounts of data in a broad range of scenarios. The
infrastructure, consisting of a cluster of graphics-capable workstation with
fast network infrastructure, a high-resolution display wall, and a dedicated
file server, supports three research projects:&lt;br/&gt; Exploiting the Hidden
Web,&lt;br/&gt; Large Scientific Visualization, and&lt;br/&gt; Modeling and
Rendering Large 3D Environments.&lt;br/&gt;The first project searches, indexes,
and queries the hidden Web data. Often crawlers, which visit pages by following
hyperlinks, cannot find needed information without searching the individual
sites. This project develops techniques to enable a crawler to navigate through
hidden pages, building a search engine that allows these data to be queried. The
second relates to the development of visualization technology that is suitable
for very large scientific datasets. This research includes the development of
out-of-core algorithms for scientific visualization, parallel graphics and
scalable-display technology, novel rendering algorithms, and better
visualization modeling primitives. The project expects to build visualization
systems that effectively decouple the visualization requirements from the
available hardware resources, allowing visualization of arbitrarily large
datasets on any reasonable device. The third project looks into models of real-
world objects and scenes from which applications such as entertaining, training
and simulation, special effects, analysis of forensic records, telepresence, and
remote walkthroughs can benefit. This work requires tackling expensive
optimization problems related to registering and cleaning raw data, and high-
resolution display for real-time rendering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
infrastructure enables the establishing of a lab in Visualization and Geometric
Computing and WebDB; which in turn will benefit many students. An outreach
component is in place; the research currently supports several female and
minorities. Moreover, two new related courses are under development&lt;br/&gt;