* 0324029
* NSF Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Braja Das, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 12/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Interdisciplinary (99)-The overriding goal of the NSF Scholars Program at
California State University, Sacramento (CSUS) is to graduate significantly more
well qualified students with degrees in Engineering and Computer Science, who
may not make it to graduation and into a high technology field without
additional financial resources and other support structures. This goal
especially identifies groups traditionally underrepresented in ECS. The program
is providing a minimum of 30 scholarships per semester to low-income students in
the College of Engineering and Computer Science to pay the complete cost of
their full-time tuition and fees. The objective of the Program is to provide a
holistic model of student support, including guidance, mentoring, peer
networking, financial assistance, and professional development to ensure the
students' academic success, retention, shortened time to graduation, and
permanent career opportunities in engineering and computer science after degree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The College of Engineering
and Computer Science (ECS) at CSUS was included in the first round of NSF awards
for CSEMS in the Fall of 2000, and was granted an extension for another two
years. To date, 112 students have received scholarships sufficient to completely
pay tuition and fees. The careful selection process, counseling, and academic
support provided to the NSF Scholars produced a very high retention rate. Only
5% left the program due to failure to meet academic guidelines, resulting in an
impressive over 90% retention rate over the 3-1/2 year period. Since 1999, the
U.S. News and World Report has ranked the College within the top 55 colleges of
engineering. The MESA Engineering Program (MEP), housed in the College of ECS,
has an outstanding track record of successfully recruiting, educating, and
graduating underrepresented students. Madeleine Fish, Director of MEP, was
recognized in 1999 as Director of the Year and in 1990 as the Outstanding MEP
Director in the Nation. The structure of the NSF Scholars Program is based on
the extremely effective MEP/Project Success model (87.5% graduation rate) which
implements a comprehensive plan of financial assistance combined with student
support services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Scholars Program is coupled with the MEP program at CSUS that is ranked as one
of the top 50 in the nation in the graduation of underrepresented minority
engineers, according to the NACME Research Letter, Vol. 1, No. 2, August 1990.
Out of the total 112 students funded by the prior CSEMS award, 63% have already
graduated and 70 (63%) were from ethnically underrepresented groups (African-
American, Chicano-Latino, or Native American), in addition, 34 (30%) were women.
The benefits of the NSF Scholars program are multi-layered and directly relevant
to the needs of society today. First, talented students with economic need, and
largely from groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering and computer
science, are being effectively assisted through a rigorous academic program
toward a timely graduation - which radically changes these students' lives
forever. Further, the high technology industry is desperate for quality
employees, and hiring students from this population is not only filling their
technical needs, but it is also helping to diversify their workforce.