* 0324836
* ITR Collaborative Research: Pervasively Secure Infrastructures (PSI): Integrating Smart Sensing, Data Mining, Pervasive Networking, and Community Computing.
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Mukesh Singhal, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This project addresses homeland security, an issue of the highest national
priority, with a goal of monitoring, preventing, and recovering from natural and
inflicted disasters. In particular, in collaboration with team from UT
Arlington, Penn State University and the University of Kentucky, the project
will create a novel technology-enabled security framework, called Pervasively
Secure Infrastructures (PSI), that will make use of such advanced technologies
as smart sensors, wireless networks, pervasive computing, mobile agents, data
mining, and profile-based learning in an integrated, collaborative and
distributed manner. The uniqueness of this multi-disciplinary, multi-university
proposal lies in the synergistic combination of the proposed research in (i)
efficient data collection and aggregation from heterogeneous sensors and
monitors; (ii) novel techniques for real-time, secured, authenticated
information transmission and sharing, and (ii) intelligent situation awareness
(e.g., threat detection and security services) through new learning, data
mining, and knowledge discovery techniques. The project will mainly focus on
authentication and secure data transmission in wireless networks. The project
will integrate these research efforts in the novel paradigm of pervasive
community computing that can efficiently handle dynamically changing
information, adapt to changing situations, and provide scalability in terms of
the number of users, devices, and data sizes.