* 0324437
* Collaborative Research: Three-dimensional characterization and modeling of angular materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Beena Sukumaran, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2007
* USD 154,146.00

This award entails collaborative research between the University of South
Florida and Rowan University to develop a methodology for three-dimensional
quantitative characterization of particle morphology, as well as to examine the
effect of particle shape and angularity on the mechanical response of
geomaterials. New methods for three-dimensional characterization and imaging of
particles are proposed. Recent innovations in geotechnical particle shape
identification in two dimensions, supported by emerging technologies in digital
image analysis, shape recognition, and object reconstruction will be adapted to
map the three-dimensional shapes of particles. Quantitative measures for
particle morphologies in three dimensions will also be introduced. A link will
be established between 2D and 3D particle shapes through digital image analysis
and pattern recognition. A digital library of particle shapes will be made
available online to the scientific community. Methods and algorithms recently
developed by the PIs to model angular particle shapes in 2D will be extended to
3D, and the particle geometries obtained using the 3D image analysis will be
incorporated within a Discrete Element Method (DEM) code. The influence of
particle shape on dilatancy and steady state shear strength will be evaluated
through experimental measurements and DEM simulations. The advantages and
limitations of the new techniques will be assessed accordingly. The proposed
research will involve several undergraduate and graduate students at both
institutions. In addition, teachers will be engaged in developing modular
exercises for middle and high school students through institutional RETs. This
alone will be greatly beneficial to the large fraction of the population.