* 0324086
* Enhancing Resources to Recruit and Support Students in Mathematics and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Elizabeth Johnson, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 324,800.00

This project is combining an existing STEM Talent Expansion Program (STEP) grant
with a CSEMS grant to build an intensive recruitment and retention program for
computer science and mathematics majors. The objectives of the project are:
&lt;br/&gt; To increase the number of students majoring in mathematics and
computer science, &lt;br/&gt;particularly those from underrepresented
groups;&lt;br/&gt; To provide adequate support so that students remain in the
majors through graduation; and&lt;br/&gt; To educate students about career
opportunities in computer science and mathematics in order &lt;br/&gt;to prepare
them to enter the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the first two objectives,
eight scholarships of $3,125 are being offered annually to incoming, first-year
students in mathematics or computer science and 10 scholarships of $2,000 are
being offered annually to non-first-year students in the majors. The
scholarships are being given to students with financial need who show promise in
the disciplines. While students receiving the $3,125 scholarships maintain their
funding through all four years at Xavier, as long as they stay in good academic
standing as majors, recipients of the smaller scholarships must reapply every
year. The third objective is being met by enhancing a STEM career exposure
series, partially funded by the STEP grant. Each year, speakers from industry
are invited to address gatherings of first-year majors and potential recruits
from area high schools. CSEMS funding is being used to bring in a nationally
known person from outside of Cincinnati as one of these speakers. The primary
area of intellectual merit in these activities is the unique combination of the
STEP and CSEMS grants into a well-integrated recruitment and retention plan.
While the STEP program provides an infrastructure of support for mathematics and
computer science majors, especially in the crucial first year, the CSEMS grant
provides scholarships to help recruit and retain these students. Xavier is well
suited to conduct this comprehensive program. With five major active NSF grants,
Xavier has demonstrated its commitment to creating innovative curricula and
promoting quality research by its faculty and students. Furthermore, Xavier's
mathematics and computer science department provides personalized assistance and
a supportive learning environment for all of its majors. The main area of
broader impact in these activities is the focus on underrepresented groups in
recruitment activities. This includes minorities in computer science and
mathematics as well as women in computer science. In particular, high schools
with large African American or female populations are being invited to the
career exposure series and preference for scholarships are given to these
students. A second area of broader impact is the funding of student travel to
&lt;br/&gt;conferences. This encourages students to participate in research and
to become involved in the professional societies in their respective fields.
Finally, the speakers in the career exposure program are chosen to provide a
variety of experiences from the workplace. In particular, Xavier invites
speakers whose work in computer science and mathematics has brought about
positive changes in society. &lt;br/&gt;