* 0324867
* A shoaling hypoxic zone on the Oregon coast: genesis and mechanisms
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Karina Nielsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

In summer 2002, Dr. Bruce Menge and collaborators observed the occurrence of
hypoxic conditions in depths as shallow as 8 m, and as close as 100 meters to
shore, along the Cape Perpetua region of the Oregon coast. The shallow depth,
closeness to shore, and persistence (~ 2 mo) of such a hypoxic zone was
unprecedented for the Oregon coast. The novelty of these observations, the high
mortality of fishes and invertebrates observed in the 672 km2 area covered by
this oxygen?depleted tongue of water, and its link to similar conditions
occurring simultaneously further offshore in deeper water, suggest the
possibility that they witnessed the early stages of an extensive and important
shift in coastal oceanographic conditions, with potentially important
consequences for coastal ecosystems. This SGER project will study the physical
and biological processes in shallow (5?75 m) depths of the inner shelf region
along the central Oregon coast from May through September 2003. The most
immediate goal is to characterize the seasonal changes in the dynamics of water
column oxygen and associated biogeochemical and physical drivers in the inner
shelf should hypoxic conditions observed in 2002 recur in 2003. A second goal is
to provide a detailed atlas of the changing oceanic dynamics of this region, and
to relate them to responses by phytoplankton, invertebrates and fish. Third, is
to couple the dynamics revealed by surveys in the inner shelf region to those
revealed by simultaneous, larger scale oceanographic surveys scheduled for
summer 2003 off the Oregon coast. A fourth goal is to gather and synthesize
evidence in order to infer the genesis of hypoxia, elucidate the mechanisms
likely for such changes and assess the potential sensitivity of the inner shelf
system to further recurrences of hypoxia. Alternatively, if hypoxia does not
recur, data collected during 2003 can provide a direct contrast to data
collected by this group and by the LTOP GLOBEC program in 2002 when hypoxic
conditions were extensive and persistent. Therefore, regardless of whether the
hypoxic event recurs, we expect to obtain insight into factors underlying the
genesis of such unusual occurrences.