* 0324850
* Retrospective analysis of dispersive and retentive behaviors of young-of-the-year fishes: Are fish otoliths environmental chronometers
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* David Secor, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 359,602.00

&lt;br/&gt;Spatial behaviors in marine fishes serve as a principal ecological
response to climate change, exploitation patterns, and environmental
degradation. Yet there exist few quantitative and conceptual tools to develop
hypotheses related to intra?population variations in migration and habitat use
patterns. Contingent structure (intra?population modalities in dispersive and
retentive behaviors) has been proposed as a useful means to measure and
categorize variation in spatial behaviors, and to evaluate the consequences of
variation at the population and metapopulation level. Contingent structure has
been demonstrated in diverse estuarine and coastal fishes using strontium,
multi?element, and isotopic tracers in fish otoliths. This research project will
test several factors that lead to contingent structure and evaluate
population?level consequences of contingent structure for estuarine?dependent
populations of white perch, Morone americana, within the Chesapeake Bay. Past
research supported by NSF uncovered the existence of two discrete juvenile
contingents classified as retentive (freshwater) or dispersive (brackish water)
individuals. Further, in a large sample of adults, juvenile contingent behaviors
were observed to structure growth and recruitment rates at the population level.
Contingent structuring in Chesapeake Bay white perch represents a unique
opportunity to evaluate important hypotheses that relate contingent structure
(spatial behaviors) to growth, recruitment, abundance, life history, and
environmental circumstance. Hypothesized mechanisms for the maintenance of
contingent structure draw heavily upon literature for resident and migratory
salmon ecomorphs, which emphasizes early growth rate and metabolic differences
between retentive and dispersive contingents. For this research project,
intensive ichthyplankton field studies and larval cohort analyses will be
conducted to link larval growth, mortality and environmental conditions to
subsequent juvenile contingent structure. Juvenile contingents will be sampled
in the field and in the laboratory, bioenergetic studies will be conducted to
test whether dispersive juveniles allocate proportionately more energy toward
feeding and less toward routine metabolism. For a large sample of adults
collected from seven major Chesapeake Bay sub?estuaries, juvenile dispersive
behaviors will be reconstructed, and contingent structuring investigated as a
mechanism shaping recruitment and resiliency within populations, and possibly
connectivity among sub?populations. Climate effects on contingent structuring
will also be investigated. Otolith isotope tracers, which are expected to be
more reliable tracers of nursery habitats than strontium in otoliths, will be
further developed. Protection of Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) is now mandated in
the management of marine fishes, yet concepts of EFH remain poorly defined and
many of the approaches to rank habitats lack rigor or are untenable. Other
researchers have proposed systems that rank nursery habitat according to how
many juveniles from a set of nursery habitats recruit to the adult stock. Past
NSF?supported research on the contribution of white perch juvenile contingents
to the adult stock represents an initial effort to evaluate nursery habitats in
this manner. Ranking systems deserve additional evaluation because 1) the
concept is testable with tools developed in past NSF research and elsewhere, but
2) the concept may need to be broadened. In temperate systems, the consequences
of juvenile habitat use may largely depend upon climate. For instance,
preliminary results for Chesapeake Bay white perch indicate that in high flow
years, brackish water habitats contributed a majority of adult recruits and
thereby are most important for white perch recruitment and population growth.
Still, during low flow years, freshwater nursery habitats made
disproportionately important contributions to the adult stock and thereby may
confer resiliency to the population during decadal cycles of drought. A broader
impact of this research is the comprehensive evaluation of the EFH concept
through simultaneous analysis of many populations across relevant climatic
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;