* 0324727
* Collaborative Research: Sampling and Analysis of Iron, an International Collaboration
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Kenneth Bruland, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2006
* USD 175,037.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0325031 OCE-0326736 OCE-0326697 OCE-0324727 OCE-0326633 OCE-0326111

Although great progress has been made in recent years to measure dissolved iron
concentrations in seawater, significant differences remain between methods as
was shown during a recent workshop held on December 5, 2002 in San Francisco.
During this worship, evaluation of data obtained for one sample from the South
Atlantic and analyzed by more than twenty different laboratories showed a range
in iron values of 0.6 nM, nearly as large as the concentration range from the
surface to 1000 m in the North Pacific. Given the importance of this element as
a micronutrient which can limit primary production, it is imperative that the
reasons for the variability in results be identified. For this reason, a
Steering Committee of experienced iron analysts will collaborate with research
groups with extensive experience in measuring iron both here in the United
States as well as Europe and Japan to resolve the differences that remain in
measurements of iron in seawater. This group of about 22 laboratories will
participate in one cruise to one open ocean station (30'N, 140'W) with low iron
concentrations (0.05 to 0.08 nM) and one coastal station with high iron
concentrations with the goal of establishing the following: (1) the
comparability of various measurements (isotope dilution high resolution
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, organic extraction graphite
furnace atomic absorption spectrometry, cathodic stripping voltammetry, flow
injection analysis-long path length colorimetry, flow injection analysis-luminol
chemiluminescence detection, flow injection analysis with DPD); (2) the
differences, if any, in the sampling strategies used (Go-Flo bottles on a Kevlar
wire, automated, metal free samplers-MITESS, modified "trace metal rosettes",
surface pumping systems; (3) the differences in filtration (Nuclepore, Anotop,
capsule filters with pore sizes of <0.1 to 0.45 um); and (4) appropriate sample
storage and distribution mechanisms. Measurements of iron will be made both at
sea and in the laboratory. In addition, surface and 1000 m depth samples will be
distributed to other analysts both in the United States and abroad to ensure
that all types of analytical methods for iron are considered and possibly for
distribution as an interim iron standard. The ultimate goal of this project is
to enable the ocean science community to compare measurements of dissolved iron
made at different places and times in the ocean with a high degree of confidence
in the differences or similarities that are detected.

