* 0324397
* Global/Semi-Global Stabilizing, Local Optimized Gain-Scheduling Control Design for Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Fen Wu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 05/31/2007
* USD 195,144.00

Although significant progress has been made over the last decade in developing
nonlinear control theories and numerical algorithms, it appears that these
methods are limited in their abilities to effectively address global stability
and optimal controlled performance altogether. One control design approach with
great potential for nonlinear systems is gain-scheduling control. With moderate
increase in controller complexity, multiple control schemes (such as switching
and gain-scheduling) will enhance the capacity of nonlinear control systems and
decouple the nonlinear control design task. As a result, overall nonlinear
control design objective with improved stability and performance will be
achieved.

This project will focus on global gain-scheduling control development and its
application to unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), as well as the integration of
research results into the educational program of North Carolina State University
(NCSU). The global gain-scheduling control framework will provide a systematic
control design technique with optimized local performance and guaranteed
global/semi-global stability, and overcome the computational complexity of
nonlinear optimal control problem. By exploiting the functional dependency of
nonlinear vector field, significantly improved LPV analysis and control design
techniques will be developed using the sum-of-squares (SOS) decomposition. More
importantly, the application of the powerful SOS tool will offer new insights
into existing fields, such as robust and adaptive controls, and lead to the
development of next generation of advanced control techniques. The application
of proposed gain-scheduling control technique to UAVs will demonstrate increased
UAV capabilities, and would greatly improve the performance and safety of
commercial, military, and personal aircraft. With the development of computer-
aided control design software, we envision the resulting gain-scheduled control
systems to be widely used to enhance the performance of nonlinear control
systems, including ground/underwater autonomous vehicles, robot manipulators,
and automotive engines.

The development of innovative education approaches will enhance NCSU educational
program by providing students at both undergraduate and graduate levels with
strong theoretical background and practical skills. Furthermore, the developed
toolbox on LPV analysis and control designs will serve as a vehicle to
disseminate research outcomes to students and researchers, and facilitate
technology transfer to industrial practitioners. Active collaboration with NASA
Langley Research Center will be emphasized to achieve research and educational
objectives.

