* 0324175
* Fast Track to Work: Scholarship Program for Graduate Students in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Patrick Pellicane, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 12/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

The purpose of the Fast Track Program is to continue recruiting, graduating, and
preparing women, underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities, and
low-income graduate students to make a smooth transition into the workforce
and/or to continue toward a CSEM doctoral degree. Intellectual Merit The four-
year program will benefit CSEM graduate students by: oencouraging uninterrupted
study toward a graduate degree in CSEM fields, while preparing students to make
a smooth transition to the workforce or doctoral degree completion; orecruiting
and retaining 29 recipients per year, in computer science, engineering,
mathematics, and statistics disciplines; oreinforcing partnerships with CSEM
faculty, students, key administrators, professional organizations, local, state,
and national industries and governmental agencies; osupporting and assisting
industries and current initiatives, such as LS CO-AMP, McNair Scholars Program,
WMEP (Women and Minorities in Engineering Program), and PEAKS/AGEP, to recruit
and enroll underrepresented minority students, including women and persons with
disabilities in the CSEM fields; oinforming and providing funds for recipients
to attend professional development workshops, seminars, and conferences to
present their research and network with prospective employers; and
oadministering a tracking form to awardees annually to maintain relationship for
future use of campus activities, such as mentoring, employment contacts, and
presentations. Broader Impact The Fast Track Program is based on the current
model to strengthen the 21st century workforce. In response to current economic
conditions and hardships, more individuals are applying for graduate school in
the CSEM fields. Also, corporations continue to report a lack of women and
underrepresented minorities in the engineering, scientific, and other technical
workforce. The management team uses its existing collaborators to increase
awareness and recruitment of underrepresented groups in CSEM fields. The purpose
of this partnership is to develop and implement new strategies to match
students' interests and skills with a compatible workplace. The highly qualified
graduate students provide excellent work performance in the workforce, and
quality teaching and mentoring in the classroom.