* 0324628
* Structural Optimization and Stability
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Su-Seng Pang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 09/30/2007
* USD 249,972.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In many mechanical and aerodynamic systems structural
strength, stability and lightness are of primary&lt;br/&gt;importance. The
stability of a structure with a specified support and external loading can be
characterized by&lt;br/&gt;an eigenvalue problem whose solution determines the
non-trivial equilibrium configurations of the system.&lt;br/&gt;The maximum
external load that can be imposed on the structure is determined by the least
eigenvalue of the&lt;br/&gt;system. The problem of designing an optimal
structure that can support the largest load is more involved. It
requires&lt;br/&gt;the determination of structural parameters, e.g., the
variable cross-sectional area of the structure, which&lt;br/&gt;maximize the
least eigenvalue of the system. An important example is due to Lagrange, who
attempted to&lt;br/&gt;determine the shape of the strongest column with a
specific length and mass. This apparently simple problem&lt;br/&gt;remained
unsolved for more than one hundred and fifty years. Its analytical solution is
still surrounded by&lt;br/&gt;controversy. &lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of this
research is that the standard optimization procedure is by no means the best way
to&lt;br/&gt;address the structural optimization problem involved. Depending on
the failure criterion, there is a certain&lt;br/&gt;relation between the
structural mode of failure and the physical parameters of the optimal structure.
In the&lt;br/&gt;Lagrange problem the maximum bending stress in the ideal column
is constant along its length. This condition&lt;br/&gt;implies that the square
of the fundamental buckling mode is proportional to the cube of the cross-
sectional area&lt;br/&gt;for the optimal column. This relation was vital in
determining the exact analytical solution to the problem. It&lt;br/&gt;also
plays a major role in the new methodology proposed here, which consists of two
stages:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Determining the relation between the mode-shape of failure
and the physical parameters of the optimal&lt;br/&gt;structure. This relation
leads to an eigenvalue problem where elements of the stiffness matrix are
known&lt;br/&gt;functions of an eigenvector of the system, and&lt;br/&gt;(b)
Solving the inverse eigenvalue problem of determining the unknown parameters in
the stiffness matrix&lt;br/&gt;subject to the eigenvector
constraint.&lt;br/&gt;The project has practical engineering applications in new
and emerging technologies related to fabrication&lt;br/&gt;of microstructures
and their integration in new generation of mechanical components. Another
important&lt;br/&gt;application of the proposed research is in design of safe,
reliable, and lightweight aerospace structures&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity
will also contribute to the curriculum development of Machine Design Lab
and&lt;br/&gt;Stress Analysis. The students will take part in a design
competition involving optimal design of structures&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support disadvantaged minority students by (a) directly involving them in the
research,&lt;br/&gt;and (b) stimulating their interest in advancing themselves
to pursue graduate study&lt;br/&gt;