* 0324350
* GOALI: Effects of Defects and Degradation Mechanisms in SiC and GaN Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Brian Skromme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 342,000.00

Intellectual Merit. This GOALI project at Arizona State University (ASU), in
collaboration with our industrial partner Technologies and Devices
International, Inc. (TDI), will investigate the effects of extended crystal
defects on the performance of electronic devices fabricated from GaN, and
identify the cause of the major degradation mechanisms in devices made from SiC.
The high breakdown field, reasonable mobilities, and ability to form
heterostructures (in the GaN case) of these materials has led to increasing
interest in their use for high power, high temperature electronics applications.
However, crystal defects and related degradation mechanisms currently limit
these applications. The objective is to determine the fundamental causes of
degradation mechanisms that currently affect SiC devices so that they can be
eliminated, and to determine the effects of various classes of crystal defects
on the electrical properties of junctions fabricated in GaN so that the most
important defects can be targeted for elimination. SiC degradation mechanisms
will be studied using in situ measurements by synchrotron based white-beam X-ray
topography (SWBXT), to be performed at State University of New York-Stony Brook.
Device fabrication, electrical characterization, optical Nomarski microscopy,
electron beam-induced current (EBIC), and cathodoluminescence (CL) will be
performed at ASU. &lt;br/&gt;The effects of defects in GaN diodes will be
studied by fabricating high voltage diodes in either lateral or vertical
geometries, using low defect density GaN starting material. This material will
be grown at TDI, and provided to ASU. The diodes will be characterized
electrically, and defects will then be studied by SWBXT, EBIC, and atomic force
microscopy. Using small active area devices, we will establish the effects of
each defect class on electrical performance. We will also search for
luminescence signatures of various structural defects in GaN. Some TEM
measurements of selected defects will be carried ASU. The results will be
correlated to yield a comprehensive understanding of the influence of defects,
and the results will be shared with TDI to help improve their growth
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will educate two Ph.D.
students in an industrially relevant research area. PowerPoint slides detailing
the properties and applications of wide band gap semiconductors will be
developed and made freely available to those teaching semiconductor device
physics at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Undergraduate students will be
involved through a senior design project based on the grant. Web pages aimed at
high school students and the general public will be developed to explain the
properties and applications of wide band gap semiconductors. Industrial
interactions with TDI and another company in this area will be strengthened by
this project. Solution of the technical problems limiting the application of
these materials will lead to more efficient power switching devices, which could
reduce losses in power systems and yield large savings in fossil fuels and
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;