* 0324245
* Calibrating Engineering Judgment in Geotechnical Risk Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Gregory Baecher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2006
* USD 142,579.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes a case-study approach to develop improved
protocols for quantifying engineering judgment in geotechnical engineering risk
analysis. The concept is based on four converging trends in geotechnical
engineering: (1) Subjective judgment is viewed as important to geotechnical
practice; (2) important organizations are using geotechnical risk analysis; (3)
current geotechnical risk analyses involving quantified expert judgment tend to
be practical, but a theoretical basis is needed; and (4) current risk analyses
case studies are a real life laboratory for furthering our understanding of how
engineering judgment is quantified, how it is validated and calibrated, and how
robust the resulting risk analyses are.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
employs two major geotechnical risk analysis studies of dam safety to understand
the process of validating and calibrating probabilities assigned by experts. As
a starting point for the case studies, the research uses theory from subjective
probability. The research furthers this body of knowledge, building on unique
aspects of the use of geotechnical judgment in complex risk analyses. It applies
the developed approaches in two major geotechnical risk analysis projects
undertaken by large dam-owning organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is organized in four tasks: case studies, theory and method development, tested
applications, and information dissemination. The two case studies employed use
an extensively documented geotechnical risk analysis of the safety of large
embankment dams. Each study relied heavily on the quantified judgment of
consulting experts. The project integrates historical engineering case studies
with theoretical developments in other disciplines (e.g., cognitive psychology,
management science, and inductive reasoning), and with practical tested
applications on ongoing projects. The intellectual merit consists in bring
multidisciplinary insight to a practical, emerging, critical area of
geotechnical engineering practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the research will be enhanced by several factors: The University of Maryland
provides a diverse research environment; strong efforts will be made to recruit
women and minority students, both graduate and undergraduate; the outcomes of
the work will appear in undergraduate research, graduate and professional
courses, and in a large multi-disciplinary course; technological risk analysis
has become pervasive in the management and regulatory activities of government
at all levels. The use of professional judgment, increasingly quantified as
probabilities, pertains to most of these uses of risk analysis, and the results
of the project can inform all these endeavors. In particular, the security of
our civil infrastructure against natural hazards and man-made threats has come
to dominate national debate. Risk analysis and the necessary role of quantified
expert judgment are integral to our ability to address these hazards and
threats.