* 0324207
* NSF/CONACyT:  Molecular Modeling of Phase Equilibria in Porous Media:   Application to Enhanced Oil Recovery
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Clare McCabe, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,935.00

McCabe, Clare M Colorado School of Mines

"Molecular Modeling of Phase Equilibria in Porous Media: Application to Enhanced
Oil Recovery"

In this project the technology needs of the oil industry will be addressed by
providing tools that can be used to better understand the thermodynamic
processes taking place during enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Specifically a
molecular based framework will be developed with which to study the phase
behavior, both in bulk and porous media, of systems relevant to EOR. In order to
achieve this goal, theoretical developments to accurately study, with the
minimum of reliance on experimental data, systems relevant to EOR will be
incorporated into a sophisticated SAFT (statistical associating fluid theory)
approach. In particular molecular polarity (such as that seen in nitrogen and
carbon dioxide which are important fluids in oil extraction) and monomer
heterogeneity (needed to accurately model aromatic compounds) will be
incorporated into the molecular model. These interactions are also of
fundamental importance in accurately modeling the effects of surfactant
molecules on oil plus water phase behavior. Additionally, within the SAFT
approach a molecular based theory for studying the phase behavior of fluids in
porous media will be developed. By computing the thermodynamic equilibria
between the confined fluid and bulk fluid, both described by SAFT, adsorption
phenomena can be studied. This represents a significant modeling challenge,
though if successful would allow us to treat phase behavior in bulk and confined
fluids on an equal footing.

The broader impacts of the proposal are (1) education of graduate and
undergraduate students (including women and minorities) and the international
cooperation with Mexico, and (2) energy applications in enhanced oil recovery.

