* 0324141
* Computer Science and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Virginia Teller, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project is to continue the CSEMS Scholarship Program (Award # 0094876) at
the College for low-income, academically talented students enrolled full-time in
one of the degree programs offered by the Department of Computer Science and the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics. There are thirty awards per year in
the amount of $3,125 each. If successful during the first year of the award,
students may apply for a second year of funding. The eligibility criteria for
scholarship recipients are the criteria listed in the NSF CSEMS Program
Solicitation. The selection process includes indicators of academic merit and
likely professional success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Administrative Committee
consisting of the PI, the two Co-PIs, the Acting Dean of the School of Arts and
Sciences, and the Acting Vice President for Student Affairs is responsible for
soliciting applications for the scholarship from qualified students, selecting
the thirty recipients, monitoring the recipients during the award period, and
conducting an ongoing survey of recipients. In these various activities, the
committee is assisted by the student support structure at the College. This
includes the Dolciani Mathematics Learning Center, Instructional Computing
Services, the Office of Student Services, and the Office of Career Counseling
and Placement. With this assistance the committee gives particular attention to
the involvement and retention of women and minorities in the scholarship
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the administration and supervision of the
PI, an optional scholarship activity is established for the award recipients.
There are several activities available for the students: a research project
mentored by a full-time faculty member in the Department of Computer Science or
the Department of Mathematics and Statistics; an internship in a corporation,
government agency or non-profit organization; or, an internship assisting Hunter
faculty members with data analysis projects in departments such as Economics,
Geography, Political Science, and Psychology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
scholarship program is expected to continue attracting academically sound
students to the Computer Science and Mathematics majors at Hunter College. The
scholarships are promoting full-time enrollment and is contributing to student
retention. Therefore, scholarships are contributing to an increase in the number
of women and minorities in Computer Science and Mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity stems from
the expectation, after the experience at Hunter in the current CSEMS program,
that most of the recipients will opt to participate in a scholarship activity.
If the activity is research with a full-time faculty member, the student
acquires valuable experience in observing a researcher's methods of operation,
as well as in learning additional concepts of the discipline beyond the
classroom. The PI has administered a previous successful CSEMS program at
Hunter, and therefore has the experience to manage this scholarship program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As for the broader impacts of the proposed activity, award
recipients will, for the most part, engage in a scholarship activity. Monthly
seminars and project abstracts are part of the scholarship activity. Students
will therefore have the opportunity to talk and write about their disciplines,
which are invaluable tools for their further professional work. They will have
the experience of interacting with peers in their disciplines. As indicated in
the proposal, CSEMS recipients succeed in publishing the results of their
projects in well-established peer-reviewed journals, thus helping to disseminate
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;