* 0324746
* Integrating Equity into Benefit-Cost Analysis: Theory and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jonathan Levy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 305,000.00

Environmental policy decisions are often evaluated either on their
impacts&lt;br/&gt;on high-risk communities or on the magnitudes of their net
societal&lt;br/&gt;benefits, but both elements are rarely considered in the same
analysis. This&lt;br/&gt;makes it difficult to inform policy decisions when
there may be tradeoffs&lt;br/&gt;between equity and efficiency. This project
focuses on synthesizing concepts&lt;br/&gt;and methods across two disciplines
often at odds with one another -&lt;br/&gt;environmental equity analysis and
risk-based benefits assessment - to better&lt;br/&gt;inform choices among
alternative environmental policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
issues, this project will both develop quantitative&lt;br/&gt;measures of
environmental equity suitable for air pollution benefits&lt;br/&gt;assessment
and refine the benefits assessment methodology to better account&lt;br/&gt;for
heterogeneity in exposure patterns and susceptibility to disease.
The&lt;br/&gt;appropriateness of these methods will be evaluated using specified
criteria,&lt;br/&gt;through stakeholder feedback, and through two case studies.
The first case&lt;br/&gt;study will examine alternative proposals to control
emissions from power&lt;br/&gt;plants, a policy decision where much debate has
centered on distributional&lt;br/&gt;issues and where impacts are found on a
national scale. The second case&lt;br/&gt;study will consider control strategies
for mobile source emissions, with&lt;br/&gt;both national and local analyses to
inform decision making at multiple&lt;br/&gt;levels. Considering both ground-
level emissions in urban settings and&lt;br/&gt;emissions from elevated point
sources will allow for issues of geographic&lt;br/&gt;scope and resolution to be
addressed in detail, a topic that has posed&lt;br/&gt;difficulties in both
environmental equity analysis and benefits assessment.&lt;br/&gt;More generally,
these case studies will advance the analytical techniques&lt;br/&gt;used in both
environmental equity analysis and air pollution benefits&lt;br/&gt;assessment,
while answering timely policy questions and providing&lt;br/&gt;educational
materials for classroom and community settings.