* 0324473
* Collaborative Research:    Testing and Analyses of Nonrectangular Walls Under Multi-Directional Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Ricardo Lopez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 10/31/2007
* USD 17,195.00

Collaborative Research: Testing and Analyses of Nonrectangular Walls Under
Multi- Directional Loads -- CMS 0324504

PI: Cathy French, University of Minnesota

This project represents a collaborative analytical, experimental and educational
effort to investigate the behavior of nonrectangular structural walls subjected
to the effects of multidirectional loading. Nonrectangular structural walls are
often used to resist lateral loads and limit deformations in structural systems
located in regions of moderate and high seismicity. Although such wall systems
are intended to resist the lateral forces along the orthogonal axes of the
building, past research has been limited to unidirectional studies of these
systems due to limitations in experimental capabilities, as such the numerical
models developed to describe their behavior have been calibrated to this limited
data. The proposed project employs one of the first applications of an NSF
George E. Brown, Jr., Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
large-scale testing facility, the Multi-Axial Subassemblage Testing (MAST)
System at the University of Minnesota, to achieve the multidirectional testing
requirements. This facility is ideal for the investigation as it is capable of
six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) control including the ability to specify moment to
shear profiles about each orthogonal axis to simulate the distribution of
lateral forces applied to the wall system. It is anticipated that
multidirectional loads will have a significant impact on the behavior of these
nonrectangular wall systems as they are intended to resist lateral forces and
limit deformations along the orthogonal axes of the building. The collaborative
team of researchers from the University of Minnesota, Iowa State University,
University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez and The Nakaki Bashaw Group, Inc., a
consulting firm in Irvine, California, bring combined strengths and resources in
experimentation, analysis, design practice and education, all of which are
essential components of the proposed investigation. All collaborative
researchers will remotely participate in the experimentation including the
operation of the test which will reside with Iowa State University. Intellectual
Merit: This project builds on the combined strengths of the collaborative
research team and newly available experimental capabilities to investigate a
critical structural element for seismic regions, nonrectangular structural
walls. The analytical and experimental studies developed in this project are
expected to lead to improved understanding of the behavior, analysis techniques,
and design of nonrectangular wall systems. The project will also recommend
appropriate modifications to the design and detailing of nonrectangular wall
elements suggested in the current building codes. Broader Impact: The project
has a significant educational component through plans to incorporate the testing
and simulation into the curriculum at the three collaborative universities
including the participation of underrepresented groups. The involvement of the
practicing engineer from the beginning of the project, who along with the
Principal Investigator is involved in the development of the American Concrete
Institute Building Code, ensures that the appropriate research findings may be
translated directly into practice with improved detailing recommendations for
nonrectangular structural walls. As such, this project will improve the nation's
infrastructure in seismic regions. It is also anticipated that the results of
this project will lead to valuable information for future remote users of the
MAST system. This information will include documentation of any observed
deformations of the reaction wall and crosshead, as well as the ability of the
system to function under mixed mode control with large applied forces. The
performance and userability evaluations of the remote participant capabilities
within the MAST are intended to lead to an improved system for remote
participation. The Co-PIs have a vested interest within this project to actively
evaluate these capabilities as they are essential to their participation in this
project. It is intended that the research data be made available to the research
community through the NSF, George E. Brown Jr., NEES National Data Repository.
Any hardware or instrumentation purchased at the University of Minnesota through
this project will be available to future users of the MAST facility.