* 0324553
* Collaborative Research: Surface and Actuation Kinetics of Stimulus-Responsive Hydrogels
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Eliot Fried, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 08/31/2006
* USD 134,913.00

Abstract

A collaborative effort between researchers at Duke University and Washington
University is supported to investigate the surface and actuation kinetics of
stimulus responsive hydrogels (SRHs). These materials are polymer gels that
exhibit a large change in volume and surface physiochemical properties during a
reversible phase transition. SRHs have the potential to overcome some of the
fundamental limitations of micro-actuation and sensing devices that currently
use electromagnetic or piezoelectric actuators. The overall characteristics of
SRHs point toward devices that are biocompatible, operate with minimal power
input, and provide a range of motion that is difficult to achieve with existing
servomechanisms.

The proposed work will combine experiment, theory, and computation with the goal
of advancing technologies based on these multifunctional materials. Experiments
to be conducted at Duke will include: 1) optical measurements of volume
displacement changes in SRHs using a novel optical-mechanical setup; 2)
tribological measurements of SRHs using a parallel-disk rheometer; and 3) fine-
grained, spatially resolved force adhesion and friction force maps using
colloidal probe microscopy. In conjunction with these efforts, researchers at
Washington University will develop physically consistent bulk and interfacial
constitutive models. Finally, numerical simulations of some of the experiments
will be conducted at both institutions to correlate material parameters and gain
predictive capabilities for rational design with SRHs.

