* 0324522
* GOALI:  Development of a Seismic Design Methodology for Precast Floor Diaphragms
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Robert Fleischman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 09/30/2008
* USD 470,430.00

Development of a Seismic Design Methodology for Precast Floor Diaphragms -- CMS
0324522&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert Fleischmann, Arizona&lt;br/&gt;A
consortium comprised of the University of Arizona (UA), the University of
California San Diego (UCSD), and Lehigh University (LU), together with the
Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute (PCI) proposes a collaborative research
project to develop a comprehensive, accurate, and efficient design methodology
for precast concrete floor diaphragms in buildings under seismic loading. To
this collaboration, the universities bring knowledge of critical issues for
precast floor diaphragms under seismic loads, as well as the required analytical
and experimental expertise and facilities. PCI, which represents the precast
concrete industry nationwide, brings knowledge of industry practices, standards,
and economics, as well as project co-funding. Using closely integrated
experimental and &lt;br/&gt;analytical simulations, the project will
significantly advance knowledge of the seismic behavior of precast floor
diaphragms and develop information on the stiffness, strength, and ductility
capacity of critical precast diaphragm elements. Integrating these results with
industry knowledge, the project will produce an appropriate seismic design
methodology. The project is proposed to the NSF.s Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program as an Industry-University
Collaborative Project. The development of an appropriate seismic design
methodology for precast concrete floor diaphragms is challenging and addresses
several critical issues: (1) the seismic force levels developed in diaphragms
depend on dynamic interaction between the diaphragms and the primary lateral
force-resisting elements (e.g., shear walls and moment resisting frames); (2)
the dynamic interaction depends on the elastic and inelastic behavior of both
the diaphragms and the lateral force systems; (3) as a result of items (1) and
(2), simple, accurate estimates of design forces for diaphragms are difficult to
make; (4) the inelastic behavior of precast diaphragms, including the internal
force-resisting mechanisms, and the deformation demands and capacities of
critical elements, is complex and poorly understood because of the jointed
nature of these diaphragms; (5) details to anchor the diaphragms to the lateral
force-resisting elements are needed; and (6) accurate methods to estimate the
lateral drift demands on the building's gravity-force resisting systems due to
the flexibility of precast floor diaphragms are needed. To address these issues,
the consortium's research will integrate the following: (1) large-scale
experiments to determine the flexibility, strength, and ductility of critical
diaphragm elements by applying both simple cyclic force patterns and histories,
and complex (multi-degree-of-freedom) force patterns and histories; (2) detailed
finite element (FE) analyses of complete floor diaphragms (under seismic load)
to determine critical force patterns and histories for diaphragm elements that
will be applied in the experiments and used in developing diaphragm design
requirements; (3) nonlinear time-history dynamic analyses (NTDA) of prototype
buildings to determine diaphragm seismic force levels; (4) quasi-static
diaphragm tests and shaking table tests of entire structures to verify the FE
and NTDA results and provide added input into the large-scale experiments on
critical diaphragm elements; and (5) &lt;br/&gt;industry knowledge of precast
construction methods and economics, design practices, and design code
development issues. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project will develop new
knowledge of the dynamic interactions between floor diaphragms and the primary
lateral force-resisting elements under the conditions where the diaphragm
flexibility is not negligible and inelastic behavior of the diaphragm is likely.
The project will also develop new knowledge of the inelastic behavior of precast
diaphragms, which is complex owing to the jointed nature of the precast system
and the flexibility and limited deformation capacity of the reinforcement across
the joints. To accomplish these goals, the project will advance the state-of-
the-art in integrating large-scale experimental simulations with analytical
simulations, and this integration will be accomplished across institutions, with
UA providing the analytical simulations to drive experiments at LU and UCSD.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project will directly impact seismic design
practice and codes for precast concrete buildings. The interest of industry is
evidenced by the number of industry participants and advisors, and PCI's
financial contributions ($426,000) to the project. The project results, when
deployed, will result in safe and economical precast diaphragm designs. In
addition, the project will support 4 graduate students, who will be educated by
the research and the interactions with industry practitioners. The research
results will be utilized in graduate curriculum at the participating
universities and in short courses for industry practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;