* 0324206
* South Texas Border Mathematics and Pre-Engineering Graduates
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Qingwen Ni, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,988.00

Through the collaborative efforts of the College of Science and Technology, the
Department &lt;br/&gt;of Natural Sciences, the Office of Programs for Academic
Support and Enrichment, and the Office of Dean of Student Services, Texas
A&amp;M International University (TAMIU) is establishing a Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program: South Texas Border
Mathematics and Pre-Engineering Graduates (STBMPEG). The STBMPEG program is
providing scholarships to twenty-nine low-income, undergraduates majoring in
computer science, engineering, or mathematics. Due to their under representation
in CSEMS fields, priority for such scholarships will be given to low-income
ethnic minorities, women, and persons with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Primary objectives of the CSEMS-STBMPEG Program
are to (1) increase the number of professional development research activities,
as well as internship opportunities, for participants; (2) provide services to
support timely completion of degree requirements; (3) increase the number of
low-income undergraduate ethnic minorities, women, and persons with disabilities
who enter graduate school in CSEMS fields; (4) expand and further develop the
capacity within existing alumni and private industry relationships/networks to
provide career seminars and relevant job preparation experiences; and, (5)
address the broader societal issue of low participation in CSEMS by the targeted
populations through mentoring and role modeling activities for lower-division
and pre-college students. To receive the scholarships, participating students
must remain enrolled full time in a CSEMS major, maintain a GPA of at least
2.80, and participate in enrichment activities designed to facilitate their
involvement with faculty and peers through mentoring and collaborative learning.
Students are required to attend a program orientation, participate in at least
one career seminar per academic year, meet with their CSEMS-STBMPEG Advisor
minimally once each quarter, participate in research with a faculty mentor or in
a CSEMS-related industry internship or on- campus employment activity, and serve
as a mentor or role model for a lower-division undergraduate or pre-college
student with demonstrated interest in CSEMS. The support provided to project's
participants include a peer mentor during their initial program year, tutorial
and peer study-group support, plus assistance in preparing for graduate school.
With the financial assistance and enrichment activities provided through the
CSEMS-STBMPEG Program, it is anticipated that most students will graduate within
two to four years of entry into the program and will either enter a graduate
program with a CSEMS major or secure a position in a related field. Broader
Impact: Long-term, continuing benefits of program activities include
establishment of new research and internship opportunities to be available for
future CSEMS majors, increased networking and mentoring activities for future
cooperative interactions among participating individuals at various stages of
their CSEMS careers, development of student linkages within the university
community itself as well as with local industry and agencies, pre-college
encouragement to seek careers in CSEMS-related fields by underrepresented ethnic
groups, low-income women and persons with disabilities, and expanded knowledge
of research processes acquired by CSEMS Scholars working in conjunction with
their faculty mentors.&lt;br/&gt;