* 0324368
* Collaborative Research: Demonstration of NEES for Studying Soil-Foundation-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Julio Ramirez, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2007
* USD 195,220.00

The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
promises to change modes of inquiry, research, and practice in earthquake
engineering. When it becomes operational in October 2004, NEES will facilitate a
major improvement in research by integrating experimental and computational
simulation. Through unparalleled experimental, computational, and information
technology resources, NEES has the potential to revolutionize the way that
earthquake engineers conduct research and implement results into practice. This
collaborative project involves eighteen researchers from ten universities. As
such, it provides an ideal opportunity for demonstrating and challenging the new
NEES model for conducting research and also addresses one of the most critical
needs in earthquake engineering today: improved knowledge of soil-foundation-
structure interaction (SFSI). The research plan involves four primary
components: (1) four complementary experimental programs which will investigate
key aspects of SFSI, (2) refinement of computational simulation models for SFSI,
(3) management of the data and metadata generated in the investigation, and (4)
outreach to the earthquake engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;Three of the four
experimental programs will involve NEES Equipment Sites. The centrifuge tests
will be&lt;br/&gt;conducted at the University of California, Davis, the shaking
table tests will be conducted at the University of Nevada, Reno, and the field
tests will use the mobile equipment from the University of Texas at Austin.
Structural tests will also be conducted at Purdue University. The integration of
computational and experimental simulation is a key feature of NEES, and the
computational models will be used to design the test specimens, develop the
testing protocols, and evaluate the measured response. An important deliverable
of the project is improved computational models for SFSI, calibrated from the
experiments, in a form available for community use. Other important features of
NEES are the curated data repositories and a collaborative research environment.
The project team includes researchers from the NEES System Integration Project
(NCSA for data management and CREW for collaborative tools). The project team
will thereby test the tools being developed by the System Integrator and
contribute to the development of enhanced data and metadata models. In addition,
the project team is committed to working with members of the earthquake
engineering community during this research project. All design documents,
simulation models, simulation results, material properties, and measured data
will be available to the community via web-based tools. Many of the experiments
will be webcast in real time, and video clips from all experiments will be
available. An effort will be made to encourage members of the community to
submit comments and suggestions to the research team based on the preliminary
research plan and to develop separate proposals to complement the proposed plan.
A series of prediction competitions are also&lt;br/&gt;planned to evaluate a
variety of computational models. Two complete course modules for undergraduate
courses will be developed based on the research. In addition, the project team
will promote the project and discuss the results at appropriate meetings and
conferences to generate interest and encourage participation among practicing
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
are extensive. By integrating the educational and research activities within the
project, the team demonstrates a commitment to advancing discovery and
understanding in earthquake engineering while promoting teaching, training, and
learning at the undergraduate level. The research team is also committed to
broadening participation of underrepresented groups. The research team comprises
a diverse group of faculty with respect to technical expertise, educational
philosophies, age, gender, and ethnicity. In addition, San Jose State University
does not grant the PhD degree in civil engineering, therefore, these students
will be exposed to opportunities not currently available at their host
institution. The research team will also enhance the infrastructure for research
and education by sharing all experimental, computational, and educational data
developed as part of this&lt;br/&gt;proposal. This information will be
disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding
within the earthquake engineering community. The research team will also make a
special effort to discuss the research results with engineers and decision
makers in the state departments of transportation, thereby providing a mechanism
for society to benefit from the results of the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;