* 0324303
* SGER: A New Interfacial Free-Radical Polymerization Approach for Direct Hollow Capsule Encapsulation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Carlos Co, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2004
* USD 56,759.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Carlos Co Institution: University of Cincinnati Proposal Number: 0324303

Intellectual Merit:

This SGER project is exploratory research on an interfacial free-radical
polymerization approach for the direct encapsulation of substrates in hollow
capsules with nanometer thick polymer shells. This approach relies on the
interfacial alternating copolymerization of maleate and vinyl ether monomers. By
choosing hydrophobic and hydrophilic combinations of these two monomer types,
which individually do not homopolymerize, the polymeriztion is constrained to
occur only at oil/water interfaces. The principles and methodology behind this
encapsulation technique, if proven, will allow for the direct encapsulation of
many substrates through a scalabale, inexpensive process presenting a high
degree of flexibility and control in manipulating the shell thickness,
permeability, and surface chemistry.

Broad Impact:

This process, which potentially combines the best features of existing hollow
encapsulation technologies, could have widespread and immediate applications in
the encapsulation and controlled release of many drugs, dyes, cells, enzymes,
transfection vectors, etc. In addition, the general principle of interfacial
free-radical alternating copolymerziation has many potential applications
extending beyond hollow-capsule encapsulation and into many established
nanotechnologies where the preponderance of interfaces accentuates the
significance of this polymerization technique. The project will also serve to
educate and train undergraduate and graduate students in the principles of
interfacial phenomena and radical polymerizations.