* 0325246
* ITR: Feedback Control of Thin Film Microstructure Using Multiscale Distributed Models
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Research: The objective of this research program is to develop a comprehensive
theoretical, computational and experimental program for nonlinear model-based
feedback control of film microstructure in chemical vapor deposition of thin
films using multi-scale distributed models. Distributed control theory for
multi-scale distributed models will be developed and employed to produce novel
analytical feedback controller and estimator designs that enforce the desired
stability, performance and robustness specifications in the multi-scale closed-
loop system and achieve thin film microstructure with desired characteristics
(e.g., reduced roughness). The motivation for this work is provided by: a) the
increasing need for control of thin film microstructure, b) the high-sensitivity
of thin film microstructure with respect to arbitrary variations in operating
conditions, and c) the lack of systematic and comprehensive framework for
feedback control that can shape thin film microstructure on-line.

To realize the desired objective, the proposed research will focus on the
following projects:

1. The development of computationally efficient and accurate algorithms for
order reduction of multi-scale distributed models.

2. The design of multi-scale reduced-order estimators and nonlinear feedback
controllers that can shape material microstructure in a desirable way.

3. The integration of on-line diagnostic techniques with multi-scale distributed
models and the study of fundamental control theoretic issues.

4. The application of the control algorithms to simulated thin film growth
problems.

5. The development and experimental application of a real-time integrated
measurement/control system to a lab-scale plasma-enhanced CVD process at UCLA to
control thin film microstructure and spatial variations.

Impact:

The research will provide a fundamental understanding of the nature of the model
reduction, optimization and control problems for multi-scale distributed
systems, develop concrete control algorithms that can be readily implemented in
practice, illustrate the application of the control methods and derive tuning
guidelines for the implementation of the controllers. The development of a
software package and the collaboration with companies will be the means for
transferring the results of the research to the industrial sector. The
integration of the research into education would benefit educators teaching
advanced-level classes in process control and semiconductor manufacturing. The
new control algorithms are expected to lead to significant advances in our
ability to shape, on-line, material microstructure in the chemical vapor
deposition of thin films. Information Technology (IT) serves both as a major
enabler and beneficiary of the proposed research. On the one hand, IT
developments, such as advances in high-confidence computing, sensing, data
processing, and software systems, provide an indispensable mechanism for
realizing the project goals. In turn, the research has the potential to further
advance IT developments through improved semiconductor manufacturing
technologies that represent an integral part of modern-day IT infrastructure.