* 0325447
* Catalyzing &amp; Nurturing Online Workgroups to Power Virtual Learning Communities
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Gerry Stahl, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,299,978.00

The Math Forum website (www.mathforum.org) combines educational activities, a
digital library of resources, automated and manual mentoring, discussion forums
and other mathematics-related services for students, teachers and the public. As
an intellectual haven for about a million people, it demonstrates how the
Internet can host large global learning communities. However, learning here has
been primarily oriented toward individual learning. In this project the Math
Forum now aims to bring together some of its visitors with similar interests to
work on common issues: students exploring a math issue together, teachers
developing curriculum, or technologists and educators designing interactive math
applets and support tools. Collaborative learning in small workgroups can be
particularly effective in motivating interest in math and in building and
communicating deep understanding. A proliferation of small groups will heighten
the sense of a vital community and increase its ability to become self-
sustaining and vigorous. The groups will help people increase their community
participation and their interest in mathematics. The Project will investigate
these questions and related issues through a series of pilot studies, controlled
experiments, prototypes and field studies using group-formation and group-
scaffolding software that is designed, implemented and assessed in collaboration
with an international, multidisciplinary group of leading HCI, CSCW and CSCL
researchers. In particular, three different kinds of groups will be formed and
supported: (a) groups of students who visit the site and work on a collaborative
problem of the month, (b) groups of teachers, student teachers and mentors who
develop new problems and curricular approaches, and (c) multidisciplinary groups
of international researchers and developers who design and assess the
technologies and interventions of the Project. An unfulfilled promise of the
Internet is to bring together systematically people who do not live close by,
but who could benefit from interacting within knowledge-rich contexts. This
Project addresses core issues of computer support for collaborative learning
(CSCL): how best to form and structure intimate learning workgroups within
global knowledge-building communities and how to effectively scaffold their
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Math Forum model has substantial broader
impact. The automated formation of small groups and support for interactions
developing deep understanding of mathematics will be suggestive for virtual
learning communities in other domains, taking advantage of other digital
libraries. This model provides opportunities for students and teachers excluded
from collaborative learning due to geographic isolation, disadvantaged schools,
physical disability, discrimination and other physical or social factors. The
model stimulates both student motivation and teacher development, transforming
interest in mathematics from a social stigma into a bridge to global
friendships. Additionally, the Project builds on the PI's prior work on a EU
grant. Core aspects of the Project including technology design, pedagogy and
assessment will be conducted by workgroups of American and European leaders of
the CSCL community in collaboration with Project staff. Annual week-long
intensive workshops will bring these collaborators together with each other and
with teachers and Project staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;