* 0325188
* ITR: Adaptive Spoken Dialog with Human and Computer Partners
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2008
* Arthur Samuel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 10/31/2008
* USD 1,524,000.00

This project takes an innovative and multidisciplinary approach to
characterizing how spoken language production and interpretation are coordinated
in dialog. It examines how people adapt to both human and computer
conversational partners, through variation in pronunciation (e.g, dialect),
rhythm, word choice, sentence structure, and perspective. Adaptations include
those that make processing easier for both partners, such as converging on the
same wording; they also include adjustments made by one partner "for" the other.
Findings from human dialog will be applied to systems that use speech
recognition and generation, with the goals of (1) getting users to adapt
utterances to forms the system can process more robustly, and (2) whenever
feasible, adapting the system's vocabulary, dialect, and perspective to the
user's' needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together methods and
theoretical perspectives from computer science, linguistics and psychology to
advance theories and improve applications. Methods include laboratory
experiments, corpus studies, and simulation studies, integrated with prototyping
and evaluation of spoken dialog systems. Three applications are planned: a
picture matching game, a PDA-based calendar system, and a telephone-based course
evaluation system for an undergraduate community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will enhance training of young scientists in computer science,
linguistics and psychology, and will include underrepresented groups in basic
research and user-interface engineering. The broader impact will be a scientific
foundation for developing flexible and robust spoken dialog systems that serve
the needs of diverse users. Specific application opportunities include mobile
computing, educational assessment, machine speech recognition of non-standard
pronunciation, and tutoring systems for the hearing impaired or second-language
learners. &lt;br/&gt;