* 0325404
* ITR:      Unapparent Information Revelation - Creation, Visualization and Mining of Concept Chain Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2010
* David Pierce, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2010
* USD 675,998.00

There are potentially valuable nuggets of information hidden in document
collections generated by multiple authors, working independently at various
times. Such information is not explicit, but can be inferred by following chains
of concepts and associations. Users surfing the web may need to be monitored
with the goal of deriving their true information need, which could be motivated
by malicious intent. The problem of unintended information revelation (UIR) is a
special case of text mining where the documents represent some pre-selected
subset of interest to a user, generated through purposeful querying or surfing.
The goal is to quantify the information revealed by this subset and to detect
significant chains of concepts and associations.

This effort focuses on the development of a UIR framework and toolkit that
covers the following areas: (i) probabilistic frameworks for concept chain
graphs (CCG): a new information representation conducive to text mining; (ii)
automatic construction of CCGs from representative document collections using
pre-existing ontologies and machine learning techniques in information
extraction; (iii) discovery tools that quantify information revealed and reveal
hidden, information rich paths within the CCG, and (iv) interactive
visualization tools for the CCG. This new framework facilitates better
visualization and analysis of information than existing information retrieval
(IR) representations.

This project should impact several applications, most notably homeland defense
applications. The UIR toolkit has the potential to expose sensitive information
available on unclassified websites. It can also be used to ascertain whether
that information is benign or safe to disseminate. Applications in discovery
from scientific documents are also enabled.