* 0325072
* Quantifying Changes in Hydrologic Cycle Fluxes over the Americas During the  Mid-Cretaceous (Albian) Greenhouse World
* GEO,EAR
* 01/04/2003,07/31/2007
* Luis Gonzalez, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 265,722.00

The mid Cretaceous (Albian) is recognized as a greenhouse world under which
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, mean annual global temperature, and
global precipitation rates were all much higher than present day. Geologic proxy
data as well as general circulation models (GCM's) have been utilized in
attempts to quantify climate variables (e.g. temperature and precipitation
rates). We have utilized the oxygen isotopic composition (18-O) of siderite in
spherical nodules (sphaerosiderites found in wetland paleosols) and an isotope
mass balance model to quantify changes in precipitation rates along the coastal
plains of the Cretaceous Western Interior Basin (KWIB) of North America (Kansas
to Alaska). Our calculations suggest that at mid-high latitude precipitation
rates greatly exceeded modern rates (290-390% greater in mid latitudes and 450%
greater at high latitudes), that the subtropical dry-belt region had a greater
precipitation deficit (i.e. was drier), and that the precipitation rates in the
tropical-equatorial regions did not differ significantly from the modern. While
our precipitation rates at mid latitudes and the sub-tropical dry belts
precipitation deficit estimates are much greater than those estimated by GCM's,
our tropical-equatorial region precipitation rates are much lower than GCM's
estimates. However, empirical data from the tropics and sub-tropics that are
needed to further constrain our model are lacking. This project will expand the
northern hemisphere paleolatitudinal 18-O proxy coverage for the mid-Cretaceous
(Albian-Cenomanian) to cover the mid-Cretaceous Americas of the northern
hemisphere. The expanded latitudinal coverage will allow 1) refinements of
isotope mass-balance models and constrain precipitation-evaporation fluxes for
the sub-tropical to equatorial regions; 2) minimize uncertainties on modeling
the hydrologic cycle in the northern hemisphere; and 3) better quantification of
vapor sources and moisture recycling for the KWIB during the Albian.
Paleoprecipitation 18-O compositions in the dry-belt region (15 to 30 N
paleolatitude) will be determined by sampling and analyzing calcretes in
siliciclastic and carbonate coastal plain deposits, and limestones from isolated
carbonate platforms in Texas and Mexico, and freshwater lacustrine carbonates in
central and southern Mexico. Equatorial (~10 S to 10 N paleolatitude)
paleoprecipitation 18-O values will be determined by sampling and analyzing
sphaerosiderites from nonmarine and coastal plain deposits in Colombia.