* 0325311
* Collaborative Research:  ITR:  Secure Signal Embedding -- Code Design and  Cryptanalysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* David Wagner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2007
* USD 680,000.00

ABSTRACT 0325311 Kannan Ramchandran U of California-Berkeley

A variety of technologies have recently become popular for embedding one set of
data into another; this includes watermarking, steganography, fingerprinting and
traitor tracing. These technologies are finding applications in emerging areas
such as intellectual property protection, media authentication, database
indexing, broadcast encryption, broadcast monitoring, and covert communications.
The application areas are expanding: they also include communication problems
such as broadcast channels and wireless communications. While the development of
these technologies has largely been heuristic, recent research has demonstrated
the feasibility of a more scientific approach rooted in information theory. This
project expands this scientific framework and explores the multiple fundamental
connections between the signal embedding applications listed above. One central
theme is the role of binning schemes for information transmission; random
binning schemes are known to be capacity-achieving in problems of communications
with side information at the encoder and/or decoder. Yet these analyses are
based on restrictive assumptions (such as coherent communication channels) which
have limited the practical applicability of binning schemes so far. The second
central theme of this project is the premise that security requirements impose
constraints which are naturally addressed by a complexity-based cryptographic
approach rather than a purely information-theoretic or decision-theoretic
approach. This project develops a systematic framework for integrating the
information-theoretic and the cryptographic aspects of secure signal embedding
problems. This project is highly multidisciplinary and involves a synergy
between research and educational activities in signal processing,
communications, coding theory, information theory, and cryptography.