* 0325116
* ITR: Feedback from Multi-Source Data Mining to Experimentation for Gene Network Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Daniel Miranker, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,700,000.00

Gene function is known for only about half of the roughly 30 to 35 thousand
human genes. There are many diverse experimental sources of data for determining
gene function (e.g. sequence, expression, and proteomic data). Analysis methods
for each data source have their individual strengths and are maturing, while the
returns from these existing algorithms are diminishing. To expand the scope of
discovery this effort brings together diverse researchers within Computer
Science and Biology in order to develop and apply data mining methods that
analyze multiple sources of multiple experimental data types. The goal is to
discover gene networks for human and yeast genes. These methods are able to
identify and support biological hypothesis that are overlooked when data from a
single experimental methodology is analyzed in isolation. Discovery of gene
networks for human and yeast genes promises to address such grand challenge
problems as determining the fundamental organization of genes in the cell and
creating a theoretical framework for interpreting high-throughput biological
data, moving ultimately towards predictive theoretical models of biology and
understanding disease at the cellular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will also help establish a broad center of excellence in computational biology
at the University of Texas. In addition to the dissemination of new algorithms
through the project Web site {http://bioinformatics.icmb.utexas.edu} and
scientific publications, newly derived gene functions will be submitted to
public biological databases such&lt;br/&gt;as BIND (Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database) and DIP (Database of&lt;br/&gt;Interaction
Proteins).&lt;br/&gt;