* 0325453
* ITR: Networks of Strategic Agents: Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Eric Friedman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 11/30/2009
* USD 2,468,677.00

Networks of interacting agents play a fundamental role in
many&lt;br/&gt;domains, ranging from physical communication networks such as
the&lt;br/&gt;Internet to social networks arising from relationships between
people.&lt;br/&gt;These networks grow and evolve through interactions of large
numbers&lt;br/&gt;of participants, yielding complex global structure and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Often this leads to systems that function efficiently and
reliably;&lt;br/&gt;but in other, seemingly similar settings, networks can
exhibit latent&lt;br/&gt;inefficiency or cascading failures. Such failures occur
not only in&lt;br/&gt;physical networks but also in social ones, as illustrated
by recent&lt;br/&gt;financial crises which propagated through networks of
relationships and trust.&lt;br/&gt;Despite considerable interest in these
topics, the research community&lt;br/&gt;is only beginning to understand the
behavior of networks such as&lt;br/&gt;these; small variations in the
incentives, information, and&lt;br/&gt;computational power possessed by the
agents in a network can have&lt;br/&gt;profound effects on network behavior, yet
the principles underlying&lt;br/&gt;these effects remain elusive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops theoretical and algorithmic
underpinnings of networks&lt;br/&gt;that arise from the interaction of strategic
agents. By combining&lt;br/&gt;game-theoretic approaches with computational
models of interacting&lt;br/&gt;agents, the work develops models that are richer
and&lt;br/&gt;more informative than either those that consider strategic agents
in&lt;br/&gt;the absence of interaction networks or those that consider
network&lt;br/&gt;structure in the absence of game-theoretic models of the
agents.&lt;br/&gt;Networks of strategic agents are investigated at several
different levels, &lt;br/&gt;extending from questions of structure to those of
function and behavior. &lt;br/&gt;One of the project's central goals is to
examine the&lt;br/&gt;inter-relationships between these three levels. In
contrast, most&lt;br/&gt;current techniques are tuned to a single level in
isolation, with&lt;br/&gt;work in computer science and mathematics focusing
primarily on structure &lt;br/&gt;and work in economics emphasizing strategic
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's inter-disciplinary nature exposes
similarities between&lt;br/&gt;questions in communication networks, including
the Internet, and&lt;br/&gt;those arising in social networks, such as trust in
markets. &lt;br/&gt;Beyond analyzing questions arising from these networks in
general,&lt;br/&gt;a particular goal is to better understand
the&lt;br/&gt;networks of interactions underlying electronic markets.
&lt;br/&gt;Indeed, while it was widely predicted that such marketplaces would
&lt;br/&gt;revolutionize trading of goods and services, very few have
survived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project participants contribute expertise
from several perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;They have made some of the fundamental
contributions to&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic game theory, computational and economic
analysis of&lt;br/&gt;interacting agents, and models for complex networks, as
well as to the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of market microstructure and the design
of electronic markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, the investigators have been
key participants in &lt;br/&gt;the new Information Science program at Cornell.
&lt;br/&gt;This program seeks to broaden the reach of
computational&lt;br/&gt;ideas by attracting students from non-technical
backgrounds, and&lt;br/&gt;incorporating notions of computation as a human-
centered activity&lt;br/&gt;that is intrinsically embedded in social, legal, and
economic contexts. &lt;br/&gt;The scientific results of the project
support&lt;br/&gt;the intellectual underpinnings of this program at
both&lt;br/&gt;the graduate and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
models involved in the research have an immediate intuitive &lt;br/&gt;appeal,
and are well suited to interactive graphical demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;These
demonstrations can be used to broaden general understanding &lt;br/&gt;of the
nature of strategic interaction and its networked character, &lt;br/&gt;and can
be made broadly available through the National Science Digital Library
&lt;br/&gt;(NSDL) where appropriate to pre-collegiate educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet is but the newest of many networks of
strategic agents.&lt;br/&gt;However, it has served to change the structure and
function of other&lt;br/&gt;networks, as it enables instantaneous, always-on,
global communication. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the theoretical underpinnings of
these&lt;br/&gt;changes can provide important societal benefits in terms of
more&lt;br/&gt;secure, stable communication and economic systems.&lt;br/&gt;