* 0325007
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ecology of Early Farming: A Mogollon Case Study
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Margaret Nelson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2004
* USD 11,450.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Margaret C. Nelson, Steve Swanson will analyze
archaeological, environmental, and satellite-based data to answer questions
about human impacts on the environment during the development of agriculture in
the Southwestern U.S. In the Mogollon Rim area of western New Mexico and eastern
Arizona, native groups made the transition to agriculture between 200 A.D. and
1000 A.D., marking a change in the relationship between people and their
environment. While it is often assumed that the adoption of agriculture rapidly
leads to sedentism and village formation, in the Mogollon region the early
farming settlements actually remained small and residents mobile, for hundreds
of years after the adoption of agriculture. These early agricultural sites were
repeatedly occupied and abandoned for hundreds of years, and only a few
developed into agricultural villages by AD 1000. In the US Southwest, early
attempts at farming during the transition to agriculture provide a rich database
on these long-term human-environment dynamics. By supplementing the
archaeological data with recent satellite-based environmental data, this
research will explore the inter-related processes of environmental resilience,
environmental impact of land use, and of village
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological record can provide critical
insights into the transition from hunting and gathering to farming, as well as
the ecology of farming strategies in an arid landscape. In the Mogollon area
there are sites that span the 800-year transition to agriculture. At each of
these sites, there is a series of different occupations, each with only a few
houses at a time. By examining pollen and burned plant remains in houses of
different ages, one can develop an environmental history for the sites,
documenting vegetation disturbance (such as deforestation) as well as vegetation
recovery over time. Combining this with satellite-based data on modern
vegetation communities permits an assessment of the environmental factors that
might influence the development of sedentism and agriculture. First, did the
environmental impacts of early agriculture influence the ability of farmers to
successfully live in a single place for long periods of time? Second, are some
places on the landscape inherently more resistant to environmental degradation,
and is that where we see the development of farming villages? Finally, what role
does climate play in influencing the location and persistence of early farming
settlements?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights gained from this research are not
only useful for social scientists: they have broader implications for developing
solutions to modern environmental problems facing society. At a time when the
environmental impacts of human land use practices are reaching the level of a
critical, global-scale danger to quality of life, it is important to recognize
that proposed solutions to current environmental crises must address
sociocultural factors as well as issues of long-term sustainability, or they
will be unsuccessful. This research is especially applicable to regions with a
similar demographic or environmental context, such as for migrant or mobile
populations, or in arid regions of the world. By examining a long-term dataset,
this study can contribute scientific information to the problem of the
sustainability of mobile land use practices in arid environments across the
globe. Information of this sort is timely given the numerous recent and ongoing
instances of displaced populations in arid environments worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;