* 0325110
* Collaborative Research ITR/NGS:     An Integrated Simulation Environment for High-Resolution Computational Methods in Electromagnetics with Biomedical Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Jan Hesthaven, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2008
* USD 125,000.00

Current technologies for radiationbased treatment of cancerous tumors rely
almost exclusively on diagnostic images such as MRI and PET scans to enable a
careful targeting of multiple high-intensity beams. However, the very complex
nature of the penetration of radiation energy into the biological tissue makes
such targeting difficult and error-prone, possibly even prohibiting radiative
treatment due to the risk of damaging essential tissue in close proximity to the
cancerous areas. Such issues are naturally of particular concern in relation to
treatment of brain cancer.

This project will conduct research on the development of a simulation
environment which eventually will provide a virtual patient-specific model of
the area of interest and an ability to accurately and efficiently model wave-
propagation within such an environment, with the potential to ultimately provide
the radiation specialist with an online tool for fine tuning the targeting of
radiation energy and, at a future stage, perhaps even model the impact of the
energy deposition and heat release on the tissue.

The project will develop an environment comprising of (a) the cleaning and
segmentation of MRI data, including data with noise sensitivity, (b) extraction
of material data and construction of a patient-specific volume model of the
target of interest, (c) the generation of high-order, curvilinear, finite
elements grids, (d) full as well as reduced order modeling of the
penetration/refraction of electromagnetic energy into the volume model, and (e)
visualization and extraction of physiological data of interest. These different
elements will be integrated into a flexible, stand-alone environment and will,
as part of the development, be tested extensively on phantom data as well as
real MRI data, possibly with added artificial noise to explore robustness.

The key developments will include new image segmentation and cleaning
algorithms, improved material models, the development of efficient high-order
accurate computational schemes for wave-propagation, efficient methods for
domain truncation, and tools for visualization and data extraction. These are
all problems of generic importance with potential for impact well beyond the
particular application being considered.

