* 0325580
* ITR:    Center for Quantum Information Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Alfred Stone, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,800,000.00

This NSF-ITR medium award provides support for the Center for Quantum
Information Physics (CQuIP) at Yale University. Researchers in CQuIP are
attempting to capitalize on recent work that has shown that--by replacing normal
bits with "qubits" that obey the laws of quantum mechanics--it is in theory it
is possible to perform certain calculations or procedures that are impossible
with a classical computer. Potential applications include secure communication
without cryptographic keys; exponential speedup of certain computations such as
prime factorization; etc. However, these advantages can only be fully realized
with interconnected systems of qubits that are much larger than the current
state of the art for the field. The central aim of CQuIP is to demonstrate
proof-of-principle relating to a diverse and novel set of approaches for
scalable quantum computing and quantum communication. The particular approaches
studied in this project are based on superconducting microcircuits; spin states
of semiconductors; and ultracold polar molecule arrays. The research at CQuIP
will also significantly advance our understanding of the basic physics
underlying these systems. The approaches under study span several sub fields of
physics, and interaction between the subgroups of CQuIP encourages cross-
fertilization of ideas across traditional intellectual boundaries. A core
function of the CQuIP is education of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
and undergraduates in the new field of quantum information science. CQuIP also
serves as a point of contact for researchers within the field, through a program
for visitors; and as an educational outreach center, through a program of talks
at nearby small colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-ITR medium award
provides support for the Center for Quantum Information Physics (CQuIP) at Yale
University. Researchers in CQuIP will build on recent work which has shown that
--by replacing normal bits in a computer with bits that obey the laws of quantum
mechanics--it is in theory possible to perform certain calculations (such as
cryptographic code-breaking) qualitatively faster than on any normal computer.
However, such quantum computation would require a system with substantially more
usable quantum bits than the handful of "qubits" that characterize the current
state of the art for the field. The CQuIP is devoted to development of such
large-scale "quantum information processors". The center will investigate,
experimentally and theoretically, several different and promising qubit
technologies: Superconducting circuits; nuclear spins in semiconductors; and
laser-trapped arrays of polar molecules. A core function of the CQuIP is
education of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates in the
new field of quantum information science. CQuIP also serves as a point of
contact for researchers within the field, through a program for visitors; and as
an educational outreach center, through a program of talks at nearby small
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;