* 0325726
* ITR Collaborative Research: Peer-to-Peer Networking Theory.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Micah Adler, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 427,140.00

The fundamental premise of the research is that P2P networking will
revolutionize the Internet and computing over the next ten years. P2P networking
has numerous important uses beyond file sharing. P2P networking will transform
the Internet from a shared bandwidth infrastructure into a combined
bandwidth/storage/computing infrastructure, creating a massive, global virtual
computer system, which will be shared by users around the world. Commensurate
with industrial deployments and computer science systems research in P2P, this
research project launches a major parallel activity in P2P networking theory. It
addresses two basic research challenges: P2P systems are enormously complex and
create a networking environment that is significantly different from the
traditional client/server model. It is difficult to evaluate new design
proposals through online experimentation and simulation. Thus the need for a
major activity in P2P networking theory.

This research project brings together three institutions to create a center in
P2P theory. The research combines expertise in computer networking, the
Internet, and distributed systems along with modeling, stochastic networks,
optimization and distributed algorithms. Often, these "regions" of expertise
look at problems in their own way, and there is limited interaction between
these regions. This proposal will not only produce more profound results in the
P2P area because of the combination of perspectives, but should provide an
opportunity for these "regions" to learn more about one another's methods and
approaches, facilitating future collaborations in other endeavors. The research
project is organized along three major axes: availability, efficiency, and
usability. It includes major activities in security and incentives.

The PIs will hold monthly one-day workshops during the academic years. A
significant participation from both academic and industrial researchers is
expected, as well as a significant industrial involvement in much of the
research. A set of performance and simulation software will be developed and
made available through the Center's site. Much of the knowledge gained through
the proposed research will be disseminated to students worldwide through
publications in text books and journal articles.