* 0326544
* ITR:     iLearn:     IT-enabled Intelligent and Ubiquitous Access to Educational Opportunities for Blind Students
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Terri Hedgpeth, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,236,210.00

ITR: iLearn: IT-enabled Ubiquitous Access to Educational Opportunities for Blind
Individuals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to
design and develop a ubiquitous computing environment (called iLearn-System)
that can help blind and visually impaired students succeed in their educational
endeavors. iLearn-System has three major components, each of which specifically
addresses key hurdles faced by blind students: iLearn-Reader for reading printed
material, ilearn-Interaction Assistant to facilitate interaction within a campus
environment, and iLearn-Information-Assistant to enable easy access to on-line
course material. The interface to these components is through an iLearn-Device,
which integrates the different iLearn-System components. The scientific
contributions of this work are in the domains of visual processing, information
fusion, customized delivery of information to blind users adapted to context and
task, speech processing and recognition, and prototype development. The impact
of this project includes the empowerment of blind and visually impaired students
to take full advantage of the educational opportunities and participate in the
innovations that would result from the project. The applicability of iLearn-
System is not only to the population of blind individuals, but also to other
groups including those whose visual abilities are declining due to aging. The
project results will be disseminated through an accessible web site,
http://ilearn.asu.edu. This web site will collect feedback from parents,
teachers, and other user groups. Nationally, or partners will disseminate
iLearn-System at high schools and universities. An annual workshop disseminates
our project results to all interested consumers, researchers, mobility
instructors, and disability specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;