* 0326105
* ITR:     Usable Security:     Towards a Trustable Information Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Paul Dourish, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

The project is developing an infrastructure for visualizing the real-time state
of software system security. Information visualization exploits aspects of the
human perceptual system to recognize salient facts, correlations, and features
of a complex information space. By presenting visualizations in real time,
allows users to relate system security to their own actions, and thereby gain a
deeper understanding of how security can be enhanced-or compromised-as a part of
their experience of using computer systems. Visualization offers a means by
which one can incorporate information about system security into all aspects of
computer system use. This is critically important since the security of
information in a networked computer system depends on the interrelationships
between many different systems, components, and applications; there is no one
point of control. Any successful approach must be comprehensive.&lt;br/&gt;A
concern with security is not with mathematical abstraction but with practical
reality. There is a disparity between theoretical security and effective
security in day-to-day computing. Theoretical security is the level of
information security one can achieve in theory, using strong encryption, zero-
knowledge systems, and the current state of the art. On the other hand,
effective security is the actual level of information security one can achieve
in practice. A system can have high theoretical security but low effective
security when the security mechanisms are implemented in ways that confuse or
confound users.&lt;br/&gt;In his classic article "Why Cryptosystems Fail," Ross
Anderson (1993) outlines two paradigms for system security. One is the
"automation" paradigm, in which the work of managing information security is
automated and embedded in the machinery of the system. The other is the
"facilitation" paradigm, in which humans can monitor and managing the security
process, adapting it to changing needs and circumstances. He argues that many
security failures have their roots in the inherent brittleness of the dominant
automation paradigm. However, for regular users, the design of conventional
applications and interfaces systematically undermines the facilitation approach.
The proposed research addresses this problem with an approach to visualizing
system security. This work is not simply applying usability principles to
security applications; rather, it is about making security a part of the regular
user experience.&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on the investigators' existing
explorations in system architecture, software system visualization, and end-user
understandings of security. The combination of these, however, yields an
infrastructure that is not only technological novel but also holds significant
promise for making the growing cyber-infrastructure accessible and secure for
everyday use. On a scientific level, this research makes novel contributions in
four areas: the mental models of Internet users, the use of visualization
technologies for software system monitoring, the use of event architectures for
interactive systems, and the relationship between user models and system
architecture. In addition the project will develop an experimental
infrastructure that the research community can exploit for research into
interactive visualization and security. At a broader level, this research offers
significant benefits to society at large. The impact of the Internet as a
cultural and economic phenomenon is hard to overstate, and yet the current
mechanisms that support users' secure exchange of information are brittle. A
resolution to this problem is pressing, and is the goal of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;