* 0326110
* Collaborative research:  A molecular  approach to larval ecology: development and application to a coastal upwelling system
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Steven Morgan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 507,814.00

Historically, the goal of ecological studies has been to understand the
processes that control population density and community structure. However,
equally important ecological questions are: why do organisms within a population
look different, and what are the population and community consequences of these
differences? Surprisingly, only a few ecologists have begun to address both of
these questions given that phenotypic plasticity is so prevalent in natural
communities. Currently, our understanding of phenotypic plasticity comes from
studies that focus on how an organism responds to an environmental condition. As
a result, we do not understand how an organism will respond in nature when there
is more than one environmental condition that can induce changes. Furthermore,
we have a poor understanding of how plasticity in an organism affects other
members of its community. We must understand these questions to fully understand
the ecology and evolution of phenotypic plasticity.

This research program will elucidate the importance of phenotypic plasticity in
the context of a community in which multiple predators may induce defenses of
prey. o How does prey morphology change in response to the presence of multiple
types of predators? o Is the response to multiple types of predators governed by
energy limitation or performance? o How effective is plasticity at deterring
multiple types of predators?

These questions will be addressed by using a foundation species of well-studied
communities to quantify the induction of morphological defenses and survivorship
in response to the presence of multiple types of predators. Four intensive
multi-factorial experiments will be conducted in the laboratory. The first
experiment is designed to reveal whether three common types of predators with
widely divergent feeding modes induce three different types of morphological
defenses in two conspecific mussels. The second experiment will quantify in
detail the developmental reaction norms of mussels to different types of
predators in isolation and compare the magnitude and rate of the morphological
response with the energetic costs. The third experiment will quantify how
morphological responses to one type of predator are affected by the presence of
another type of predator. The fourth experiment will determine the effectiveness
of plasticity in deterring two types of predators at once. The research is the
next logical step in an exciting and rapidly developing field of study, and it
will open the doors to a much better understanding of the ecological
ramifications of plasticity in natural communities. On broader impacts, this
research will support one postdoctoral associate, one graduate student and one
undergraduate student, and will create new research opportunities for students
of diverse backgrounds from local high schools, two undergraduate institutions
and the University of California, Davis. The postdoc and graduate student will
help in mentoring undergraduate students, training students in the classroom,
presenting results at scientific meetings and to popular audiences, and
publishing results in scientific journals and popular periodicals.





