* 0326276
* ITR: Applying Translation Technology to Language Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Daniel Marcu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,256,000.00

Virtually all systems that produce text, from speech recognition to natural
language generation, use a language model as a core component in order to rank
word strings by their well-formedness and appropriateness for a given context.
These models are difficult to develop both because of algorithmic challenges
specific to integration of multiple knowledge sources and the lack of robust
language processing tools. The goal of this project is to develop models via new
techniques for exploiting the information available in parallel multilingual
corpora, i.e., translations of the same source in multiple languages. Such
corpora implicitly encode a hidden, common core that can be uncovered using
state-of-the-art estimation techniques. The project involves: i) automatic
learning of structure within and across languages at multiple levels of
abstraction: semantics, morphology, phonology, and paraphrasing, and ii)
integration of the results into novel language model frameworks to address the
problem of limited domain- and language-specific training data. The hypothesis
is that, by sharing data and structure across languages and genres within a
language, the resulting models will be richer and more robust. Such ideas were
impossible to envision until recently; availability of multilingual corpora and
increases in computing power make them now feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project marries machine translation and speech recognition language modeling
techniques, anticipating that the combination will lead to more powerful and
general models. The research will facilitate rapid development of tools for less
well studied languages and will immediately impact applications in mainstream
languages ranging from information management to international collaboration to
bilingual education. The results will also have implications for statistical
modeling problems beyond language processing.&lt;br/&gt;