* 0326162
* Oxygen Utilization and Nutrient Remineralization Rates in the Pacific Ocean (Supplement to Continuation of Models of the Pacific Basin Circulation Based on WOCE-era Observations)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2005
* USD 114,997.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326162&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemical
cycling will be studied in a multi-box inverse model of the Pacific Ocean with
focus on oxygen utilization and nutrient remineralization rates. The inverse
model was developed under previous grants incorporating for the first time all
the main WOCE hydrographic sections collected in the Pacific Ocean to determine
zonal and meridional transports within density layers as well as diapycnal
fluxes and air-sea exchange fluxes. Biogeochemical fluxes will be added in the
model to investigate, on basin-scale, the depth-dependent rates at which oxygen
is consumed and nitrate, phosphate, silicate, and total alkalinity (TA) are
produced below the euphotic zone. The formulation of this inverse model differs
from previous models in that the biogeochemical source/sink terms are explicitly
included as unknowns. Through the incorporation of these terms, it is possible
to put constraints on the biogeochemical rates. We propose to perform a set of
model experiments to explore this approach including coupling of oxygen
utilization and phosphate and nitrate remineralization rates through Redfield
ratios, introducing non-zero initial guesses for the biogeochemical rates, and
imposing positivity/negativity constraints. In addition, experiments will be
conducted with varying the weights of the model equations, predefining the
vertical diffusivities, and evoking top-to-bottom nutrient conservation. The
best estimates of oxygen utilization and nutrient/TA. remineralization rates,
from which organic matter, opal, and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) export rates can
be inferred, will be compared to results from tracer age based approaches and
other studies in the literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
work forms an interdisciplinary component of the ongoing synthesis of the data
collected during the international WOCE program. It also represents a novel
application of inverse methods (widely used in physical oceanography) to the
inference of biogeochemical rates. The resulting estimates of organic carbon and
CaCO3 remineralization rates will benefit the study of the oceanic component of
the global carbon cycle. The funds will support a postdoctoral investigator who
is in the process of establishing herself in interdisciplinary research and is
interested in further combining physical and biogeochemical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;