* 0326715
* A Workshop on Information Aggregation in Decision Making, University of Maryland May 1-3,  2003
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2004
* Thomas Wallsten, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2004
* USD 16,384.00

Virtually all decisions are preceded by gathering and combining information.
Such information aggregation, as this process is called, occurs regardless of
whether it is an individual, a group, or a computer algorithm that is making the
decision. For example, individuals choosing among cancer treatments, selecting
investment portfolios, or purchasing homes seek information from various sources
and consider what tradeoffs to make prior to arriving at their decisions. Groups
go through the same process, but in addition, must combine the separate opinions
of their members to arrive at a single group decision. And optimal models or
efficient algorithms for real-world decisions, such as scheduling or allocating
resources, or making a choice based on the outputs of distinct detectors,
balance multiple resource demands against multiple criteria. &lt;br/&gt;Despite
the formal similarities across individual, group, and computational decision
making, researchers in the three areas rarely communicate with each other. Part
of the reason for the relative lack of contact between the individual-
information-aggregation, group-decision-making, and optimization areas is that
traditionally research in these domains has been conducted according to strict
disciplinarily lines. &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop is to foster
cross-area collaboration, as well as exchange of ideas, models, and methods. It
will accomplish these goals by bringing together eminent scientists whose
research is focused on information aggregation in group and individual decision-
making, or in associated topics in operations research, distributed detection,
statistics, and formal decision science, so that the various areas of inquiry
may benefit from their similarities and learn from their differences. This
workshop, built around both empirical and theoretical contributions, will have a
significant positive influence toward de-compartmentalizing the research in the
important areas of individual, group, and optimal decision-making.