* 0326054
* ITR:      Computationally-Enhanced Construction Kits:     Integrating Tangible and Computational Media for Construction and Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Michael Eisenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,804,491.00

ITR-Computationally-Enhanced Construction Kits: Integrating Tangible and
Computational Media for Construction and Design
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Construction kits-such as geometric design sets, erector
sets, architectural blocks, anatomical models, chemical modeling kits-are toys
designed for the building or assembly of physical models. Such kits have
historically played a powerful educational role in children's lives. This
project is developing a wide variety of computationally enhanced construction
kits, focusing on scientific, mathematical, and engineering domains (such as
solid geometry, molecular chemistry, architectural design, and anatomy). Through
the use of embedded computation, pieces within a construction kit may
communicate with each other, with desktop machines, and with their users; and
overall, by integrating construction kits with computation, the educational
power and expressiveness of these kits can be greatly
increased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work addresses a range of foundational
questions, prominently including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[a] How to improve the
technical design of such kits;&lt;br/&gt;[b] How to expand the scientific
content of these kits; and&lt;br/&gt;[c] How to characterize the cognitive and
educational benefits (if any) of such kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addressing
these questions, the PIs are using a strategy of comparative design: that is,
they are systematically exploring a variety of design alternatives,
characterizing the strengths and weaknesses of each, and attempting to "map out"
the overall design space for construction kits. The goals and subject matter of
this project are capable of profound and widespread impact in the promotion of
American science and mathematics education. Construction kits often have a
central affective role in developing students' interests in science and
mathematics. The advent of affordable materials for embedded computation in
combination with both powerful software applications and the World Wide Web
enables these kits to have a vastly more democratized and educationally potent
role. New social structures can develop around physical constructional media;
and these new structures could prove especially powerful in attracting
traditionally underserved populations into scientific and technological
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;