* 0326770
* Second RIMS-UCI Collaboration Conference:    Arithmetic Applications of Moduli Degeneration;  May 7-10, 2003;  Irvine, CA
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Michael Fried, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 03/31/2004
* USD 11,000.00

Title: RIMS-UCI Collaboration Conference on Arithmetic Applications of Moduli
Degeneration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project supports US
participants to attend a workshop at UC Irvine, May &lt;br/&gt;7 to May 10,
2003. The lectures combine algebra and complex analytic &lt;br/&gt;geometry to
give new insights into collections of algebraic relations from
&lt;br/&gt;refined parameter (moduli) spaces. Some lectures introduce a new zoo
of cusp &lt;br/&gt;types. These generalize cusps attached to modular curves.
They extract what &lt;br/&gt;governs previously subtle problems and enhance
mature topics like Deligne's &lt;br/&gt;tangential base points and Belyi covers.
Tempered fundamental groups, &lt;br/&gt;Modular Towers and cusp embeddings of
curves in their jacobians appear in &lt;br/&gt;featured lectures. Number
theorists and algebraic geometers will find results &lt;br/&gt;going far beyond
those from a previous workshop in Kyoto, October, 2002 at &lt;br/&gt;RIMS
Institute. Especially, there are new applications to motivate students
&lt;br/&gt;and post-doctorals to learn techniques for classifying algebraic
equations &lt;br/&gt;from their bad reduction types. The invited speakers, and a
capstone volume &lt;br/&gt;to the previous publication series, will attract new
Ph.D. students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports US participants to
attend a workshop at UC Irvine, May &lt;br/&gt;7 to May 10, 2003. Mathematical
objects described by equations can be &lt;br/&gt;painfully complicated, full of
peripheral data one would like to eliminate. &lt;br/&gt;Special structures on
parameter spaces for these objects can help researchers &lt;br/&gt;filter all
but the essentials from these equations. This workshop follows the
&lt;br/&gt;more technical workshop at RIMS Institute in Kyoto, October, 2002.
Our &lt;br/&gt;speakers will emphasize significant new contributions to this
data filtering &lt;br/&gt;process based on cusp geometry. A lecture series by
Yves Andre and focused &lt;br/&gt;lectures by the other invited speakers will
attract new Ph.D. students to the &lt;br/&gt;field. They will learn new ideas
for classifying equations by their bad &lt;br/&gt;reduction types. Applications
will be to a wide range of topics, including &lt;br/&gt;string theory and height
measures. A conference proceedings will disseminate &lt;br/&gt;the results in a
capstone to a previous series of related
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;