* 0326707
* High-Resolution Marine Gravity, Seafloor Topography, and Seafloor Roughness
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 06/30/2008
* USD 367,567.00

The PIs will improve the precision and resolution of marine gravity and
topography by re-tracking the waveforms of the ERS-1 and Geosat altimeters to
better image local gravity anomalies for: 1) resolving the fine-scale tectonic
structure of the deep ocean floor (e.g., abyssal hills, microplates, propagating
rifts, seamounts, meteorite impacts, . . .); 2) measuring the roughness spectra
of the seafloor on a global basis to better constrain models of tidal
dissipation, vertical mixing, and mesoscale circulation of the oceans; and 3)
resolving the fine-scale gravity field of the continental margins for basic
research and petroleum exploration. The work funded here will make a factor of 2
improvement in the global gravity models. The improvement will be more
significant in near-shore areas where Geosat data are missing. Funded tasks
include: a. re-track the waveforms of ERS-1 altimeter to reduce the noise by a
factor of 2; b. re-track the waveforms of the Geosat altimeter to reduce the
noise by 20%; c. combine altimeter data from Geosat, ERS, GFO, Topex, and
Jason-I to develop new marine gravity models using long-wavelength fields (&gt;
~400 km) from CHAMP and GRACE as constraints; d. construct a new global
topography model based on the best available gravity and topography data; e.
perform scientific investigations of small-scale tectonics, seafloor roughness,
and isostasy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;