* 0326745
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology: Social Policy, Family Structure, and Children's Educational Achievement: A Comparative Study
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Suet-Ling Pong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,500.00

Through this research we will better understand how the relationship between
single parenthood and children's literacy is affected by a particular country's
family policy environment. We will compare 15-year-old students from American
single-parent families with their counterparts in 17 other industrialized
countries in order to assess whether a nation's family policy environment
influences the relationship between single-parenthood and children's literacy
achievement through changing single parent family disposable income, changing
their parental time inputs, or both. This analysis applies hierarchical linear
modelling to data from two sources. First, the individual student data are
extracted from the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), supplied
by the OECD. Second, the country-level family policy data are to be collected
from the Social Science Research Unit at the University of York, England. This
study examines educational solutions beyond the school context by recognizing
the importance of the family and of a national family policy. The focus is the
role of social policymaking cross-nationally, and how family policy changes
family situations that affect a child's literacy achievement. The results from
this research will interest sociologists and other social scientists focusing on
education, the family, and comparative research. In addition, this study has the
potential to help American policymakers to design social policies that promoting
higher academic achievement for all children.