* 0326739
* International Workshop on Special Functions, Orthogonal Polynomials, Quantum Groups and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Sergei Suslov, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,000.00

We propose to organize an International Workshop on Special Functions,
Orthogonal Polynomials, Quantum Groups and Related Topics dedicated to Richard
Askey on his 70th birthday. Date: 18--22 October 2003. Location: Hotel
Hochwiesmuehle, Bexbach/Saarland, Germany. International Organizing Committee:
Erik Koelink (Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands), Tom Koornwinder
(KdV Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Jasper Stokman (KdV
Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Andreas Ruffing (Munich
University of Technology, Germany), Sergei Suslov (Arizona State University,
United States). Local Organizing Committee: Andreas Ruffing (Chair), Kristine
Ey, Clemens Lindemann (President of Saarpfalz District), Heinz Mueller (Mayor of
the Town of Bexbach).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of special functions, in
general and q-series in particular, has seen major and significant advances in
the last thirty years. Recently the subject is being applied in different areas
of mathematics and physics. The focus of the proposed workshop will be on the
active research areas in special functions and their applications influenced by
Richard Askey. This is especially important at a time, like the present, when
the subject is being applied in many areas including quantum group,
combinatorics, number theory, completely integrable systems, mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main emphasis of the meeting will be the
theory of special functions and their applications. A point of emphasis will be
on recent developments in classical orthogonal polynomials, or Askey--Wilson
polynomials and their special and/or limiting cases, biorthogonal rational
functions, Leonard's pairs, integral transforms including q-Fourier transform
and Askey--Wilson function transform, q-Fourier series, Askey--Wilson operators
and their inverses, quantum groups and special functions, q-harmonic
oscillators, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will have truly
international character; it will bring together all ``generations'' of Askey's
mathematical family: from the world top leaders to young researchers and
graduate students who are engaged in development of modern theory of special
functions, q-series and their applications.