* 0326605
* ITR:"Regulography"- Quantitative Reconstruction of Transcriptional Regulatory Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Fuyuhiko Tamanoi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 11/30/2008
* USD 2,528,019.00

"Regulography"- Quantitative Reconstruction of Transcriptional Regulatory
Networks James C. Liao, Vwani Roychowdhury, Chiara Sabatti, David Eisenberg,
Fuyuhiko Tamanoi, University of California, Los Angeles

Goal and Tasks: The goal of this project is to reconstruct the hidden structure
and dynamics of transcriptional regulatory networks based on massive gene
expression data (generated from DNA microarray) and regulatory models under the
constraints of various ancillary information, such as protein interactions with
DNA, other proteins, and RNA. The ultimate outcome of the project will be an
integrated framework (incorporating both methodology and the required databases)
for deducing transcriptional network structure and dynamic, which can be applied
to define the signal transduction pathways perturbed by unknown drug effects,
toxic compound challenges, and mutations. We are using Saccharomyces cerevisiae
as the model eukaryote for verification of our paradigm. Toward this end, we are
pursuing the following specific tasks: (1) Develop an analytical and IT-based
framework for quantitative and dynamic reconstructions of various pre-
translational regulatory networks. This includes transcriptional regulation (as
governed by protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions), and processing,
transport, and stability regulation of mRNA (as governed by various protein-mRNA
interactions). This work builds on a novel system-reconstruction methodology
called Network Component Analysis. (2) Acquire and organize data for protein-
DNA, protein-protein interaction, protein-RNA interactions, mRNA stability, and
gene-expression noise. (3) Experimental verification of the paradigm of the
framework developed in (1) and (2). (4) Disseminate the results through a
composite "regulographic" database. Team Organization: The PIs of this project
come from five different fields: Dr. Liao is a chemical/biochemical engineer
specialized in metabolic engineering and DNA microarray analysis, Dr.
Roychowdrury is an electrical engineer/computer scientist specialized in
networks and systems theories, Dr. Tamamoi is a microbiologist specialized in
yeast genetics, Dr. Eisenberg is a renowned biochemist/crystallographer
specialized in protein structure, function, and protein-protein interactions,
and Dr.Sabatti is a statistician specialized in genetic and microarray analyses.
Broader Impact: In addition to the fundamental scientific discoveries proposed
here, we are pursuing the following information technology related activities:
(1) As part of the interdisciplinary bioinformatics program at UCLA, we plan to
develop a two-part course on intracellular regulatory networks (targeted toward
upper-level undergraduate students and beginning graduate students in both
engineering and biological fields) . (2) We will leverage the organizational
infrastructure of a number of interdisciplinary research institutes on UCLA
campus (including, the NSF Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics, the
California Nano-Science Institute, and the Institute for Cell Mimetic Space
Exploration) to attract both undergraduate and graduate minority students. (3)
We will integrate our experimental and analytical results into a dynamic
database, and make it available to the larger community, which we believe will
spur and aid research efforts on intracellular process modeling at a much larger
scale, involving academic and commercial institutions nation wide.



