* 0326727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linking Culture and Structure to Adolescent Outcomes in Poor Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Katherine Newman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This project seeks to understand the social processes underlying the effects of
poor neighborhoods on adolescents. Why do adolescents in high poverty
neighborhoods have higher rates of teenage pregnancy than adolescents from low
poverty neighborhoods? Focusing on male adolescents, this project investigates
the ways in which neighborhood disadvantage affects sex and pregnancy related
behaviors, such as sexual intercourse, contraceptive use, and romantic
relationships. I draw on recent work in cultural sociology to develop and test a
meso-level theory that links neighborhood context to adolescent fertility
outcomes using peer networks and cultural models. The National Longitudinal
Survey of Adolescent Health provides the primary data for the analysis. This
quantitative analysis will be supplemented with qualitative, in-depth interviews
with male adolescents and their parents in three Boston neighborhoods chosen for
variation in neighborhood structural disadvantage. The broader impact of this
research will be to shed light on the role of neighborhoods in adolescent
fertility outcomes but also generally to inform our understanding of the role of
cultural factors and peer networks in neighborhood and stratification processes.
In addition, this project will add to knowledge about the sexual attitudes and
behaviors of minority adolescent males, a relatively under-researched group.
Teenage childbearing and sexual activity incurs health, social, and economic
costs on teenage parents, their children, and society, and public policy has
been concerned with reducing teenage pregnancy and other harmful fertility-
related outcomes. By understanding the social processes that underlie the role
that neighborhoods and peers play in these outcomes, scarce policy resources can
be better directed toward the individuals and communities most at risk for
negative outcomes, potentially leading to more effective education and
intervention programs.