* 0326396
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Morphable Software Services:  Self-Modifying Programs for Distributed Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,045,775.00

Future embedded system applications and infrastructures will
be&lt;br/&gt;increasingly dynamic. Moreover, the devices used in such
infrastructures&lt;br/&gt;will vary widely, from sensors and embedded devices,
to handhelds, to high end&lt;br/&gt;server systems, all of which interact
continuously in order to collect,&lt;br/&gt;collate, and deliver information
from where it is produced to where it is&lt;br/&gt;needed. This project
addresses the dynamic nature of distributed embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems, by
developing new information technologies that integrate across&lt;br/&gt;multiple
areas of Computer Science, including computer architecture,
operating&lt;br/&gt;and real-time systems, compilers, and middleware. The key
intent is to create&lt;br/&gt;morphable embedded services, that is, services
that continuously self-modify&lt;br/&gt;and adapt in order to meet dynamic
application needs and environmental/resource&lt;br/&gt;constraints, including
power budgets, end-to-end quality of service (QoS) guarantees&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.,
timing constraints), and security constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
many Useful examples of morphable services. In limited forms, they&lt;br/&gt;are
already present in today's cellphone platforms, for instance, where end
users&lt;br/&gt;dynamically download new rings or acquire new games (possibly
displacing existing&lt;br/&gt;ones), etc. Service morphing, however, goes much
beyond such configuration&lt;br/&gt;capabilities. Imagine a cellphone, for
example, which dynamically morphs into&lt;br/&gt;an portable wand, using its
sensing (e.g., its built-in camera) and&lt;br/&gt;communication abilities (e.g.,
by interacting with other nearby phones)&lt;br/&gt;to guide its owner out of a
disaster site. Then, in contrast to such&lt;br/&gt;functionality-centric
morphing, consider this cellphone drawing on the&lt;br/&gt;power of nearby
server systems (or other phones) to provide suitable levels&lt;br/&gt;of service
to its user, despite the fact that its power is running low. This&lt;br/&gt;can
be done, for instance, by dynamically offloading services onto
other&lt;br/&gt;platforms, by (re)partitioning services across the device and
cooperating server&lt;br/&gt;systems, and/or by deploying more power-efficient
and perhaps, less graphics-capable&lt;br/&gt;service code to the phone itself.
Another interesting aspect of our work is its&lt;br/&gt;ability to go beyond
performance and power as the only critical elements of future&lt;br/&gt;systems.
With our approach, for instance, compiler methods and middleware can be
used&lt;br/&gt;to enhance information security rather than system performance.
This can be done&lt;br/&gt;by scattering critical application state to reduce
its exposure to&lt;br/&gt;external intrusions. As a result, information security
can become an integral&lt;br/&gt;element of the QoS needs of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A concrete example of security-focused
service morphing is to `scatter'&lt;br/&gt;critical and vulnerable values across
multiple cooperating distributed&lt;br/&gt;platforms and to `assemble' them only
to the extent needed by the application&lt;br/&gt;under compiler control.
Moreover, when the last use of the `assembled'&lt;br/&gt;value is complete, the
`assembled' value is destroyed. Each use of an `assembled' value is verified by
compiler-generated code that authenticates it. For example, consider the use of
last four digits of the social security number&lt;br/&gt;used for authenticating
a transaction. The entire social security number will&lt;br/&gt;never be stored
in a memory location as a value (that could be hacked into).&lt;br/&gt;The value
will be scattered in a form known only to the compiler which it
will&lt;br/&gt;then use to `assemble' the value just in time only for the extent
of the use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The different service morphing techniques to be
developed in this research&lt;br/&gt;include dynamic component (re)deployment,
(re)specialization, and (re)partitioning.&lt;br/&gt;Such actions are supported
by system-level mechanisms that efficiently carry the&lt;br/&gt;performance,
usage, and requirements information needed for runtime component
morphing,&lt;br/&gt;principally addressing components' processing and
communication actions.&lt;br/&gt;The intent is for self-modifying components to
be able to acquire runtime&lt;br/&gt;information about current resource
availabilities and Quality of Service&lt;br/&gt;demands. While developing these
software technologies, we will concurrently&lt;br/&gt;explore new application-
specific techniques and methods that take advantage&lt;br/&gt;of morphable
software services, targeting remote sensing and autonomous
robotics&lt;br/&gt;applications. Finally, while most of our work will utilize
current embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems platforms, using XScale boards, we will also
consider how to&lt;br/&gt;further improve hardware platforms to better enable
morphable services.&lt;br/&gt;Such work essentially broadens the optimization
space in which morphable&lt;br/&gt;services are able to
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our technical approach integrates across multiple
CS disciplines, by exploiting,&lt;br/&gt;for instance, detailed knowledge about
computer architecture (e.g., power usage&lt;br/&gt;related to memory footprint)
to develop compiler techniques that dynamically generate&lt;br/&gt;code with
functionality and the performance/power profiles more suitable
to&lt;br/&gt;current application needs. Compiler-level and architectural
knowledge is maintained&lt;br/&gt;as meta-information at the middleware level,
and lightweight middleware dynamically&lt;br/&gt;deploys newly morphed code to
target platforms. Kernel-level mechanisms collect and&lt;br/&gt;distribute the
resource information needed for such actions. They also help
integrate&lt;br/&gt;the application-level with the system-level actions being
taken, the latter being&lt;br/&gt;particularly important when satisfying certain
end-to-end constraints&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., timing or power constraints) desired by
distributed embedded applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key goal of this
research is to demonstrate the importance and utility of&lt;br/&gt;morphable
services for critical applications. This implies the need to&lt;br/&gt;jointly
develop application techniques and ideas with morphable service
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;By grounding our research in a challenging application
domain, autonomous robots used in&lt;br/&gt;emergency management situations, our
technological solutions must ``close the loop'',&lt;br/&gt;integrating system-
level information about resource constraints, with&lt;br/&gt;middleware-level
options to morph services, with application-level opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for
making tradeoffs and choices about how to best meet current
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;The result are systems in which changed application
needs result in new code&lt;br/&gt;modules deployed and specialized to meet
these needs, jointly with changes in&lt;br/&gt;underlying system configurations
and properties. In other words, applications and&lt;br/&gt;systems are
continuously `morphed' to best match end user
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A concrete example of extending application-
level research to exploit&lt;br/&gt;service morphing is to extend mission-
centric notions of `value' in autonomous&lt;br/&gt;robots. In robotics, `value'
captures an individual robot's contribution to a mission&lt;br/&gt;undertaken by
a robot team, and `value' helps a robot determine its next
actions.&lt;br/&gt;Our new research will extend these solutions: instead of
considering only&lt;br/&gt;movement alternatives, the robots will also consider
the `values' of&lt;br/&gt;other activities like communication, computation and
observation. This approach&lt;br/&gt;depends significantly on other components
of this proposal, namely QoS&lt;br/&gt;management and cooperative service
morphing, so that the communication links&lt;br/&gt;available to a robot team
and the CPU power needed for interpreting distributed&lt;br/&gt;sensor inputs
can be deployed appropriately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;