* 0326546
* ITR: Reliable Technologies for Operating Systems and Operating System Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Henry Levy, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

Despite decades of research in extensible operating system&lt;br/&gt;technology,
extensions such as device drivers remain&lt;br/&gt;a significant cause of system
failures. In Windows XP, for example,&lt;br/&gt;drivers account for 85% of
recently reported failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researchers are developing a reliability subsystem&lt;br/&gt;for commodity
operating systems. Their approach is&lt;br/&gt;to improve OS reliability by
isolating the OS from driver&lt;br/&gt;failures. Rather than
guaranteeing&lt;br/&gt;complete fault tolerance through a new (and incompatible)
OS or&lt;br/&gt;driver architecture, their goal is to prevent the vast majority
of&lt;br/&gt;driver-caused crashes with little or no change to
existing&lt;br/&gt;driver and system code. To achieve this, they isolate drivers
within&lt;br/&gt;lightweight protection domains inside the kernel address
space.&lt;br/&gt;Drivers run largely unchanged in kernel mode, but are
prevented&lt;br/&gt;from corrupting the kernel by both software and hardware
means. The &lt;br/&gt;system&lt;br/&gt;also tracks a driver's use of kernel
resources to hasten automatic&lt;br/&gt;clean-up during
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To prove the viability of their approach, they
are implementing a system&lt;br/&gt;called "Nooks" in the Linux operating system
and are using it&lt;br/&gt;to fault-isolate several device&lt;br/&gt;drivers.
Their initial results show that Nooks offers a substantial
&lt;br/&gt;increase&lt;br/&gt;in the reliability of operating systems, catching
and quickly&lt;br/&gt;recovering from 99% of the faults that would otherwise
crash the system.&lt;br/&gt;While Nooks was designed for drivers, their
techniques generalize to&lt;br/&gt;other kernel extensions as well. The
researchers are demonstrating&lt;br/&gt;this by isolating a kernel-mode file
system and an&lt;br/&gt;in-kernel Internet
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, because Nooks supports existing
C-language extensions, runs on &lt;br/&gt;a&lt;br/&gt;commodity operating system
and commodity hardware, and enables&lt;br/&gt;automated recovery, it represents
a substantial step beyond the&lt;br/&gt;specialized architectures and type-safe
languages required by previous&lt;br/&gt;efforts directed at safe
extensibility.&lt;br/&gt;