* 0327234
* Collaborative Research:    High Spectral Resolution Measurements of Surface Reflectivity in the Western Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* R. Glenn Sellar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2006
* USD 202,136.00

ABSTRACT
&lt;br/&gt;Minnett&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0327187&lt;br/&gt;Sellar&lt;br/&gt;OPP- 0327234
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal by Principal
Investigators at the Universities of Miami (UM) and Central Florida (UCF). The
Arctic is recognized as area that is particularly sensitive to the effects of
climate change, the effects of which are not regionally limited but extend to
the entire climate system. The cloud radiative forcing and the surface response
are components of competing feedback mechanisms that can enhance or dampen the
response of the Arctic system to changes in climate. The seasonal changes of
albedo of the snow and ice cover over the Arctic Ocean, which are most rapid and
profound at the time of snow melt and breakup of the ice cover, have a profound
effect on the surface radiation and heat budget of the Arctic. Errors in the
measurement or specification of the surface albedo overwhelm other sources of
uncertainties in the measurement or modeling of the surface heat budget and
response of the Arctic to cloud radiative forcing. The project is focused on the
deployment of a new instrument, the High-Efficiency HyperSpectral Imager
(HEHSI), together with a suite of extant ancillary sensors, on the Canadian
Coast Guard Ship Franklin during part of the year-long expedition to the Cape
Bathurst area as part of the Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study (CASES).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
first Arctic field deployment of a new, small, robust, lightweight imaging
spectroradiometer with no moving parts (other than the computer disk). This is a
significant improvement in capabilities of current, non-imaging spectrometers,
and video imagers. In collaboration with Canadian colleagues, these measurements
will be used to study the relationships between optical properties and physical
properties of the surface. The project will improve our understanding of the
variability in the spectral reflectivity of he frozen surface under a range of
conditions of illumination, and how narrow-band measurements of reflectivity can
be related to broad-band hemispheric albedo. The field measurements will be
compared to coincident data from the new generation of satellite imagers,
thereby establishing the foundation for extending the accurate but localized
measurements to the Arctic as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on and strengthens international
collaboration between the US and Canada in Arctic research from previous NSF
funding. It will involve students at many stages in their careers, from high
school juniors and seniors (through the Miami-Dade Academic Internship program
at UM), through undergraduate and post graduate research assistants (at both UM
and UCF). The University of Miami is a Hispanic Serving Institution and thereby
fosters the participation of under-represented groups in science and
engineering. The data will be made available through a WWW pages at Rosenthiel
School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences (RSMAS). The project will contribute
to the active outreach activities coordinated through the RSMAS Dean's Office.
The improvement of understanding of the physical processes in the Arctic,
especially in the framework of the changing climate, has important, multifaceted
societal impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;