* 0327336
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Struggle for Accountability in Mexico: Explaining Uneven Political Development
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Walter Goldfrank, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

In recent years, numerous corruption control agencies, autonomous electoral
institutes and central banks, independent auditing agencies, human rights
Ombudsmen, and "public prosecutors" have sprung up throughout the developing
world in an attempt to provide discipline and responsiveness in the use of state
power. Like some of their counterparts in the developed world, many of these new
independent pro-accountability agencies often are characterized by poor
institutional performance. What explains the level and variation in the types of
problems faced by different government agencies tasked with regulating and
inspecting abuses of state power? This dissertation looks to explore these
questions by comparing and contrasting the history, structure and functioning of
three independent agencies in Mexico: the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE), the
National Human Rights Commission (CNDH) and the Superior Federal Auditor (ASF).
This project poses two hypotheses. First, the "sabotage" hypothesis argues that
the more power the Mexican authoritarian coalition has over an agency's founding
and reform, the more design flaws it has that will negatively affect its
institutional performance. Second, the "grounded professionalism" hypothesis
argues that independent agencies perform better when they have meritocratic
recruitment (for both high and low-level officials), are trusted and actively
supported by powerful sectors of society, and have a strong institutional
location within government. In order to test these hypotheses the investigator
will spend twelve months in Mexico conducting interviews and consulting archival
materials. The broader impact of this research will be achieved through its
distribution, its potential to promote collaboration between US and Mexican
researchers, and its contribution to social science training and infrastructure.
The study's findings will be disseminated in four ways: (1) It will be
incorporated into the lectures and reading assignments for the classes on
political change in Latin America and Mexico that both the PI and the CO-PI
teach at UC Santa Cruz; (2) It will be incorporated into the consulting work
that the Co-PI conducts on pro-accountability state reform in the developing
world; (3) It will be presented at professional meetings and conferences; (4) It
will be used to write articles that will be submitted to leading journals and
publishers in the field of Political Sociology. This research will also enhance
the infrastructure for research and education by facilitating cross-border
scholarly networks since the co-PI will be housed at one the most important
research institutes in Mexico (the Center for Economics Research and Teaching
(CIDE)) during his fieldwork which will allow him to establish important links
between the UC system and the Mexican research establishment.