* 0327225
* The Influence of Cobalt and Cadmium Speciation on Marine Cyanobacteria in the Costa Rica Upwelling Dome and at Station Aloha
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2006
* USD 371,930.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327225&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
influence of iron on phytoplankton growth has been the subject of extensive
investigations, comparatively little work has been conducted on the influence of
other trace metals such as cobalt, cadmium and zinc. Building on results from
culture studies indicating differences in growth rates depending on trace metal
concentrations, a scientist from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
hypothesizes that shifts in relative abundances and speciation of trace elements
could influence the composition of phytoplankton assemblages. To test the
hypothesis, the investigator plans to examine the influence of cobalt and
cadmium speciation on Synechococcus and Crocosphaera at two sites in the Pacific
Ocean. In addition, he will determine the distribution of cobalt across
transects in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific to improve our understanding of the
global biogeochemical cycle of cobalt. To attain these goals, the scientist will
develop and calibrate a cadmium speciation method, measure cobalt and cadmium
speciation on vertical profiles, analyze cyanobacterial abundances relative to
cadmium and cobalt speciation, conduct physiological experiments to determine
the sensitivity of nitrogen fixing cyanobacteria to cobalt and zinc limitations
and cadmium toxicity, analyze functional gene expression of metalloenzymes in
Synechococcus and assess changes in cell number of Crocosphaera and nitrogen
fixation gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;