* 0327460
* Understanding Intraseasonal Convection and Large-Scale Circulation Variations in Observations and Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Eric Maloney, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 329,081.00

This project is designed to improve our understanding of the interactions
between tropical convection and the large-scale circulation, focusing
particularly on the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). Three mechanisms by which
MJO convection may be linked to the large-scale circulation are to be studied:
surface wind convergence, tropospheric moisture variations, and surface
evaporation variations. Observational work includes the role played by
tropospheric moisture variations in influencing intraseasonal convection, the
importance of variations in surface evaporation in determining the character and
location of sub-seasonal convection, the dependence of intraseasonal convection
on surface wind convergence imposed by the large-scale flow, and the mechanisms
which determine the strong relationship among tropical synoptic-scale
disturbances, tropical cyclone variability, and sub-seasonal wind variations. A
comparison of model performance to observations will enable progress toward an
improved convective parameterization. These activities are to be coordinated
with the Atmospheric Model Working Group at National Center for Atmospheric
Research which is responsible for developments in the atmospheric component of
the Community Climate System Model, version 2.0.

Broader impacts

This research will support one student. It will add to the body of knowledge of
the Madden-Julian Oscillation in particular, and to the understanding of the
interactions of convection and large-scale circulation in general. The results
will be disseminated via meetings and publications in internationally-recognized
scientific journals.