* 0327609
* Collaborative Research: Matching Levels of Detail in Descriptions and Depictions of Geographic Space
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Holly Taylor, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 84,551.00

This collaborative research project focuses on issues related to wayfinding, and
is at the interface of geographic information science and human cognition. The
research addresses the questions of the relationship between verbal and
pictorial representations of geographic information, and how both representation
modes can be successfully integrated in systems relating geographic information
to users. To address this question, a theory of content and level of geographic
detail is constructed that is independent of specific mode. The research is
founded upon computational and cognitive theories of geographic information. The
main idea is that theories of information granularity can be imposed on a
'canonical model' of dual mode information, enabling inter-modal comparisons and
transformations to be made between levels of detail and information content. The
level of detail that should be presented in each of the verbal and pictorial
modes, and relationships between levels of detail in each mode, are important
areas of investigation. The theory of information granularity should accord with
human cognition, and a major part of the work will be the testing of the theory
by a graded set of experiments with human subjects. The research will be
evaluated through the construction of a demonstrator mobile 'wayfinding
assistant' that will operate using both verbal and pictorial
modes.&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the task of wayfinding in an
unknown city, using a portable, mobile, digital wayfinding assistant, with two
interaction modes, verbal and pictorial, and some locational and directional
capabilities. With increasing use of multimedia, this research will help to
formulate guidelines for effective presentation of pictoral and verbal spatial
information. The research addresses fundamental questions such as: What should
be the balance between modes of information supplied to the user? Should the
information to be represented in each mode be complementary or supplementary? If
it is necessary to 'switch off' a mode, how can this be done seamlessly, with
the same level of detail presented? The ability to change flexibly between
modalities may be especially appropriate for individuals with sensory
impairments, as well as those whose tasks require both modes operating
simultaneously, or those who need to switch seamlessly between modes (e.g. a
driver of a vehicle who must switch from a visual display to audio cues because
of the need to concentrate full visual attention on a traffic situation).
&lt;br/&gt;