* 0327799
* CMG: Rheology of Damaged Materials with Applications to Deformation in the Earth's Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 481,066.00

The investigators are exploring new methods for representing damage
&lt;br/&gt;mechanics in the Earth's crust using a continuum rheology. Using a
&lt;br/&gt;method that has been developed for understanding phase transitions in
&lt;br/&gt;liquid crystals, they are developing a new model of damage in a
&lt;br/&gt;continuum material undergoing shear flow. They model crustal
&lt;br/&gt;deformation using a fluid phase with anisotropic properties, in which
&lt;br/&gt;some elastic energy is stored according to the direction of an
&lt;br/&gt;alignment vector. The undamaged state is characterized by random
&lt;br/&gt;alignment of the directional vectors (director). Defects can be
&lt;br/&gt;introduced in various configurations with appropriate alignment of
&lt;br/&gt;the directors. In response to shear, point defects can develop and
&lt;br/&gt;merge to trigger spikes in the velocity, that is, slip events. This
&lt;br/&gt;slip mechanism, followed by subsequent healing, provides a model for
&lt;br/&gt;the formation of microcracks and stick-slip behavior on
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Deformation of the Earth's
crust and upper mantle &lt;br/&gt;has implications for the origins of
earthquakes and the mechanisms &lt;br/&gt;for plate tectonics. This study of the
behavior of this system will &lt;br/&gt;address the origins of damage, formation
of faults, fault slip, and &lt;br/&gt;healing, in the Earth's
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By developing new models of damage
rheology, this &lt;br/&gt;project will address the underlying mechanisms leading
to &lt;br/&gt;earthquakes, a scientific problem of fundamental societal
importance. &lt;br/&gt;A theory of damage in a continuum has potential
implications well &lt;br/&gt;beyond geophysics, and could be applicable to
damage in other &lt;br/&gt;continuum materials. In addition, this project
establishes a new &lt;br/&gt;collaboration between geophysics and applied
mathematics, leading to &lt;br/&gt;the development of new methods in both
fields, while educating a &lt;br/&gt;graduate student and a postdoctoral
scholar.