* 0327660
* Vasopressin Neuromodulation in Neuroendocrine Hypothalamus:  Receptors, Signal Transduction and Physiological Significance
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Margarita Curras-Collazo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2007
* USD 393,768.00

Vasopressin Neuromodulation in Neuroendocrine Hypothalamus: Receptors, Signal
Transduction and Physiological Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroendocrine
cells (MNCs) located in the supraoptic nucleus (SON) of the brain release the
peptides oxytocin (OXY) and vasopressin (VP) that are critical for hydromineral
balance, lactation, the birth process and cardiovascular function. VP and OXY
get liberated into the bloodstream and target the kidneys, uterus, arteries and
mammary glands. Local release of VP and OXY allow MNCs to participate in their
autoregulation. It has been previously determined that treatment of SON tissue
from adult rats with VP and OXY can decrease the release of the stimulatory
chemical glutamate (GLU) that mediates the transfer of information from other
brain regions to the SON. During activated states such as dehydration and
lactation these signals provoke the release of VP and OXY from MNCs and hence
the modulatory roles of these peptides on incoming signals becomes critical. In
concert with other effects of local peptide release, this level of control may
prevent depletion of hormone supply during periods of prolonged activation and
help maintain the efficiency of MNC controlled osmoregulatory and other
homeostatic systems that sustain life in land and aquatic vertebrates. The
components of this circuit are unknown and the proposed experiments will
characterize the receptor subtypes and potential downstream signal transduction
cascades involved in VP's actions on GLU release. Levels of GLU and VP in the
SON will be correlated in perfusates from SON punches using HPLC and enzyme
immunoassay. Other experiments will investigate the source of GLU release and
VP's modulatory actions. The physiological significance of the dramatic and
potentially important effect of local VP on glutamatergic transmission in rats
subjected to dehydration will also be examined. Commensurate with the PI's
strong commitment to the development of young scientists, the proposed studies
will involve the training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;