* 0327724
* Collaborative Research:  Potential Climate Change Impacts on Algal Dynamics and Biogeochemistry in the Bering Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* David Hutchins, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 237,556.00

Oceanographers recognize the importance of phytoplankton photosynthesis in
affecting atmospheric pCO2 and global climate change. Little attention has been
given, however, to the opposite question: How will rising anthropogenic pCO2
levels and associated climate changes impact algal community structure and
biogeochemistry? Climate-related shifts in phytoplankton assemblages may have
profound implications for oceanic feedbacks on the atmosphere, and for human use
of marine resources. This is because particular algal groups are largely
responsible for crucial processes like vertical carbon export, biogenic
calcification, production of climatically active gases like dimethylsulfide
(DMS), and for supporting food webs that lead to economically valuable higher
trophic levels. Increasing pCO2 and temperature, as well as changes in light and
nutrient supplies from a shoaling mixed layer and a stronger thermocline, can
drive major switches in algal diversity. These dominance changes include
dramatic shifts between siliceous, calcareous, and non-mineralizing
phytoplankton, between groups that are major or minor contributors to the
biological pump, and between taxa that produce negligible or copious amounts of
DMS. The PIs are investigating the potential impacts of pCO2 and climate change
on algal community structure and biogeochemistry in the Bering Sea, an area that
already exhibits signs of rapid climate regime shifts. Two independent
experimental methods are being used: Semi-continuous incubations, to simulate
non-equilibrium conditions due to episodic events such as storms, and a unique
shipboard chemostat system to simulate quasi-steady state stratified conditions.
Experimental treatments include: (1) Ambient pCO2 and temperature conditions,
and (2) Elevated pCO2 (750 ppm) and temperature (+ 3o C). Each treatment is
subdivided into two mixed layer depth simulations: (1) Ambient nutrient and
light conditions and (2) A higher light/lower nutrient treatment to simulate a
future decreased MLD. Levels of pCO2 and physical variables chosen were based on
current model predictions for the surface ocean by the year 2100. Phytoplankton
diversity and carbon and nutrient cycling are being closely followed in these
greenhouse ocean simulations, with particular attention to shifts between
biogeochemically critical groups like diatoms, coccolithophorids, and
Phaeocystis.