* 0327104
* Collaborative Proposal: Model Knowledge and Scientific Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2003,05/31/2004
* John Trout, Loyola University of Chicago
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 05/31/2004
* USD 90,976.00

A central issue in science studies is the relationship between evidence and
hypothesis. But science studies is not the only discipline that investigates
this relationship. Science studies has too long neglected the half-century's
worth of fascinating and important empirical literature we call Ameliorative
&lt;br/&gt;Psychology. A central finding of Ameliorative Psychology is that
statistical prediction rules (or SPRs) are generally more reliable (and usually
significantly more reliable) than human experts when it comes to making
predictions about practically important matters (Meehl 1954, Sawyer 1966, Dawes
1994). This literature offers effective reasoning strategies that have undergone
repeated and successful empirical tests. &lt;br/&gt; This proposal is to develop
and articulate a view of human knowledge and reasoning that takes Ameliorative
Psychology seriously as an exemplification of reasoning excellence. It intends
to extract from the literature what science has learned about good reasoning,
and then apply those lessons back to individual reasoners and social
institutions, including the institutions of science. The new position is defined
as strategic reliabilism: Reasoning excellence involves the efficient allocation
of cognitive resources to robustly reliable reasoning strategies. Strategic
reliabilism is an explicitly cost-benefit-based epistemology for real, bounded
knowers. &lt;br/&gt; Epistemology is the branch of philosophy concerned with
knowledge and good reasoning. The proposal will liberate epistemology from the
scholastic debates of analytic philosophy and treat it as a branch of the
philosophy of science: Normative epistemology is to be properly understood and
investigated as an essential, though often implicit, feature of cognitive
science. The PIs will bring the skills and interests of the philosopher of
science to epistemology by unearthing and clarifying the philosophical (in this
case, epistemological) presuppositions of a particular branch of science (in
this case, psychology). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel theory about how best to
reason about empirical matters, especially one that comes with a half-century's
worth of empirical support, is bound to have broad and significant impact. Here
are four such impacts: (1) The view of reasoning excellence we extract from
Ameliorative Psychology naturally suggests a number of concrete useable lessons
about how people can improve their reasoning about causation, diagnosis, and
cost-benefit analysis (among other issues). The proposal's aim is to begin to
employ the underutilized power of science to improve people's reasoning about
important issues. (2) SPRs are currently being used by institutions to make some
very important decisions that deeply affect people's lives (from medical
diagnoses to credit decisions). The use of SPRs by social institutions is a
significant (and largely ignored) way in which science is affecting society. The
project will offer a clear articulation of the principles and assumptions
underlying Ameliorative Psychology. (3) The view of reasoning excellence we
extract from the Ameliorative Psychology can suggest alternative decision-
procedures for social institutions. However, there are still many social
institutions that have yet to heed the advice of the SPR literature, including
diagnostics for mental illness, predicting violent behavior, and admissions to
graduate and professional school. (4) The predictive models developed by
Ameliorative Psychology are especially valuable for reasoning about complex
phenomena about which one has many different lines of evidence. This is a
perfectly accurate description of the task facing those who are charged with
assessing science at various levels. Philosophers, historians and sociologists
of science take the huge mass of data that is the history of science and try to
draw general lessons about the methods and theories of science. Those scientists
on grant review boards also make assessments about the promise of various
projects by considering and weighing a number of different lines of evidence. It
is ironic that those who assess science have not used methods that have the
strongest scientific support. This is true for individuals extracting lessons
from the history of science (Faust &amp; Meehl 1992), and for scientific
institutions rating scientific grant proposals (NIH Panel Report, 1996,
especially section 5). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;