* 0327581
* Data Mining and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to Investigate Public Health Information
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Arthur Dakan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 227,562.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a course that combines GIS (geographic
information systems) with data mining and statistical analysis to examine public
health data. Two graduate courses that integrate GIS and data mining will be
offered in the summer, 2004 term. The courses will be taught by a team of
faculty from the geography/geosciences and mathematics departments. The courses
are fully integrated into degree programs currently offered at the University of
Louisville. In particular, the Department of Mathematics initiated a PhD program
in Industrial and Applied Mathematics in the fall, 2002 semester. The degree
program includes a mandatory internship and 18 credit hours in an application
area. Geography and GIS can easily comprise one application area for the degree.
The instruction will include use of ArcView and SAS to examine data from real
databases containing information on health outcomes. Students will learn to
define association rules between environmental factors and health outcomes. They
will also work with clustering techniques, kernel density estimation, and text
mining. In geography, students will learn to use ArcView to construct maps using
available data, and to manipulate maps to optimize information revealed. Upon
completing the course, students will be encouraged to take internship positions
that integrate statistics with GIS using real databases. Students will be
encouraged to take additional courses in the mathematics and geography
departments to further develop their skills.