* 0327270
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Solar Energy Adoption and Diffusion in Sri Lanka: An Analysis at Multiple Scales
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Samuel Ratick, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

This research examines solar energy technology diffusion in rural Sri Lanka, one
of the fastest-growing solar energy markets in the World. Solar photovoltaic
systems produce electricity without emitting the pollutants and climate-changing
gases associated with electricity production by more pervasive fossil fuels, and
are beginning to find a niche in rural areas in developing countries that do not
have access to grid electricity. This research will discover the social,
infrastructural, market-related, spatial and environmental factors that best
explain why solar home systems (SHS) are being adopted quickly in some parts of
the country, and more slowly in others. It is essential that we understand what
factors most influence acceptance and adoption of sustainable energy
technologies in different geographic contexts, in order to create more effective
policies that better meet all peoples' need for efficient, reliable and
environmentally-sound energy services.

This project will also discover the factors that affect how different
individuals: come to know about SHS; develop opinions of SHS; decide to adopt
SHS; implement the decision to adopt SHS; re-evaluate their decision after
adopting SHS; and are differently impacted-upon by adopting SHS or by the SHS
adoption process within their community. Factors that will be investigated to
explain variation in SHS adoption behavior and in the impacts of SHS adoption
among different people include: characteristics of their personal social
networks; the level of trust in their relationships and in their community; the
behavioral norms and the strength of sanctions on behavior within their social
network and in their community; their wealth class; their ethnicity; their
gender; their occupation (or livelihood); their access to outside information;
availability of the technology; and their access to low-interest loans that
facilitate SHS purchase. Understanding the diverse adoption behaviors and
experiences of the SHS adoption process among different types of people in a
community will draw policy-makers attention to the fact that the diffusion of
this innovation affects different people's lives in different ways. Energy
service delivery programs and policies must therefore be crafted in light of
detailed information at the personal level to ensure that all members of a
community, especially those most disadvantaged, have access to and benefit from
essential energy services. This NSF-funded research not only will produce
knowledge that helps forward the interests of American companies active in Sri
Lanka and other growing solar energy markets, but more importantly, it helps
fulfill our responsibility to create opportunities that improve people's lives
in a post-conflict state.