* 0327246
* Inter-Regional Exchange and Urbanism in the Indus Valley: Lithic Source Provenience Studies at Harappa
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Jonathan Kenoyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00



Under the supervision of Dr. J. Mark Kenoyer, Randall Law will analyze a wide
range of raw materials from the ancient site of Harappa, Pakistan in order to
reconstruct the avenues of inter-regional exchange and resource access that
existed in the Indus Valley during the late 4th to early 2nd millennium B.C.
This time period is important because it encompasses the emergence, existence,
and decline of South Asia's first state-level society, the Indus Civilization, a
contemporary of early states in Mesopotamia and Egypt. This study being
accomplished through a systematic, broad-scale provenience examination of
Harappa's raw rock and mineral commodity assemblage. Unlike past examinations of
prehistoric South Asian lithic exchange networks, this study uses up-to-date
geologic reference material, modern mineralogical identification techniques, and
geochemical provenience analyses of archaeological materials to generate a new,
more accurate model of inter-regional interaction.

Harappa was a center of numerous lithic craft activities and excavations by the
Harappa Archaeological Research Project since 1986 have collected abundant and
highly varied amounts of rock and mineral debris. In addition, for comparative
purposes, geologic samples have been collected from potential source areas
surrounding the Indus Valley in Pakistan and India. Geochemical provenience
studies of selected archaeological and modern materials have indicated that an
expanded program of analysis will provide the types of information needed to
produce a map of possible sources and the trade routes used during the
prehistoric period in this region of South Asia.

Support from the National Science Foundation will be used to collect and analyze
additional geologic samples from India and Pakistan in order to create a
database for these materials that is more regionally comprehensive and
statistically significant. Funding will also support the analysis of
archaeological samples from all chronological periods and occupational areas of
Harappa so that a full diachronic picture of material acquisition and
distribution at the site can be generated. Past studies of trade networks, craft
production and subsistence exploitation suggest that changes in those activities
accompanied the process of urban development at Harappa. This study will result
in a new framework for examining the political and economic strategies of the
group or groups that ruled the city of Harappa.

The broader impacts derive from the new scientific perspective on regional and
local processes relating to inter-regional interaction and urban development in
prehistoric South Asia. The geochemical characterization database will be of
great benefit in future provenience studies at other South Asian sites and
during other periods. The resulting data and interpretive models of inter-
regional exchange and resource access can be used for cross-cultural comparisons
by scholars in the larger field of early state studies and are relevant to the
current geo-political interactions in this region of the world. The PI and Co-PI
have been involved in significant outreach with scholars and graduate students
in both Pakistan and India. This outreach has included presenting collaborative
papers at conferences, training students in sample collection and processing as
well as providing offprints and research results to local institutions and
libraries.

