* 0327487
* Colloid-Polymer Systems: Statics and Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Marc Robert, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2008
* USD 304,231.00

Marc A. Robert William Marsh Rice University "Colloid-Polymer Systems: Statics
and Dynamics"

Phase equilibria, static and dynamic microstructures, and diffusion properties
of mixtures of colloidal particles and soluble non-adsorbing polymers will be
investigated. The systems are either bulk three-dimensional ones, or they are
confined to two-dimensional films, slit pores, and one- and quasi one-
dimensional channels. The largest possible range of polymer-to-colloid size
ratios will be investigated, from deep into the "colloid limit" of small polymer
and large colloid, to deep into the "protein limit" of large polymer and small
colloid. The colloid-polymer systems to be investigated consist of colloidal
particles which are hard-sphere like (neutral or charged with a highly screened
interaction), and of polymer which is soluble and non-adsorbing in the colloidal
suspensions.

A combination of the most efficient computer simulation methods developed by
mathematicians and physicists and based on histogram reweighting and finite-size
scaling, of theory (statistical thermodynamics) and of experiment (lithography,
video microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, image analysis) will be used.

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity

The problems that will be studied are challenging fundamental ones which require
expertise in statistical thermodynamics, computer simulations, theoretical and
experimental physical chemistry, and condensed matter physics. In particular,
the powerful computer simulations proposed in this project will lead to
significant understanding at a molecular level of the subtle key issues of
soluble polymer-induced forces between neutral colloidal particles, which theory
and experiment alone have not been able to resolve. Professor Panagiotopoulos
(Princeton University) has agreed to collaborate with the PI on computer
simulations at no cost to the project.

Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity

In addition to graduate students, a large number of undergraduate students will
take part in the proposed activity, and several will make presentations at
national and regional scientific meetings and become co-authors of publications.

The PI will be involved in several outreach programs of Rice University, in
which he will discuss this proposed activity in understandable terms with
middle- and high school teachers and students, in predominantly African-American
and Hispanic public schools of Houston, those most largely underrepresented in
academia. The PI will also host several middle-school students in the summer to
visit his laboratory for one week.

The project is supported by two CTS programs: Interfacial, Transport, and
Thermodynamics sub-program; Particulate and Multiphase Processes.