* 0327696
* Genes, Gestation, and Life Experiences: A Critical Comparison of Concepts and Methods Used in Analyses of Biosocial Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Peter Taylor, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 71,670.00

SES 0327696 Peter Taylor, University of Massachusetts, Boston "Genes, Gestation,
and Life Experiences: A Critical Comparison of Concepts and Methods Used in
Analysis of Biosocial Development"

Everyone "knows" that genes and environment interact, but in this "Age of DNA"
genetics is often seen as the way to expose the important or root causes of
behavior and disease or as the best route to effective therapeutic technologies.
Several scientific currents, however, are bringing back into the picture
environmental contributions in the development of behavioral and medical
conditions over any individual's lifetime. This trend provides a wealth of
potential issues and case material for science and technology studies (STS). The
particular project proposed centers on a comparison of the questions, concepts,
and methods of three fields: Research on gestational programming, which has
identified associations between nutrition during critical periods in utero and
diseases of late life, including heart disease, diabetes, and death by suicide;
Life events and difficulties research, which has exposed relationships between
severe events and difficulties over a person's life course and the onset of
mental or physical illness; and Reciprocal causation models of IQ development in
which there is a matching of traits and the changing environments in which
traits develop so as to allow both high heritability and large gains from one
generation to the next. These fields have been selected to expose the
complexities of analyzing environmental contributions in development-in
different ways the fields complicate the persistent contrasts: inborn and
unchangeable versus environmental and changeable; and biological versus social.
The project aims to show how the fields challenge both sides in longstanding
debates about biological determinism and can also take discussion beyond the
general dictates of developmental systems theory. The impact of the study will
derive from two kinds of publications: 1) Web-based teaching material and
articles for a range of audiences in the tradition of critical commentary by
scientists and some STS scholars on genetics and biological determinism, which
will seek to stimulate deeper discussions about environmental contributions in
development. These publications will also draw the attention of STS scholars to
the area of environment and development in the Age of DNA; and 2) Publications
specifically for STS audiences illustrating the approach of entering the arena
of possible STS questions in this general area through study of the concepts and
methods used for analyzing developmental processes. The first phase of the study
focuses on the central researchers in the three fields-Barker (Gestational
Programming), Brown and Harris (Life Events and Difficulties), and Flynn
(Reciprocal Causation). Analysis of published literature will be supplemented by
interviews with these researchers on key points in their conceptual-
methodological development. The second phase of the study further elucidates the
complexities of the environmental contributions in development through
interviews with behavioral geneticists, scientific commentators on biological
determinism, and other researchers concerning their views on the three fields
and the reception of these fields in the United States.

