* 0327753
* Performance of El Nogal Building during the Bomb Attack of 2/7/03
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Mete Sozen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 04/30/2005
* USD 26,719.00

On the evening of 7 February 2003, at 8:05 PM, in the city of Bogota Colombia a
car bomb attack &lt;br/&gt;caused 33 deaths and 155 injuries when it impacted
the El Nogal Building, a recently constructed, modern multi-story structure. The
damage to the reinforced concrete structural system was extensive. Funding is
requested to conduct a 12-month effort focused on the collection of data related
to this event and to conduct a preliminary evaluation of these
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the Murrah Federal Building attack, a central
question has been whether routine seismic details required by US building codes
would result in adequate performance of structures subjected to blast loading
from car bombs and similar devices. The El Nogal experience is ideally suited
for testing that concept because the structure was detailed in accordance with
the Colombian Building Code, which is very similar to building codes used in the
US. The El Nogal Building in Bogota was designed with seismic considerations
equivalent to those required in a building under Seismic Design Category 2 in
the United States. This event provides a unique opportunity to test this
premise. It is believed that the observed containment of damage was due to the
use of "seismic details" in the design and construction. To confirm this belief
explicitly will aide in improving security of structures in the United States
and those owned by the United States in other parts of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The El Nogal Building structural engineer of record, Prof.
Luis Garcia, is currently on the research staff at Purdue University. Moreover,
the owner of the structure has made the decision to rebuild and has retained the
company of Mr. Garcia to conduct the damage assessment and to work on the
structural aspects related to the rebuilding process. Thus, convenient access to
all aspects of the structures is guaranteed, including access to the structural
drawings and design process of the original structure, to the damage assessment
operation, and finally, to the rebuilding work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Funding
in the amount of $26,719 is requested to conduct a 12-month effort focused on
the collection of data related to this event and to conduct a preliminary
evaluation of these data. The monies would be used to cover personnel and travel
expenses related to the tasks of data collection and preliminary analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;