* 0327779
* Measurements of Air-Sea Gas Transfer and Bubble Dynamics in the Southern Ocean during a SOLAS Dual Tracer Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327779&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia
University will participate in an international SOLAS (Surface Ocean Lower
Atmosphere Study) dual tracer gas exchange study led by a New Zealand scientific
team. The study aims at improving our understanding of gas exchange and their
dependence on wind speed and other factors in the Southern Ocean, a key region
for air-sea exchange of atmospheric CO2. Parameterization of gas transfer
velocity (k) with wind speed is not ideal, as there are other factors that
contribute to influence k. However, many investigators rely on these
parameterizations to derive gas transfer velocities so continuing to improve the
parameterization of k versus wind speed (or mean square wave slope)
relationships is critical for improving understanding of global biogeochemical
budgets, including that of CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the experiment, the
LDEO team will contribute the 3He data (ca. 300 measurements) to a dual tracer
experiment (3He/SF6) that will provide spatially and temporally averaged k over
a period of ca. 20 days and a region of ca. 250 km2. For this experiment, a
mixture of 3He and SF6 will be injected into the surface mixed layer at 46.67
'S, 178.5 'E, and the resulting tracer patch will be surveyed for ca. 20 days. k
can be derived from the rate of decrease in the 3He/SF6 ratio close to the
center of the patch. Depending on the wind regime during the experiment, the
team should be able to obtain 4 to 8 estimates of k over a range of wind speeds
between ca. 2 and 14 m s-1. These data will be used to test how well gas
exchange parameterizations, derived from global ocean 14C inventories and
supported by results from dual tracer gas exchange experiments conducted in
coastal and shelf area, can be extrapolated to higher southern latitudes. The
dual tracer results will be complemented by short time scale, small spatial
scale measurements of k that are based on micrometeorological measurements (eddy
correlation of CO2, and relaxed eddy accumulation measurements of CO2 and DMS).
In addition to the dual tracer measurements, the team will perform Ne, N2, O2
and Ar measurements (in collaboration with colleagues at the University of Rhode
Island and Princeton University) to understand better the role of bubbles in gas
exchange at high wind speeds. Taken together, these data should improve our
knowledge of k in the data-sparse regions in the Southern Ocean and
significantly contribute to closing a critical gap in our knowledge of air-sea
gas fluxes, thereby addressing a key element of the SOLAS science plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;