* 0328581
* US-Turkey Cooperative Research:  International: Bayesian Inventory Management under Censored Demand
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Richard Levine, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 17,599.00

0114738&lt;br/&gt;Levine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a collaborative research project involving Dr. Richard Levine,
Department of Statistics, University of California at Davis, Davis, California,
Dr. Emre Berk, Department of Management, and Dr. Ulku Gurler, Department of
Industrial Engineering, both at Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. These
scientists will study the development of Bayesian updating methods to draw
statistical inferences and derive optimal solutions in periodic review inventory
problems. The goal is to develop realistic Bayesian models for decision-making
in inventory management applications when1) inventory demands are unobservable
or partially observed (lost sales); 2) customers differ in their attitudes
toward immediate and delayed inventories; 3) demand processes evolve over time.
In the context of inventory management, the goal is to be achieved by utilizing
advanced statistical methods for modeling the uncertainty in demand processes
and incorporating Bayesian methods to update available information dynamically
during the course of operation as data accumulates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
This award will allow an Assistant Professor at UC Davis to collaborate with two
Turkish scientists, one of whom is also a recent Ph.D. This project is likely to
enhance the potential for long-term productive collaboration. The topic is of
scientific interest. The purpose is to bridge the gap between the purely
industrial engineering/operations research approach that focuses on optimization
of a given system and the common statistical approach that provides a one time
solution for the estimation of system parameters from a given data set. The
collaboration brings experts with needed complementary expertise to deal with
this complex problem. The project brings active researchers in these areas in
the United States and Turkey. The project meets the INT criteria for support of
collaborative research of mutual benefit.