* 0328383
* On-Line Games for Middle School Science:  Planning Grant Proposal for Design and Collaboration-Building
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* M Kinzie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 08/31/2005
* USD 49,990.00

This 12-month planning grant will create the foundation for a project based on
meaningful, online, game-based learning. Specifically, it will enable the
proposer to develop and validate story lines and game characters with middle-
school aged children in two summer design institutes. In addition, the proposer
will build partnerships with museums and informal learning institutions and
develop a plan to work with these partners for the dissemination, promotion, use
and evaluation of the future games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
project will develop standards-linked design specifications for play scenarios,
game characters and real-world, problem-based activities across STEM domains.
These design specifications should be of significant value for future
educational game development. Children will serve as "informants" during game
design, providing input where most effective. This involvement in the planning
process is critical to the success of the games, and should ensure the desired
"kid appeal."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The strategy of involving
advisory groups of children, including those at-risk, will allow the project to
factor in ways to engage audiences underrepresented in the sciences by tailoring
characters and activities that ensure broad appeal. In addition, the approach of
solving puzzle-like problems embedded in a game's story narrative should appeal
to both boys and girls. This project will generate a report for publication on
the design process and resulting specifications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;