* 0328247
* SGER:  Model Uncertainty and Robustness in Nonlinear Model Predictive Control for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Charles Coronella, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2005
* USD 96,640.00

Intellectual Merit:

An issue in the development of any process control strategy is the sensitivity
and robustness of the process models and the application of viable computational
procedures where the input is uncertain information or about processes or
specific events. This SGER project is exploratory research aimed at exploring
sensitivity and robustness issues in process control with biomedical
applications. In addition, a better understanding of the effects of
uncertainties and the development of more robust design and analysis procedures
could also benefit industry through enhanced product effectiveness and better-
trained engineers. New uncertainty-analysis methodologies might also be used by
regulatory agencies in the approval of new procedures and technologies in
medicine.

The main goal of the project is to explore the robustness due to uncertainties
in predictive control algorithms, ultimately for biomedical applications -
specifically exploring the robustness of nonlinear model predictive control
(MPC) in the presence of model uncertainty. Some case studies, such as insulin
delivery systems, will ultimately be analyzed.

Broad Impact:

The research has the potential to influence the way medication is administered
to patients. Drugs might be administered to match the patient's needs, rather
than according to a prescribed schedule. Applications run the gamut from
controlling insulin dosages to the administering of various drugs for cancer
treatment.