* 0328991
* Nonlinear Spatiotemporal Models for Decomposing Style Variations using Kernel Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Ahmed Elgammal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 02/28/2007
* USD 249,631.00

Robotics and Computer Vision
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0328991&lt;br/&gt;Title: Nonlinear Spatiotemporal Models for Decomposing
Style Variations using Kernel Methods&lt;br/&gt;PI: Elgammal,
Ahmed&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers Univ New Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this research is to model the changes in human appearance
(shape and intensity) due to action being performed through generative
spatiotemporal models that explicitly decomposes the variations due to the
effects of personalized style (spatial and temporal) of the human performing the
action. Learning such models would facilitate a unified framework for
simultaneously solving of certain human motion analysis problem including: 1)
providing spatiotemporal priors for tracking. Since the effect of personal style
is explicitly decomposed, these priors can be specialized to the particular
tracked subject. 2) parameterizing the personalized style effect in a way that
will be useful for identifying the subject performing the action. 3) Detecting
spatiotemporal action outliers. Inline with this ultimate goal, this proposal
addresses the effect of style variations on appearance changes in terms of
shape, i.e., human silhouettes. Human silhouette (shape) deformation is
considered as a global form of appearance changes that carries sufficient
information that can be exploited for further analysis of human motion. The
observed human silhouette at each time instant is considered as a shape derived
from a generic spatiotemporal model that can be specialized to the particular
human being tracked through explicit decomposition of orthogonal style variation
modes. Since the silhouettes undergo topological changes over time,
correspondences between landmarks (features) are not always feasible. Therefore,
the research will focus on global shape representations that do not require
establishing feature correspondences. The research will focus on the use of
explicit and kernel-based implicit nonlinear mapping approaches where the mapped
silhouettes can be decomposed using multi-linear tensor decomposition into
orthogonal factors given bases for each factor affecting the shape deformation
such as body pose, spatial style, and temporal style. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;