* 0328984
* Quantifying and Increasing Information Transmission with Data Perceptualization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Hong Tan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 09/30/2008
* USD 285,134.00

This project will develop enabling perceptualization tools to quantify, and
dependably increase the communication of information through perceptual channels
using an information theory framework. New perceptually tuned volume
visualization and haptic rendering techniques for perceptually effective
communication of both scalar and vector data will be developed. The
appropriateness and utility of advanced volume rendering and shading techniques
for efficient information transmission, and the most effective combination of
visual and haptic modalities based on data variable characteristics will be
determined. User studies will allow measurements to qualify, and quantify
information transmission for each of these components. Close work with
researchers in severe storm predication and cytoskeleton modeling will be used
to verify the utility of the work, and produce more effective tools for biology
and atmospheric science researchers.

This fundamental advancement in perceptualization techniques will have a
dramatic impact on many scientific fields, including astrophysics, biology,
computational fluid dynamics, medicine, meteorology, nanotechnology, and
seismology. The improvement in data perceptualization can also be directly
applied to applications in information visualization, such as data mining,
digital libraries, corporate management, financial data analysis, network
intrusion detection, and homeland security.

This research will also have a broader impact on the education of the general
public, undergraduate engineering students, and K-12 students through the
development of interactive learning modules and demonstrations that allow them
to see and feel thunderstorms, tornadoes, cellular cytoskeletons, and other
scientific data.







