* 0328391
* Using Speech Recognition to Enhance Communication Capabilities for Individuals with Physical Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Lina Zhou, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 415,302.00

This project builds on the PI's previous efforts, placing a special emphasis on
communications-oriented activities and individuals with physical disabilities.
The research will focus on improving user interaction with speech recognition
systems. Previously, the PI developed a novel error specification technique that
uses confidence scores to facilitate the recognition error correction process.
While earlier efforts by others to use confidence scores for this purpose had
largely been unsuccessful, the PI's initial evaluation of his technique has
yielded promising results; whereas earlier efforts relied on identifying
specific words that were incorrect, the PI's technique can prove beneficial even
if it is only possible to identify the regions where errors may exist. In the
new project, the PI will integrate confidence scores with techniques from
natural language processing, to facilitate the process of correcting recognition
errors. He will develop novel interaction techniques and models, that support
new interaction scenarios and allow for better understanding of the relationship
between users and speech recognition systems. Questions to be addressed include
the following: Can we expand existing models to effectively describe
interactions between users and speech recognition systems when error correction
activities are explicitly separated from dictation? How can we support the
process of finding and correcting recognition errors when these activities are
temporally separated from dictation? How do the abilities and limitations of
individuals (e.g., traditional users and individuals with various disabilities)
affect their strategies when completing tasks that involve deferred error
correction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research extends an
existing collaboration between UMBC's Information Systems Department and the
Workforce and Technology Center (WTC). Speech recognition can be a critical
technology for individuals with physical disabilities. While these individuals
have been shown to employ different strategies as compared to traditional
computer users, limited research has focused on the use of speech recognition
technologies by this important group of potential users. Therefore, by
explicitly investigating the challenges these individuals encounter when using
speech recognition technologies, this project will directly impact this
underrepresented group of users, and will furthermore facilitate greater
independence and new employment opportunities for them. Because a broad range of
users will be included in this project, the results will also benefit
traditional computer users with no physical disabilities. Through the
collaboration with the WTC, the PI will distribute his results via appropriate
publications within the rehabilitation community, in addition to the HCI and ASR
communities.&lt;br/&gt;