* 0328579
* SGER:  Biomimetic Wet Attachment Mechanism for Miniature Climbing Robots in Unstructured Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Metin Sitti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,993.00

Robotics and Computer Vision
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0328579&lt;br/&gt;Title: SGER: Biomimetic Wet Attachment Mechanism for
Miniature Climbing Robots in Unstructured Environments&lt;br/&gt;PI: Sitti,
Metin&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates the development of an untested and novel capillary forces based
attachment mechanism for miniature climbing robots. As different from the
currently available techniques, this novel technique would enable robust and
power efficient climbing to wide range of unstructured surfaces with relatively
high attachment forces. The proposed wet adhesion based attachment and
detachment mechanism is inspired from beetles, ants, crickets, etc. type of
insects. Design and manufacturing of the first biomimetic polymer micro/nano-
hair structures with microfluidic channels and liquid reservoir would be
realized, and its feasibility would be demonstrated. Compliant polymer hairs and
their liquid layer could adapt to wide range of surface roughness by filling the
gaps, and attachment forces few magnitudes order higher than the robot body
weight would become possible using strong capillary forces. Moreover, the
detachment of the stuck micro/nano-hairs would be investigated since the
detachment mechanism has not been completely understood yet. By an optimized
detachment mechanism with minimal forces, power consumption of the miniature
robots would be reduced significantly. By the proposed synthetic micro/nano-
structure manufacturing techniques and micro/nano-force models to be developed,
robust miniature climbing and walking robotic systems in unstructured
environments would become possible in the near future. Thus, more lives would be
saved in disasters and accidents, and we could access to unprecedented and
hazardous areas in nuclear &lt;br/&gt;