* 0328254
* Support of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) Office Operation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Jonathan Prince, San Jose State University Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Emma R. Dieter
* 09/30/2006
* USD 1,937,451.00

23 May 2003 Proposal Number: 0328254 Institution: San Jose State U. PI: Prince,
Jonathan M.

The University-National Laboratory System (UNOLS) is an association of 64 US
institutions that have research and education programs in the ocean sciences. It
was established in 1971 as a coordinating, scheduling and planning mechanism for
oceanographic facilities operated by member institutions. The majority of the
facilities are academic research vessels (UNOLS fleet), but also includes
submersibles, remote operated vehicles (ROV), aircraft and US Coast Guard
Icebreakers. The UNOLS goal is to assist in the coordination and scheduling of
facilities and shared-use equipment and provide efficient use of finite
resources. This Office is the focal point for planning, coordinating and
reporting of UNOLS activities. The UNOLS Office and Organization also promote
public awareness and support for these facilities and the discoveries they make
possible.

The UNOLS Office is supported by six funding agencies; Navy, NOAA, USGS, MMS
and DOE to provides a forum for facility users, operators and supporting Federal
Agencies to co-operate in achieving common goals for major research vessels and
facilities, coordinating efficient facilities scheduling and improving the
safety and quality of such facilities. Broader Impact: The proposed activities
address the broader community needs related to providing and enhancing major
shared use facilities for marine science and education. The Office promotes
collaboration and cooperation while addressing the research and education from
more than sixty institutions. The various UNOLS committees and the UNOLS office
engage in public outreach through websites, professional journal articles,
speaking engagements and educational outreach by oceanographic researchers using
UNOLS research vessels.

