* 0328491
* PEET: Monographic Research and Phylogenetic Investigations of the Ceramiales (Rhodophyta)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Max Hommersand, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 765,294.00

A grant in the Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy (PEET) program
has been awarded to Drs. Suzanne Fredericq of the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette, Max Hommersand of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Wilson Freshwater of the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, and James
Norris of the Smithsonian Institution, to address the need for taxonomic
research and training on one of the dominant algal groups in the marine
environment, the red algae. Red algae are of great interest because they are
common to abundant in a range of marine habitats worldwide, including rocky
shores, coral reefs, seagrass beds and mangroves; they are major primary
producers, providing food and shelter for a great number of invertebrates and
herbivorous fish. The Order Ceramiales, one of the most diversity-rich but least
understood groups of marine red algae, will form the core of taxonomic work.
Using various data-gathering and data-analyzing protocols for morphological and
molecular DNA sequence data, students will be trained in collecting, identifying
and monographing species in the Ceramiaceae to produce the first modern
synthesis for the classification of the family, and to compile the information
in a Worldwide Web-accessible database that will connect species descriptions
with images and publications related to them. This project is designed to ensure
that there will be a new generation of red algal scientists with a background in
both the classical elements of classification and the tools to further our
understanding of the red algae in the next decades. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
make many common and important components of marine environments accurately
identifiable and will train at least two doctoral students, one postdoctoral
fellow and four undergraduate students in modern systematic methods. This
research will provide a predictive, conceptual framework for the evolution of a
large number of other algal groups, as well as an easily accessible source for
identification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;