* 0328363
* FIBR: Integrative Studies of Wolbachia-Eukaryotic Interactions; Genomes to Communities and Back
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* William Sullivan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,934,718.00

Understanding how microorganisms and their hosts interact at different
biological levels (e.g. genetic, cellular, ecological and population) is of
fundamental importance. We will address this question using a widespread and
important group of intracellular bacteria called Wolbachia. Wolbachia occurs in
up to 70% of insect species and its spread represents one of the great pandemics
of life on this planet. They have broad effects on their hosts, ranging from
sperm-egg incompatibility to feminization, male-killing and induction of
parthenogenesis. We will conduct a set of integrated studies to investigate
Wolbachia-host interactions. A team with expertise in genomics, genetics,
molecular biology, population biology, ecology and systematics have been
assembled to achieve this goal. Our studies will determine the genomic diversity
of Wolbachia, genetic changes associated with host shifts, extent of gene
transfer from Wolbachia to hosts, and the patterns of movement of Wolbachia
globally and within insect communities. These biodiversity investigations will
be combined with studies of the mechanisms by which Wolbachia induce
reproductive alterations in their hosts, and the genetic, molecular and
population basis of host modifications of Wolbachia. Finally, we will
investigate the long-term consequences of infection, including the potential
role of Wolbachia in host speciation. &lt;br/&gt; Broader implications of this
project include enhancing understanding of the mechanisms by which parasites
manipulate fundamental cellular processes in their hosts, interactions of
bacterial and host genomes, and the role Wolbachia may have played in the
spectacular diversification of insects. Furthermore, Wolbachia could be an
effective means for biological control of insect pests and vectors of disease.
Our program, by addressing key questions on the effects of Wolbachia on insect
genomes, species and communities, will give trainees from high school to
postdoctoral levels exposure to both the methods and perspective of an
interdisciplinary approach to science. These trainees, therefore, will be well
equipped to explore important biological questions from an integrative
perspective. Because Wolbachia have such dramatic effects, they have attracted
considerable public interest. Research resulting from this project therefore
will be effective as a means of broadly promoting science education. &lt;br/&gt;