* 0328231
* PECASE: Photopolymerization Kinetics and Consequent Nanostructure of Lyotropic Liquid Crystalline Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/10/2003,04/30/2008
* Allan Guymon, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2008
* USD 324,085.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0093911&lt;br/&gt;University of Southern
Mississippi&lt;br/&gt;Allan Guymon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique
ordering presented by polymerizable lyotropic liquid crystalline (LLC) systems
provides a wide variety of structures for a number of potentially important
applications. The major obstacle in using polymerized LLC materials, however, is
the ability to remain and control this structure throughout the polymerization.
Typically, thermodynamically driven phase separation occurs during
polymerization, leaving little or no liquid crystalline order. The theme of the
research planned by the PI is to use the photopolymerization kinetics as a
nanoscopic probe to predict and control the nanostructure of LLC systems. Two
fundamental and complementary questions will be addressed using a combination of
polymerization of LLC monomers and LLC templated polymerizations. First, what
role do order and the degree of order have in influencing the polymerization
behavior? The photopolymerization of materials spanning the gamut of LLC phases
will be monitored to understand changes that occur during polymerization.
Factors that may influence phase behavior and structure control including
temperature, LLC phase structure and stability, composition, polymerization time
scale, and mobility will be examined. Second, what influence does the
polymerization have on structural evolution and the ability to control this
structure? Factors influencing phase behavior, phase separation, polymer
structure and anisotropy will be examined extensively before, during and after
polymerization. Results for both questions will be related forming a complete
model of the factors, both kinetic and thermodynamic, governing the ultimate
polymer structure. Tangible outcomes of this research are (1) development of a
complete understanding of the polymerization and the mechanisms governing
ultimate polymer structure and (2) establishment of the principles and methods
for the molecular level design of LLC systems with controllable and adjustable
nanostructure designed for particular applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
prevailing theme in this PECASE project will be student education. Extensive
involvement of undergraduate and graduate researchers in a discovery learning
environment will be emphasized. As a means to attract the best and brightest
students to polymer science and engineering, a polymer module for high school
chemistry is a primary element of the educational component. In collaboration
with Petal High School, a three-week module will be developed that presents the
fundamentals, applications, and research opportunities in the field of polymer
science. Lecture, demonstration, laboratory, and testing materials will be
correlated to emphasize the importance of polymers in everyday life. Virtual
labs, web-based materials and hands-on experiments will be incorporated. The
curriculum will involve extensive planning and involvement from the school
district, the university, and local industry. After successful implementation,
the module will be brought to the Hattiesburg and Oak Grove school districts.
From these experiences a two-day instruction course will be developed for high
school chemistry teachers throughout the state. Special focus will be placed on
involvement of districts with high percentages of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. The module will also be modified appropriately for
introductory chemistry courses at both junior colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;