* 0328162
* NSEC: Center for Nano-Chemical-Electrical-Mechanical Manufacturing Systems (Nano-CEMMS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Lizanne DeStefano, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Shaochen Chen
* 09/30/2009
* USD 12,879,449.00

The proposed Nanoscale Chemical-Electrical-Mechanical-Manufacturing Systems
(Nano-CEMMS) Science and Engineering Center is a collaboration between the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, the California Institute of
Technology, and the North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State
University. The Center aims to revolutionize the nation's nanomanufacturing
capabilities to position the nation at the forefront of high technology
manufacturing much as the microelectonics revolution did only a few decades ago,
and to improve the quality of life in our society in ways we can now only
imagine. The Nano-CEMMS Center intends to build on two key breakthroughs made by
members of the Center's research team, namely molecular gate technology and Very
Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) fluidic circuits, to directly manufacture
nanoscale structures and systems. The molecular gate can be digitally switched
to deliver and control incredibly tiny attoliter (10 -18 liters) amounts of
material, which is a billion times smaller than the nanoliter switches of today.
Molecular gates also are akin to transistors that deliver and control electrons,
but with increased functionality since diverse and dissimilar materials can be
delivered and molecules can undergo chemical reactions. The capability to build
large arrays of addressable molecular gates through VLSI fluidic circuits
coupled with other advances in micro-fluidics, nanoelectronics and optical
sensing, and nanopositioning carves out a pathway for developing truly novel,
scalable and robust manufacturing processes for constructing 3-D nano-structured
multi-material devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-CEMMS researchers with
expertise in manufacturing, micro- to nanofabrication, micro- to nanofluidics,
nanoelectronics, chemistry, computations, systems, operational planning and
control, and combinatorial optimization will team up to develop new
methodologies and tools that exploit chemical, mechanical and electronic
phenomena and processes for 3-D manufacturing at the nanoscale. The planned
integration of these nanoscale processes and devices is anticipated to result in
scalable manufacturing systems and assembly lines capable of manufacturing
unique devices and products for applications ranging from medical to photonic
systems. The Nano-CEMMS Center is organized to have a broader impact through its
industrial and educational programs. The Center has been structured in two ways
to accelerate the transfer of its technological and system innovations for the
benefit of industry and society. First, an Industrial Advisory Board, including
top pharmaceutical, biological, and electronic industry leaders as well as
cutting-edge industrial innovators, spanning multiple application areas and the
nanomanufacturing value chain, will advise the Center and participate in its
research, education and outreach plans. Second, test-beds will be targeted at
specific applications that can be potentially transformed by the Center's
research. Two examples that we will pursue vigorously include combinatorial
chemistry and biology assays and nanoscale organic optoelectronics; both capable
of impacting multi-billion dollar industries. Ambitious goals have been set to
ensure that the Center includes a diverse group of participants. These goals are
supported by specific outreach activities designed to reach diverse groups of
students and faculty and encourage student and faculty exchanges across the
three lead institutions. In addition, fully realizing that nanotechnology cannot
be successful without a well-trained workforce, an extensive education and
outreach program has been planned to enhance the scientific research, education,
and industrial nanotechnology workforce of our nation. The program, spanning
K-12 education and professional training, will build on existing successful K-12
outreach and education programs and will be centered on an extensive web-based
Collaboratory that will allow for the dissemination of materials across the
nation and the participation of its students, teachers, scientists and industry
professionals. A comprehensive assessment component will help the Center track
its broader impact and continuously improve its programs for increased
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;