* 0328222
* Student Research in Computational Linguistics at the ACL 2003 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2003
* Chris Brew, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 09/30/2003
* USD 21,090.00

This award subsidizes expenses of student participants in the Student Research
Workshop organized in conjunction with the 2003 Association for Computational
Linguistics Conference, to be held July 7-12, 2003 in Sapporo Japan. The
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization in the field of natural language processing and language
engineering. The Association's annual conference, which rotates among the
Americas, Pacific-rim countries, and Europe/Africa, is the major international
meeting in the field.

The workshop format allows students to present their research and receive
feedback from a panel of established researchers in the field. It provides
students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a
critical time in their professional development through feedback from the panel
and other student participants. Also, student participants will be able to see
each other's presentations and feedback, which could lead to a general raising
of standards and expectations, strengthening future student research. The ACL
Student Workshop is an inexpensive yet highly effective means of encouraging
young and upcoming computational linguists. The intimate format encourages the
student participants to begin building a rapport with established researchers.
The workshop should contribute to the maintenance and development of a skilled
and diverse natural language processing workforce, helping to produce a pool of
researchers with the scientific and engineering knowledge required for future
applications of natural language processing. It should help to foster
international scientific exchange, providing merit-based opportunities for
future leaders of the field to attend a conference that might otherwise be less
geographically diverse than is desirable for the field. In addition, by building
a supportive environment for these students, it is more likely that down the
road, they will lend a supporting hand to other students who follow.

Computational linguistics is a multidisciplinary field of increasing importance
to science, commerce, and society. This workshop contributes to the professional
development of young scientists who will lead this growing field in the coming
decades.