* 0328563
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavior Genetics and Scientific Autonomy: The Structure and Genesis of a Scientific Field
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Troy Duster, New York University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,498.00

Over the last decade or so, the field of human behavior genetics has enjoyed
enthusiastic media coverage for the often bold claims of some researchers about
discoveries of "genetic influence on" or "genes for" a wide variety of human
behaviors and traits. These claims include genetic explanations for aggression,
homosexuality, intelligence, alcoholism, and schizophrenia, as well as
biological explanations for putative behavioral differences by race, ethnicity,
and gender, such as genetic explanations for the IQ gap between blacks and
whites. Over its forty-odd year history, the field and researchers working in it
repeatedly have found themselves at the center of public and scientific
controversy. This dissertation investigates how controversy has affected the
development of human behavior genetics and asks why some working in this field
have placed group (e.g., race) differences and particular complex behaviors at
the center of their research agendas. Using a sociology of knowledge approach, I
explore the strategies employed by competing members of the field to acquire
resources, set up norms for conduct, and establish factual claims. I investigate
the ways public controversy has been both an outcome of and an influence on
these strategies. I explore how controversy has marked the field's identity and
map its relative autonomy from non-scientific influences and other scientific
fields. To reconstruct these strategies, the competing factual claims, and the
changing norms of the field, I conduct thirty interviews with key participants
in the field and analyze relevant scientific articles from the late-1960s to the
present. To measure the impact of these effects, I conduct limited citation,
publication, media, and funding analyses during the same period. Finally, I
attend annual meetings of the Behavior Genetics Association, the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, and the World Congress on
Psychiatric Genetics to observe the current concerns and interactions of field
members. The results of this study will contribute to sociological scholarship
on science, race, culture, and organizations. Its broader impacts include
understanding how social and biological sciences can cooperate more productively
to address social problems and how researchers investigating contentious topics
might avoid unnecessary public controversy.