* 0328922
* PEET: Monographic Research on Parasitic Hymenoptera
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Robert Wharton, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 09/30/2010
* USD 796,596.00

Parasitic wasps are extraordinarily diverse. At least half of the species have
not yet been formally described, and many of the 72,000 described species are
comparatively poorly known and notoriously difficult to identify. Virtually all
parasitic wasps attack and kill other insects and many appear to be quite host-
specific. They are therefore essential components in the complex food webs of
natural ecosystems and they provide a valuable source of natural enemies for
pest insects in managed ecosystems. The gradual attrition of specialists on some
of the largest families of parasitic wasps has led to a situation in which the
body of knowledge necessary to recognize genera and describe species now resides
with a very few, aging individuals. This problem will be addressed by a
mentoring process whereby trainees are apprenticed to specialists in three of
the larger, more difficult groups of parasitic wasps. Through specific
cooperative agreements, students will benefit from outstanding specialists who
oversee unmatched collection resources and whose expertise in these focal groups
(taxa) will soon be lost. Trainees will describe numerous new species and
prepare comprehensive taxonomic treatises (monographs) that will facilitate
identification and provide the essential foundation for all future work on these
insects. As monographic research heads inexorably towards fully electronic
output, comprehensive image databases will become essential ingredients. The
synergistic nature of the collaborative effort on the imaging aspects of the
monographic process provides our trainees with an exciting opportunity to
participate directly (and contribute substantially) to this development.
&lt;br/&gt; Trainees will prepare monographic treatments for approximately 130
taxa (110 genera in the ctenopelmatine Ichneumonidae and ambositrine Diapriidae
and about 10 &lt;br/&gt;species each in the ichneumonid genus Pantorhaestes
Foerster and the figitid genus Agrostocynips Diaz). A badly needed catalog
clarifying the status and generic placement of the approximately 900 described
species of eucoiline Figitidae will also be prepared. Training of the next
generation of scientists is an essential component of the PEET program, and the
collaborative nature of the project, with its diverse array of outstanding
specialists, will provide exceptionally broad training and experience for the
students in all aspects of modern, collection-based systematics research. One
postdoctoral and three Ph.D. students will be trained under this program, and
several undergraduate students will assist with curation and imaging. The
improved taxonomy and more natural classifications of parasitic wasps provided
by trainees under this program will enable better characterization and
management of biological diversity. The utility of parasitic wasps in applied
programs (such as biological control) means that this project also directly
supports research that targets a more sustainable agriculture with fewer
negative impacts on the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;