* 0328217
* Oceanic Lithosphere Created at a Segment of the Mid Atlantic Ridge: A 20 Million Year History
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Hannes Brueckner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 06/30/2007
* USD 273,000.00

Under this funding, the PIs will study samples from the Vema lithospheric
section, a flexured, uplifted sliver of oceanic lithosphere, exposed for over
300 km along a flow line near the Vema fracture zone in the central Atlantic,
and representing a time interval of 20 my of accretion at a ridge axis. This
effort builds on the finding that the degree of melting undergone by the
upwelling mantle has changed significantly through time, with short-wavelength
(~3- 4 my) oscillations superimposed on a long range (~ 20 my) steady increase,
correlated with crustal thickness variations. The PIs will: (a) Determine the
major and trace elements of mantle equilibrated phases orthopyroxene,
clinopyroxene and spinel from peridotites to refine the pattern of variations of
degree of melting with time. (b) Determine the major and trace elements
composition of a set of basaltic glasses and non-glassy basalts from the upper
crustal unit of the VLS to obtain an independent estimate of variations of
extent of melting. (c) Complete the study of Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic composition of
cpx from the peridotites and of the basaltic glasses, in order to confirm a
possible relationship between degree of melting and isotopic composition and to
help solve the issue of the genetic link between mantle peridotites and crustal
basalts, given that preliminary data show the basalts to be isotopically more
"enriched" than the peridotites. (d) Estimate the upwelling velocity of the
mantle beneath the Ridge will by comparing the mantle peridotites degree of
melting curve with that derived from the basalts or with a crustal thickness
curve inferred from gravity. Knowledge of mantle upwelling velocity relative to
spreading half-rate is critical to discriminate between "passive" models of
creation of lithosphere, and models where buoyant forces play a role.

