* 0328782
* Study Contact States and Compliant Motion Between General Objects Critical to Real and Virtual World Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Jing Xiao, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 06/30/2008
* USD 299,993.00

Robotics and Computer Vision
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0328782&lt;br/&gt;Title: Study Contact States and Compliant Motion between
General Objects Critical to Real and Virtual World Applications&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Xiao, Jing&lt;br/&gt;U of NC Charlotte&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For real-world
robotic operations involving contacts or compliant motion as well as for certain
virtual-world applications such as dynamic simulation and haptic interaction,
two important and related problems regarding information of contacts among
general objects (including robots) remain largely unsolved: &lt;br/&gt;(1) how
to obtain knowledge of contact states effectively and efficiently for handling
motion involving complex contacts, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) how to enable automatic
on-line (real-time) identification of geometrically valid contact states in the
presence of real-world uncertainties or digital approximation errors in virtual
environments to ensure valid subsequent action or response. &lt;br/&gt;Problem
(1) is particularly crucial and challenging for tasks involving a large number
of complex contact situations and high-dimensional motion, and Problem (2) is
especially critical to tasks with high accuracy requirement, including robotic
assembly, manipulation, dynamic simulation, virtual prototyping, and certain
haptics applications. This project seeks to find principled solutions to these
problems through systematic investigation of a number of fundamental issues
related to contact states and compliant motion involving general objects, which
include objects with curved surfaces, articulated objects, and certain
deformable objects. As an integrated part or derivative of such basic
investigation, the project will further study: physically accurate haptic
display of contact states in virtual environments, and general compliant motion
planning and execution in real world, as well as their related
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The general problems addressed in this
project (as introduced above) are crucial to advancing the state of the art in
several related areas and their many applications, including robotics, haptics,
and dynamic simulation, and yet there has been little principled and systematic
research towards these problems. The PI has studied aspects of the problems
restricted to contacts between only polyhedral rigid bodies. Hence, the project
represents a very significant, multi-dimensional extension with new and
substantial challenges, but not without the considerable foundation built upon
the PI's related previous work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research
activities, aside from its expected contributions to both basic research and a
wide range of related applications, will also have a significant impact on
student education and research training. The interdisciplinary breadth of the
research activities spans many areas in robotics and control, AI and intelligent
systems, computational geometry, geometrical and physical modeling and
simulation, haptics, computer graphics and virtual environments, as well as
human-machine interaction and virtual collaboration. The project is also
comprehensive with both theoretical and algorithmic components and experimental
and system integration components. It will thus provide a rich and balanced
environment that can accommodate students from all levels (from Ph.D. to
undergraduate) to obtain knowledge and research training in the various related
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will also provide an excellent
opportunity for (a) cross-discipline research collaboration between the PI and
her colleagues at the newly established College of Information Technology (COIT)
at UNC Charlotte, and (b) close international collaboration between the PI's
group and a leading research group on compliant motion control in Europe. Such
collaborations will be instrumental to enhancing research capabilities as well
as research infrastructure at the new COIT. The project will clearly enrich
student education and contribute significantly to the special goal of COIT of
providing students an interdisciplinary learning and research experience in the
broad spectrum of Information Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;