* 0329996
* SENSORS:  Embedded Software for Distributed, Smart Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Stephen Jacobsen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 289,880.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at solving one of the fundamental
problems in tele-sensing: the interpretation of information, and determination
of the system state, based on noisy and sparse data from sensor grid sources,
interconnected with interruptible (wired or wireless) communication channels.
Such situations include medical sensing on ambulatory subjects when sensor
signals are frequently dominated by motion artifacts at the interface between
the sensor and the body. The approach explored in this research combines sensor-
level signal processing with adaptive, optimal sampling of data from multiple
sensors to reduce/eliminate motion artifacts and determine
reliability/uncertainty measures for the entire measurement and data
communication process. Non-medical applications of the proposed software system
include sensor control and interpretation of data from other sensor networks,
such as shipboard sensors, automotive sensors or airplane sensor grids where
distributed, autonomous sensor ensembles are essential in increasing reliability
and operational safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to develop a method and software for reducing motion artifacts in biomedical
sensors. The method will enable devices that (a) fuse data from multiple,
networked, independent sensors in order to derive information about the signal
of interest and to characterize interfering noise, (b) use adaptive signal
conditioning (adaptive filtering, automatic gain control, etc.) and Optimal
Algorithms for data acquisition that are based on characteristics of the signal
of interest; and (c) provide quantitative measures of data quality and
reliability based on error-minimizing optimal sampling criteria. Motion
artifacts, i.e., spurious signals caused by tissue movement and intermittent
contact of the sensor with the body surface cause significant errors in the
signal being measured and are the most serious and most difficult to eliminate
class of errors in medical sensors for use by ambulatory subjects. Information
and communication technologies successfully address many telehealth monitoring
issues; however the success of telemedicine implementation depends on the
availability of non-invasive, minimal-contact, miniature, autonomous and low
power processors and software embedded in intelligent sensors, immune to errors
caused by motion of the subject wearing them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research, if successful, will have broad impact, enabling the development of a
class of reliable, miniaturized personal telehealth monitoring devices and
networks that will be used by the elderly persons, convalescent patients,
persons working under hazardous conditions and environments, and by military
personnel and athletes for physical conditioning in training and protective
monitoring in the battlefield. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;