* 0329547
* Biomedical Engineering Society 2003 Annual Meeting, Nashville, TN, October 1-4, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2003
* Robert Roselli, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0329547&lt;br/&gt;Roselli&lt;br/&gt;The Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)
Annual Meeting is scheduled to be held in Nashville, TN, October 1-4, 2003. The
goals of the meeting are to present the latest research and development advances
in the field of biomedical engineering, to provide students and industrial
representatives an opportunity to discuss careers in biomedical engineering, and
to serve as a focal point for discussions about the future of the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate student participation in the
meeting is encouraged. Graduate student research awards are to be presented for
outstanding research projects: a young investigator award stimulates careers in
biomedical engineering; a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) poster
session is included; and, a Career Fair and Career Workshop will be held. Annual
meetings of the BMES Society provide an unusually good opportunity for students
to learn about the newest scientific and engineering ideas in this rapidly
growing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the meeting is
high: the meeting is to advance knowledge and understanding within the field of
biomedical engineering. Information presented at the meeting will have broad
impact as many of the new techniques to be presented, both in education and in
research, will be applicable to fields outside of biomedical engineering. The
meeting brings together academic and industrial researchers, many of them women,
at the same scientific sessions. This promotes collaboration between these
individuals, and consequently impacts biomedical research in a broad sense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstracts of presentations at the meeting will be placed
on CD and distributed to participants and offered to key libraries. Inclusion of
a large number of students at this meeting will ensure national dissemination of
important scientific findings and career guidance.