* 0329386
* NTE:  Engineering of Nanospaces: Hybrid Membranes for Environmentally Important Separations (TSE03-P)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* David Ford, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 417,000.00

Proposal Title: NTE: Engineering of Nanospaces: Hybrid Membranes for
Environmentally Important Separations&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0329386&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: David Ford&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Texas A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to design, synthesize, and evaluate organic-inorganic hybrid membranes for
applications such as removal of trace volatile organic contaminants from air or
water streams. The membrane processes employed for these two applications will
be vapor permeation and pervaporation. Membrane materials will be based on
mesoporous inorganic frameworks with average pore sizes ranging from 1 to 100
nm. The porous spaces of the framework will be modified by chemically attaching
dendrimeric molecules to the pore surfaces. This architecture will afford a
degree of simultaneous control over both the chemistry and free volume of the
membrane, which is difficult to achieve with polymeric or inorganic materials.
Design goals will be accomplished by manipulating the dendrimer chemistry, pore
geometry, and dendrimer surface density. Organic dendrimers will be designed to
adsorb target contaminants without permanently sequestering them. In terms of
the broader impacts, the students will benefit from an interdisciplinary
experience that connects materials synthesis and separation processes. The
membranes produced have the potential to remove toxic contaminants before they
enter the environment.&lt;br/&gt;