* 0329102
* PEET:  A Revisionary Study of the Eumycetozoans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2010
* Jean-Marc Moncalvo, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 05/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract for DEB-0329102, "PEET - A Revisionary Study of the
Eumycetozoans"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. Frederick
Spiegel of the University of Arkansas to produce a revision of the
classification of the group of microscopic organisms called the Eumycetozoa.
Also known as slime molds, the eumycetozoans all have an amoeba-like stage that
feeds on the bacteria and fungi that decompose dead vegetation. When finished
feeding, the amoebal stage develops into a spore-dispersing fruiting body that
is fungus-like in appearance. Eumycetozoans are important in many areas of
biology. Some eumycetozoans are widely used in biology as model organisms.
Within the group, a number of different kinds of amoebae are found. In
terrestrial ecosystems, eumycetozoans are important predators of bacteria and
fungi. Biologists who are interested in the model eumycetozoans, those
interested in how different kinds of cells develop in closely related organisms,
and those interested in the ecology of plant decomposition all have a need to
know about the relationships among eumycetozoans and how to identify them
accurately. In the last two decades, major advances have been made in the
methods used to develop modern classifications; however, during that time no
major classifications of eumycetozoans have been produced, and the number of
experts in the group has declined seriously. This project will help to relieve
this situation by having a team of experts in modern classification methods and
experts in mycetozoan biology: (1) help to train several PhD students to be well
rounded systematists, (2) produce a comprehensive, revised classification of the
eumycetozoans, and (3) disseminate this information to biologists and the
interested public on a Web Site devoted to eumycetozoans classification and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;