* 0329609
* SENSORS: Robust Event Services for Emergency Response in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Sang Son, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

Stankovic - abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless sensor networks,
composed of 1000s of inexpensive devices, have the&lt;br/&gt;potential to
significantly improve emergency response systems for&lt;br/&gt;earthquakes,
floods and other natural disasters, as well as for&lt;br/&gt;chemical and
biological attacks. While each node must be very cheap and,&lt;br/&gt;therefore,
is likely to have limited capacity, the aggregate behavior of &lt;br/&gt;the
nodes should collectively determine the situation,&lt;br/&gt;detect possible
survivors, send necessary information to the nearest &lt;br/&gt;rescue teams,
identify a safe exit path for them, and monitor any &lt;br/&gt;subsequent events
of interests in the area. Since such emergencies &lt;br/&gt;may last a long time
and are highly dynamic; the system needs to adapt to &lt;br/&gt;the changing
environment, be robust, utilize &lt;br/&gt;the limited resources efficiently,
and meet any timing requirements. &lt;br/&gt;This research is developing robust
and real-time middleware services&lt;br/&gt;for events and message delivery. In
wireless sensor&lt;br/&gt;networks events are not binary, but are based on
sensor fusion&lt;br/&gt;from many noisy sensors in complicated environments.
Sensor data&lt;br/&gt;may be missing, wrong, or out of date. Consequently, the
event service&lt;br/&gt;must support real-time, data fusion, confidence
calculations, and&lt;br/&gt;conserve power. Events can occur in a very local
region, be global or occur&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously in many parts of the system.
The event service must be&lt;br/&gt;highly decentralized in order to work on the
limited capacity&lt;br/&gt;devices. The service must also minimize false alarms.
&lt;br/&gt;All of these features makes an event service for
wireless&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks very challenging. The ultimate vision
of&lt;br/&gt;this work is to provide a facility that allows the application to
specify &lt;br/&gt;the desirable data and events, and deliver them in a timely
manner. &lt;br/&gt;If this research is successful, emergency response can
occur&lt;br/&gt;more quickly, and be more accurate; lives can be saved and
damage&lt;br/&gt;reduced.&lt;br/&gt;