* 0329339
* Southwest Quantum Information and Technology:  2003 Student Summer School and Retreat
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* K. Birgitta Whaley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2004
* USD 19,138.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;March 21 2003&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southwest Quantum
Information and Technology: 2003 Student Summer School and
Retreat&lt;br/&gt;Ivan H. Deutsch&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;0329339&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southwest Quantum
Information and Technology (SQuInT) Network is a consortium of universities,
national laboratories, and industry with the purpose to promote the exchange of
scientific ideas and resources in the highly interdisciplinary field of quantum
information science (QIS). Under this project, the 2003 student summer school
and retreat is being held from June 15-19, 2003 in Asilomar State Park,
California. A series of pedagogical lectures aimed at the beginning graduate
students and new researchers in the field with special focus on computer science
and engineering aspects of QIS with lectures regarding algorithms, complexity,
and control theory are central to the program. A strong series of lectures on
laboratory implementations in a variety of physical settings are also being
presented. The close collaboration of theorist and experimenters in QIS is
crucial to the success of the field and a hallmark of this SQuInT Network. This
summer school is providing about 50 students from all over the country a
valuable opportunity to network and build a strong community of future QIS
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;