* 0329311
* Environmental Remediation Through Self-Assembly and Applications to Environmental Sensor Development
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Gary McPherson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

John, Vijay T.&lt;br/&gt;Tulane University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Environmental
Remediation through Self-Assembly and Applications to Environmental Sensor
Development"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop a
process for environmental remediation of aqueous streams containing aromatic
compounds. The process involves incorporating well-known technologies with new
science. Surfactant micelles will be first used to concentrate organic
contaminants (typically phenols and aromatic amines) in aqueous streams, in a
version of the well-studied micellar enhanced ultrafiltration technology (MEUF).
The next step will be to polymerize these contaminants within the micelles using
oxidative enzymes such as horseradish peroxidase. The resulting conjugated
polymers are themselves very useful in coatings technologies, and in
applications to electrooptics. The third step is to encapsulate the micelle-
polymer assembly within the pore structure of mesoporous silicas (and titanias).
This will result in useful polymer-ceramic nanocomposites where functionality of
the encapsulated materials can be utilized to develop robust sensor materials
that are photoluminescent. The encapsulation of enzymes through this route will
also be evaluated in the development of novel chemo-
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excellent
interdisciplinary training for both undergraduates and graduate students will be
provided. The combination of spectroscopy, microscopy and scattering techniques
that the students will be exposed to, will be an invaluable research experience.
Tulane University operates a unique Coordinated Instrumentation Facility where
centralized instrumentation and expertise allow excellent student training. The
PI's are fully committed to providing educational opportunities, and have a
strong record of working towards such objectives with formalized programs such
as the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation in Research (LAMP). The
research is the continuation of a collaboration at Tulane that has produced
several Ph.D. graduates and has provided undergraduate research experience to
over 10 students. From a technical prospective, the exploratory research phase
will evaluate the feasibility of transforming environmental contaminants to
useful, high value products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of enzyme
entrapment in mesoporous silicas will be used to encapsulate phosphotriesterase.
Thin films of such enzyme containing silicas will be used to develop a sensor
for the detection of nerve agent surrogates such as paraoxon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;