* 0329115
* PEET: Building Taxonomic Expertise in Cucujoidea:  Monographic and Phylogenetic Studies of the Cerylonid Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Joseph McHugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 885,388.00

Beetle diversity is a remarkable aspect of life on Earth. The beetle branch on
the Tree of Life exhibits incredible variation in morphology, development,
physiology, behavior, ecology, etc., and this diversity is reflected by an
astounding number of species. A vast amount of beetle diversity, however,
remains unknown. Researchers estimate that there are between one and ten million
extant beetle species, but only about 350,000 have been discovered and formally
described. The beetle superfamily Cucujoidea is comprised of 32 families that
have been chronically understudied and remain in the frontier stage of taxonomic
development. Some cucujoids are economically significant herbivores (e.g.,
lizard beetles), stored product pests (e.g., grain beetles) or predators of pest
insects (e.g., ladybugs). Most, however, are small, cryptic beetles that are
closely associated with fungi and decaying plant matter, making them important
components in healthy terrestrial ecosystems. A collaborative research and
training project between laboratories at the University of Georgia and Brigham
Young University will assemble a group of outstanding graduate students and an
international team of researchers with complementary skills and institutional
resources to produce worldwide taxonomic treatments of several lineages within
the Cerylonid Series, a subgroup of Cucujoidea. Phylogenetic analyses will be
conducted using morphological and molecular data to form the basis for a natural
and stable classification of these groups. The project will provide new
information about the biology and immature developmental stages of these
beetles. Evolutionary transitions in the cucujoid lineage will be examined,
including trophic shifts (phytophagy, mycophagy, parasitism, predation),
coevolution (e.g., with endosymbiotic yeasts), and the origins of inquiliny,
gregariousness, and aposematism.&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a mentored
learning environment at the University of Georgia and Brigham Young University
for the training of two postdocs, four graduate students, and ten undergraduates
in modern systematic methods, with an overall goal of enhancing taxonomic
resources and expertise in cucujoid beetle systematics. The published results
will be disseminated in scientific journals and through applications of modern
technology, including Internet-accessible electronic identification keys,
digital image galleries of specimens, digital reproductions of rare taxonomic
literature, electronic species distribution maps, nomenclatorial databases,
interactive databases of GIS-compatible specimen data, etc. Museum holdings of
cucujoid taxa will be enhanced through curation by project participants and by
augmentation of holdings with new material that will be generated through
fieldwork. This project will provide undergraduate and graduate students with an
unsurpassed educational and research experience by taking advantage of the
strengths of the PI's and their sponsoring institutions, and by providing close
interactions with renowned taxonomic expert collaborators around the world. When
the project objectives are met, a large and difficult slice of beetle diversity
will become more accessible due to the immediate impact of the published
taxonomic products, as well as the long-term impact that the infusion of
taxonomic expertise will create. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;