* 0329316
* NTE Phase I (Exploratory):  Molecularly Imprinted Conducting Polymer Scaffolds for Sensing and Measurement
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Scott Husson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,916.00

Kilbey, S. Michael, et al. Clemson University

"NTE: Phase I (Exploratory): Molecularly Imprinted Conducting Polymer Scaffolds
for Sensing and Measurement"

The objective of this exploratory research project is to develop and test a
novel method of creating molecularly imprinted polymer layers that are
interlaced with conducting polymers for sensing and signaling. The PI's will
evaluate the ability of these layers to bind and signal, though changes in
electroactivity, the presence of pyrethroids. This class of hazardous
insecticide has been selected because of its growing use in urban environments
against mosquitoes that carry diseases such as West Nile Virus and because a
common structural feature in pyrethroids offers the potential to develop a
general (rather than specific) sensor. The molecularly imprinted conducting
polymer scaffolds will be created using 3-vinylthiophene. This material allows
the growth, via surface confined atom transfer radical polymerization (SC ATRP),
the layer in the presence of the template pyrethroid; following layer growth,
electrochemical polymerization will be used to couple the thiophene groups
throughout the layer. The advantages of this two-step process are distinct: SC
ATRP permits controlled growth of the layer, and subsequent electrochemical
polymerization crosslinks the scaffold and integrates the conducting polymer
throughout the network, thereby providing "on-board" sensing and signaling
capabilities. The PI's will use standard spectroscopic techniques to investigate
the effect of processing on the layer and a variety of electrochemical
techniques to assess the response of the scaffolds to the presence of the target
pyrethroids. The PI's will compare the performance of imprinted and non-
imprinted materials to evaluate the specificity of the imprinted scaffolds to
the target pyrethroids. Broader Impacts:

This work will provide a training ground for graduate and undergraduate
researchers in areas such as environmental engineering, materials engineering,
and nanotechnology. These themes are consistent with employment trends for
chemical engineers. Through existing programs at Clemson, opportunities for
students from underrepresented groups to participate in this research, which
will help ensure that these research activities foster an interdisciplinary
training ground. Sensors based on the new scaffolds that will be developed could
be used for passive monitoring of pyrethroids in urban areas. Because
pyrethroids affect the endocrine and nervous systems, such sensors would allow
better monitoring of dispersed dosages and improve the ability of officials to
protect citizens. If these novel molecularly-imprinted conducting polymer
scaffolds prove to be robust for templating and detecting target molecules, the
approach is likely to spur new initiatives to produce sensors with "on-board"
signaling capabilities that can be integrated in broader sensor arrays, and
expand the applications for electronic noses (impedimetric sensors).

