* 0329829
* Design and Integration of a Cylindrical Ion Trap Array for a Micro-Total-Chemical-Analysis System
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2007
* USD 290,058.00

Research:

Recognizing the increasing need for highly sensitive, accurate and portable
micro-chemical sensors, the project focuses on developing an effective micro-
mass spectrometer to positively identify and accurately quantify low
concentrations of chemical and biological reagents. The objective of the
research is to design, model, fabricate, test, and integrate a miniature mass
analyzer to augment the existing chemical analysis capability of a micro-
ChemLab-on-a-chipTM. This research will focus on assessing the functionality of
micro-metered cylindrical ion traps in an array, including the detection
sensitivity, selectivity, resolution, and mass detection range. By combining
theoretical analysis and experimental fabrication, the PI will integrate this
miniaturize mass analyzer with a miniature gas chromatograph column, a micro-
thermal conductivity detector, a surface acoustic wave detector, and an internal
calibration unit, for chemical and biological sensing.

Broader Impact:

The research outcome will be integrated into two courses developed by the PI to
maximize the impact of the research, i.e., an undergraduate course featuring a
Micro-Fabrication Laboratory and a graduate/undergraduate course on Surface and
Interface Engineering. One female student will be supported under this program
to pursue her Ph.D. degree. Senior research projects and summer positions will
be offered to undergraduate students at UCLA, especially women, to work on ion
trajectory simulation to help their long-term career development in academia or
industry. Summer internships will also be offered to female high school students
through the outreach activities established by the PI to promote the interest of
female students in pursuing science and engineering when they enter college.