* 0329514
* Proteomic Analysis of a Bacterial Consortium during Biodegradation of Chemical Mixtures (TSE-03N)
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Kenneth Reardon, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 01/31/2006
* USD 105,796.00

Kenneth F Reardon Colorado State University 0329514

Assessment of Proteomics as a Tool to Improve Performance of Biological Waste
Treatment Processes (TSE03-N; Exploratory Proposal) Engineered environmental
bioprocesses (e.g., wastewater treatment, in situ bioremediation) rely almost
exclusively on microbial communities. However, the complexity of these
communities can make it very difficult to appropriately design, control, and
trouble-shoot those processes based on microbial parameters; instead, observed
chemical changes must be monitored and biological factors inferred from them.
This can lead to poor control and fault diagnosis, and does not allow
optimization of the microbial consortium involved. Over the past 20 years, the
use of nucleic acid-based methods has proven to be valuable to understand
certain aspects of microbial communities. Nonetheless, these methods have
significant limitations, primarily because ribosomal DNA analysis reveals an
organism's phylogeny instead of its function, and the latter is far more
important for engineering applications.

The goal of this exploratory project is to obtain initial evidence of the type
and utility of data that can be obtained by a proteomics analysis of a model
waste treatment bioreactor. Specific objectives are (1) to demonstrate the
ability to obtain 2-dimensional electrophoresis images from mixed culture
samples, (2) to use pattern recognition techniques from computer science to
determine whether protein markers of significant process changes can be
identified, and (3) to compare these proteomic data with 16S rDNA population
analysis and chemical concentrations. The project objectives will be achieved by
analyzing samples from a model bio treatment system: a mixed-culture bioreactor
degrading a mixture of organics that is subjected to different environmental
perturbations (feed composition, pH, and toxin), and samples analyzed for
proteome profiles, population composition, and organic chemical composition.
This research is of significance and intellectual merit because it would produce
the first evaluation of a new approach to analysis of environmental
bioprocesses, with potential to reveal new information on the function of a
microbial consortium with which to improve a bioprocess.