* 0329044
* Marine Mammal Commission Digital Library of International Environmental and Ecosystem Policy Documents
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Paul Arthur Berkman, New Media Studio
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/28/2007
* USD 433,738.00

This collections track project is implementing a sustainable single-source
digital collection of international environmental and ecosystem policy documents
that facilitates knowledge discovery, supports a "rich learning environment" and
benefits researchers, teachers, students, diplomats and decision-makers
throughout society from global to local levels. Materials for this collection
are provided by the Marine Mammal Commission based on their comprehensive five-
volume Marine Mammal Commission Compendium of Selected Treaties, International
Agreements, and Other Relevant Documents on Marine Resources, Wildlife, and the
Environment . Architecture of this digital library is harnessing the
exponentially expanding complexity of international documents with automated
technology based on the patented Information Management, Retrieval and Display
Systems and Associated Methods from EvREsearch LTD. The template for this
digital library is the Antarctic Treaty Searchable Database
(http://webhost.nvi.net/aspire). To facilitate knowledge discovery "parent
documents" are broken into "finite elements" that are tagged with information
about their: (a) unique hierarchal location in the digital library; (b) year of
adoption; (c) signatory nations; and (d) regime classification. This increased
granularity, with tags inserted directly into the finite element, enables
comprehensive database searchability. The search results are displayed in user-
defined expandable-collapsible hierarchies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An advisory
board is providing oversight and guidance for the digital library: (a) design
and implementation; (b) evaluation strategies, including the design of the
questionnaire; (c) dissemination strategies, including website links as well as
CD-ROM distribution with and without cost-recovery; and (d) management in a
manner that fosters long-term sustainability. This project involves
collaborations with the Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE),
Digital Library for Water in the Earth System (DWEL) and American Society of
International Law. The digital library is hosted and managed in conjunction with
the award-winning website at the Byrd Polar Research Center in a manner that
ensures its continuous uninterrupted availability. Dissemination of the digital
library involves website links to governmental, non-governmental and academic
websites, with a particular focus on the "Model United Nations" audience that is
represented by more than 30,000 websites on the internet. Additionally, the
digital library is distributed from the Byrd Polar Research Center and the
Marine Mammal Commission on a CD-ROM that runs automatically without
installation. This digital library facilitates knowledge discovery of
international environmental and ecosystem policy documents, and provides long-
term benefits for education activities, resource management and the basic
infrastructure of our society.&lt;br/&gt;