* 0329366
* Starter Grant: Circadian Rhythms in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Jayna Ditty, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The circadian clock is a ubiquitous cellular mechanism that allows organisms to
temporally regulate gene expression and biological function. Organisms at all
levels of biological complexity, from prokaryotes to humans, temporally organize
their cellular functions to allow them to capitalize on the environmental
conditions (light, temperature) at any given time of day. Despite approximately
30 years of study on circadian phenomena, little is known about the fundamental
mechanism of the circadian clock. Historically, model systems in circadian
biology have been limited to complex eukaryotic organisms. However, recently it
was discovered that the single-celled photosynthetic prokaryote, Synechococcus
elongatus PCC 7942, has a circadian pacemaker comprised of the products of at
least three genes, kaiA, kaiB, and kaiC. The kai locus is expressed from two
promoters, one upstream of kaiA (monocistronic message) and one upstream of kaiB
(dicistronic kaiBC message), that are expressed in the same circadian phase in
wild-type cells. Previous work has shown that KaiA is required for expression
from the kaiBC promoter, and that overexpression of kaiA enhances expression
from kaiBC, suggesting that KaiA is a positive activator of the kaiBC promoter.
KaiC is required for normal levels of expression from its own promoter; however,
overexpression of kaiC blocks expression from kaiBC, suggesting a role in
negative autoregulation. Although these data suggest that there is
transcriptional regulation at the kai locus promoters, there is no direct
evidence to suggest that KaiA or KaiC directly bind to kai promoters to regulate
transcription. Pervious work (funded by the NSF Fellowship for Microbial
Biology) identified a putative negative element within the kaiBC promoter
region, whose presence is required for normal levels of KaiB production within
the cyanobacterial cell. Studies proposed here aim to better define this
negative element within the kaiBC promoter region, and subsequently identify
trans-acting factors involved in kaiBC expression. The specific aims proposed
here offer many opportunities that will contribute to the development of a
successful independent research laboratory in the field of cyanobacterial
circadian biology at The University of St. Thomas (a comprehensive liberal arts
co-educational undergraduate university). Results of the experiments proposed
here should advance our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which
cyanobacteria tell time by identifying new components required for prokaryotic
circadian timekeeping, while at the same time offering undergraduate students at
The University of St. Thomas the opportunity to obtain invaluable training in
microbial genetics and molecular biology (using the cyanobacterial circadian
clock as a model system) by getting hands-on experience by directly addressing
the questions proposed in this grant. In addition, students will have the
opportunity to study prokaryotic circadian biology in light of mammalian
circadian model systems. Dr. Dwight Nelson, Professor, Department of Biology,
The University of St. Thomas, uses mice as a model system to study light input
into the circadian clock. St. Thomas students will have the opportunity to
investigate the scientific question of how organisms tell time utilizing diverse
model systems. In addition, students will learn the importance of collaborative
efforts between universities by working with Professor Susan S. Golden, Texas
A&M University, to annotate the S. elongatus PCC 7942 genome.