* 0329640
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Evaluating the Development of Social Differentiation in the Pueblo World: Identity and Inequality in Salinas, New Mexico in the A.D. 1200s
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Katherine Spielmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Matthew Chamberlin will
analyze data collected during his archaeological survey in the Salinas Pueblo
District of New Mexico. The Salinas region is of great interest because large,
nucleated Pueblo settlements exhibiting socio-religious hierarchies and social
identities defined at multiple scales-including both the village and the village
cluster-appeared in the A.D. 1300s and persisted until abandonment in the late
A.D. 1600s, over a century after Spanish contact. However, two phases of
settlement prior to nucleation in Salinas, a dispersed phase in the A.D. 1100s
and an initial aggregated phase in the A.D. 1200s, remain virtually unknown. The
transition from dispersed to aggregated settlement is of great concern to
anthropologists studying the development of social inequality and identity in
small-scale societies. This project provides a unique opportunity to evaluate
whether social inequality and multiple levels of social identity in Salinas are
present in dispersed settlements, appear after aggregation, or are limited to
the nucleated social environment of the A.D. 1300s. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Chamberlin's survey has gathered ceramic and landscape data associated with
specific activities in the past-trade, ritual, and ceramic production-that will
be used to evaluate the nature of identity and inequality among both dispersed
and aggregated settlements. Specific analyses will include (1) chemical sourcing
of decorated ceramics obtained in long- and short-distance trade to determine
whether settlements differ in the diversity of sources and the intensity of
trade relationships, (2) comparative and quantitative analyses of the physical
characteristics and spatial relationships of ritual features and settlements to
determine whether settlements differ in the scale and elaboration of ritual, and
(3) analysis of local ceramic production to determine whether settlements
possess different socially-learned technological styles. Through these analyses,
it will be possible to outline the development of social identities and
inequalities through time and across space and trace their relationship to the
process of aggregation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition to these scientific
research questions, this project will contribute broadly to the public
understanding of archaeology and history. The project has built close
relationships with State Historic Preservation officials and National Park
Service archaeologists at the nearby Salinas Pueblo Missions National Monument.
By providing new information on the history of the occupants of the major
pueblos in the Monument, this project will aid these organizations in their
evaluation and public interpretation of Salinas cultural resources. Furthermore,
a website detailing the goals and initial findings of the project is on line and
will increase the public visibility of the project. Publication of project
results in professional journals and presentations will communicate these
results to the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
contributes to the preservation of a valuable public resource. Looting of
ancestral Pueblo sites is a major problem in the project area. This survey has
gathered information critical to understanding this disappearing part of Pueblo
history, and vital to preservation officials endeavoring to inventory the
region's cultural resources. To this end, this project provides the first
detailed, site-level record of the extensive cultural resources in one part of
Salinas. Lastly, this project continues to build relationships with students and
faculty from multiple universities. A number of undergraduate and graduate
student volunteers, including the author, will receive hands-on training in a
range of scientific methods used in the course of the project.&lt;br/&gt;