* 0330660
* Alabama LSAMP Research Project
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Mary Braswell, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 03/31/2006
* USD 209,132.00

The Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ALSAMP) proposes
to engage in a &lt;br/&gt;research project on departmental/institutional factors
which promote retention and baccalaureate &lt;br/&gt;degree attainment in
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (STEM) fields and
&lt;br/&gt;persistence to graduate study by members of underrepresented minority
populations at urban &lt;br/&gt;institutions. The Alabama Alliance, established
in 1991, is one of the six oldest National Science &lt;br/&gt;Foundation (NSF)
Alliances in the nation and has been in the forefront of efforts to increase the
&lt;br/&gt;quantity and the quality of underrepresented minorities receiving
baccalaureate degrees in STEM &lt;br/&gt;fields. Thus, because of this
successful experience in developing and implementing programs that
&lt;br/&gt;promote retention and baccalaureate degree attainment of minorities,
Alabama is uniquely qualified &lt;br/&gt;to engage in a research project of this
nature. While the Westat Study (March 2000) did an &lt;br/&gt;outstanding job of
identifying LSAMP programs that work, the questions of why they work has not
&lt;br/&gt;been addressed. This project will be a follow-up the Westat Study and
will provide a complete and &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive picture of LSAMP program
activities. The goal is to generate general information &lt;br/&gt;that builds
on the Westat Report and logically extend this work in order to efficiently and
logically &lt;br/&gt;guide effective implementation of best practices in diverse
institutions. The objectives include the &lt;br/&gt;following: 1. To determine
departmental and institutional factors facilitating undergraduate access
&lt;br/&gt;to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers,
including baccalaureate &lt;br/&gt;degree attainment and persistence to STEM
graduate study by members of traditionally &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented
racial/ethnic groups ( specifically the keys to LSAMP success cited by the
Westat &lt;br/&gt;Study), and 2. To generalize these factors and disseminate
resulting findings and measures to the &lt;br/&gt;scientific and education
communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Alliance will employ the services of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Center &lt;br/&gt;for Educational
Accountability to assist with the research. The Center is uniquely positioned to
&lt;br/&gt;conduct the research activities of the proposed project. The Center
has a number of ongoing projects &lt;br/&gt;that relate directly to the goals of
the project. The project will begin with an in depth review and
&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of 1. All LSAMP activities at each of the twelve ALSAMP
institutions, and 2. Student &lt;br/&gt;performance data in SEM courses.
Appropriate surveys and interviews will be conducted, data will &lt;br/&gt;be
analyzed, and research findings will be published in an appropriate Educational
Research &lt;br/&gt;Journal. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit - The
project is an important step in advancing knowledge and understanding of
&lt;br/&gt;why the LSAMP programs for underrepresented minorities in science
technology, engineering, and &lt;br/&gt;mathematics are successful. Education
faculty will work with mathematics and science faculty in &lt;br/&gt;this
educational research project to find answers to these important questions by
collecting and &lt;br/&gt;analyzing data resulting from surveys and individual
interviews. The research results will add to &lt;br/&gt;the knowledge base in
educational research and evaluation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts -
The project broadens participation of underrepresented groups by the inclusion
of a &lt;br/&gt;large number of African American students in the target
population for the research surveys and &lt;br/&gt;interviews. In addition, a
large number of Historically Black Colleges and Universities are included in
&lt;br/&gt;the Alabama Alliance and the research efforts will involve a diverse
pool of students and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;Discovery and understanding are
advanced by the collaboration between disciplines and institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation and assessment findings will be documented and
disseminated to other researchers in &lt;br/&gt;education and at national
meetings.