* 0330267
* SENSORS: Multi-Anion Sensing by Conductive Polymers with Dual Mode of Signal Transduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Pavel Anzenbacher, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,990.00

The objective of this proposal is the development and study of novel, inherently
conductive&lt;br/&gt;polymer thin films that will be used for selective sensing
of inorganic anions with emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;phosphate- and phosphonate-
related species. The detection and quantitative measurement of levels
of&lt;br/&gt;phosphate and phosphonate anions is an important requirement for
drug testing and pharmacological&lt;br/&gt;(pharmacokinetic) studies as well as
environmental monitoring. The sensing of these anions, found
in&lt;br/&gt;fertilizers and pharmaceuticals, is aimed at aqueous environment
and low concentrations (&lt; 10 -6 mol/l).&lt;br/&gt;Sensor materials capable of
reacting to the presence of analyte by change of
optical&lt;br/&gt;(color/emission) and electrical properties in a simultaneous
regime will be developed. The combination of&lt;br/&gt;two independent modes of
signal transduction will improve the selectivity and reliability of the
sensing&lt;br/&gt;process. This will be accomplished by preparing novel
polythiophene-based polymer materials with&lt;br/&gt;anion-selective receptors
integrated into the pi-conjugated backbone of the polymer. The
critical&lt;br/&gt;knowledge amassed during the PI's previous studies will be
used to prepare monomers bearing suitable&lt;br/&gt;receptors and
electropolymerizable thiophene derivatives. These sensor monomers will
be&lt;br/&gt;electrochemically polymerized on the surface of transparent
electrodes. Such transparent electrodes&lt;br/&gt;coated with anion sensor
material will be used to fabricate spectroelectrochemical cells, which will
allow&lt;br/&gt;for investigation of anion binding using two modes of signal
transduction: changes in optical and&lt;br/&gt;electrical properties. The two-
mode signal transduction is expected to increase the accuracy of the
whole&lt;br/&gt;sensing process, enhance specificity and make these materials
capable of anion sensing in multi-anion&lt;br/&gt;environments. Reliable anion
sensing in multi-anion environments will be achieved by using
individually&lt;br/&gt;addressable transparent microelectrodes with multiple
deposited materials bearing different receptors.&lt;br/&gt;Alternatively,
similar effect may be achieved by copolymerization of two or more sensor
monomers&lt;br/&gt;bearing different receptor units. These sensor-coated
electrodes will be used to build sensor devices and&lt;br/&gt;will be tested in
multi-analyte environments.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is diverse. Polymer materials capable of sensing&lt;br/&gt;of anionic
substrates in polar/aqueous solutions at low concentrations are rare. Efforts
toward&lt;br/&gt;implementing successful molecular sensors into polymer
materials, which may allow the development of&lt;br/&gt;robust/stable materials
with improved performance, are therefore desirable. Particularly important in
this&lt;br/&gt;regard is the idea of improved reliability and accuracy of the
sensing process by simultaneous&lt;br/&gt;implementation of two independent
modes of signal transduction. This may allow for reliable sensing
of&lt;br/&gt;anionic substrates that are otherwise difficult to sense. The
approach of detecting the anion by change of&lt;br/&gt;two variables in a
simultaneous regime may allow for sensing of multiple anionic analytes. This
is&lt;br/&gt;particularly important because, despite the great need, materials
and devices that would provide both high&lt;br/&gt;selectivity and allow for
multi-analyte sensing have not been successfully prepared so far.&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of the broader impacts, this PI would like to emphasize that the proposed
research will&lt;br/&gt;serve for the advancement of general knowledge by
investigating novel sensor materials. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;multi-anion sensors
would be highly useful in a wide variety of applications, mostly medical
and&lt;br/&gt;environmental, for example to allow for a precise monitoring of
drug metabolization thus stimulate a&lt;br/&gt;development of novel drug-
metabolization assays. The development and investigation of such
novel,&lt;br/&gt;conductive polymers with dual mode of signal transduction for
sensing anionic multi-analytes represents&lt;br/&gt;a venture into an emerging
and far reaching area of research and technology. This PI's team will also
take&lt;br/&gt;active part in an interdisciplinary discussion focused on various
aspects of anion sensing through&lt;br/&gt;publication and active participation
in scientific meetings. Last but not least, the broader community
will&lt;br/&gt;benefit through the advancement of education thus contributing to
professional training of qualified&lt;br/&gt;workforce.