* 0330800
* SGER:    New Approaches to the Design of Fixed Order Controllers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* S. Bhattacharyya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2007
* USD 80,000.00

Control theory is at a eculiar crossroad.Much of the elegant theory developed
over the last 43 years has&lt;br/&gt;run its course and now appeals to a
dwindling number of academics,while it has generated little
interest&lt;br/&gt;from industry and is mostly irrelevant for engineering
design.On the other hand the real design roblems&lt;br/&gt;faced by control
engineers remain unresearched,lack theoretical foundation,are of a fundamental
nature&lt;br/&gt;and theoretically extremely challenging,and there is a crying
need for analytical and computer aided&lt;br/&gt;design ap roaches.Our roposal
attem ts to address this gap and to work towards its resolution.&lt;br/&gt;The
exploratory research described here deals with the develo ment of new approaches
to the design of&lt;br/&gt;.xed order and structure controllers.The need for
this research stems from the following:a)The o timal&lt;br/&gt;control theory
developed intensively since 1960 by control theorists result in high order
controllers that&lt;br/&gt;are model-based and the theory cannot handle the
constraint of .xed order,which is ever present in&lt;br/&gt;industrial
applications;this makes modern theory inapplicable to even such widely used
controllers as&lt;br/&gt;PID and lead/lag,for instance.b)O timal and high order
controllers can have severe structural and&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity roblems as
shown dramatically in the 1997 paper "Robust,Fragile or Optimal?"h(IEEE
T-AC&lt;br/&gt;August 1997)by Keel and Bhattacharyya.This a er showed that
controllers designed by H2,H ",l1&lt;br/&gt;and techniques could be acutely
sensitive to erturbations in the controller coe .cients rendering
them&lt;br/&gt;unusable.Since then no systematic solution to the fragility
roblem has emerged despite signi .cant&lt;br/&gt;activity in this area.c)An
important need in practical design roblems is to have sets of
feasible&lt;br/&gt;solutions meeting various objectives such as
stability,robustness,time-delay tolerance etc so that design&lt;br/&gt;tradeo .s
can be intelligently compared.The resent theory of .xed order controllers is far
from answering&lt;br/&gt;such questions-indeed it cannot in most cases determine
if even nominal stabilization is ossible at all.&lt;br/&gt;With the above
background as motivation our roposed research sets out to explore some new
ap-&lt;br/&gt;proaches to solve the .xed order controller design roblem.The .rst
step in this,necessarily,is the&lt;br/&gt;determination of the stabilizing
set.This is a di .cult and longstanding unsolved roblem in
control&lt;br/&gt;theory.We have recently obtained a breakthrough in two s ecial
cases.Speci .cally we obtained a mixed&lt;br/&gt;analytical/com utational
solution to the roblem of determining whether a .rst order or PID
controller&lt;br/&gt;can stabilize a given lant.Our solution can determine the
complete set of stabilizing controllers and&lt;br/&gt;shows that this set is not
convex or even connected.In view of this it is not clear how
erformance&lt;br/&gt;constraints can be e .ectively imposed.Moreover the
solution technique used by us in these cases does&lt;br/&gt;not seem to extend
to the general case.&lt;br/&gt;We intend to explore two approaches for the
general case.The .rst will be an attempt to approximate&lt;br/&gt;the .xed order
controller stabilizing sets,which are disconnected in general,through unions of
convex&lt;br/&gt;sets.We will explore the use of the interlacing conditions for
stability to generate these and it appears&lt;br/&gt;ossible that we can get a
good and tight approximation to the stabilizing sets as unions of
convex&lt;br/&gt;sets.This can open the door to the im osition of erformance
constraints and their satisfaction through&lt;br/&gt;computationally tractable
methods such as linear rogramming and convex optimization,despite
the&lt;br/&gt;complicated to ology of the stabilizing sets.The second approach
that we intend to explore is the&lt;br/&gt;use of a hybrid
Nyquist/D-Decomposition technique that we have found to be useful in simple
cases.&lt;br/&gt;This method has the additional otential advantage that it may
be ossible to determine stabilizing sets&lt;br/&gt;from frequency domain data
only thus making the design based exclusively on experimental data
and&lt;br/&gt;essentially "gmodel-free "h.In this setting achieving robustness
of the design to the data should also be&lt;br/&gt;develo ed.&lt;br/&gt;In
summary the exploratory research pro osed here addresses the design of fixed but
arbitrary or-&lt;br/&gt;der,robust,non-fragile controllers based on classical as
well as modern erformance criteria.This is a&lt;br/&gt;longstanding and di .cult
open control roblem.Nevertheless it needs to be solved in general for
the&lt;br/&gt;theory and ractice of the .eld to rogress.In the roposal we
describe some seemingly romising new&lt;br/&gt;approaches which are signi .cant
departures from the optimization and model based approaches
that&lt;br/&gt;dominate the .eld at resent.We intend to explore how far these
approaches can be develo ed into&lt;br/&gt;design e .ective rocedures.We believe
that such procedures will bene .t control engineering ractice as&lt;br/&gt;well
as academic research and hel close the looming theory-practice gap in our .eld.