* 0330410
* SENSORS:Design and Development  of Remote Addressable Sensor Arrays for Toxic Agent Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Arunava Majumdar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,532,250.00

The proposed team comprises of diverse yet complementary expertise in materials
science, biology and engineering, at Northwestern University (NU), University of
Tennessee (UT) and UC Berkeley (UCB). Together, we will employ an in-house
developed approach for integration of high sensitivity micro-cantilever sensor
elements with microelectronics platform, including RF remote addressability, in
conjunction with truly innovative biochemical receptors to add discriminating
selectivity- especially for nerve agents and toxic chemicals. Our ambitious aim
is to at least approach a complete turn-key system consisting of fully
integrated technologies, capable of monitoring hazardous environment, and
automated decision output for the threat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives of the proposed research include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Design and
development of remote integrated piezo-MOS (metal oxide semiconductor)
cantilever based nanosensor arrays for multiplexed toxic biochemical sensing at
parts- per-billion (ppb) or parts-per-trillion (ppt) levels, or better if
possible,&lt;br/&gt;2. Identification/optimization of multiplexed biomolecular
receptors via optical detection,&lt;br/&gt;3. Development and validation of
highly specific methods for the detection of botulinum neurotoxins (BoNT) and
Sarin nerve gas.&lt;br/&gt;4. Proof-of-concept demonstration of a complete and
integrated sensor system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, in
essence, defines a new paradigm in integrated sensor technology, and may provide
that much needed "giant step forward" for this important
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A concerted effort is proposed to couple research
with effective education/outreach for not only graduate students/postdocs, but
also undergraduate students and society at-large, such
as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A commitment to enhance scholarship experience for
minority students via liaison with HBCU schools, especially for summer
internship program at all three institutions.&lt;br/&gt;2. A pledge to enhance
women participation via genuine recruiting effort, coordinated with the Society
for Women Engineers (SWE). We seek to achieve 50% participation of women
scientists/engineers in this program.&lt;br/&gt;3. Leveraging the proven and
successful "Materials World Modules (MWM)" program (collaboration with Prof. Bob
Chang, NU) for nation-wide high school dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;4. Public
display module of if "Integrated Nanosensors", at the Chicago Museum of Science
and Industry, in coordination with the ongoing NSF-NSEC outreach initiative at
NU.&lt;br/&gt;