* 0330605
* FSML: Infrastructure for Whole-Plant Biology and Experimental Plant Ecology at the Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2006
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2006
* USD 160,498.00

This award provides partial support for the modernization of greenhouse and
laboratory facilities for research in whole-plant biology and experimental plant
ecology in at the Harvard Forest. The improvements to facilities include: new
electrical and mechanical systems and automated climate control for an existing
greenhouse, and renovations that will provide a multi-user laboratory for plant
physiology. The proposed infrastructure improvements will provide researchers
using the Harvard Forest with state-of-the-art facilities for fundamental
research in plant biology and ecology. The facilities will complement extensive
field sites and automated data acquisition systems used by broad user groups
associated with an NSF Long Term Ecological Research site, a DOE National
Institutes for Global Environmental Change program, and the Harvard Forest
Research Program for Undergraduates. The improvements will facilitate syntheses
of experimental work on plant structure, function, ecophysiology, and community
ecology with large-scale studies of ecosystem dynamics at the Harvard Forest.
Facilities will be used extensively by graduate and undergraduate students
involved in dissertation research, and research and training projects supported
by a NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduate site award and by the United
Negro College Fund-Mellon Foundation Research Experience for Minority
Undergraduates.