* 0330496
* SENSORS: The Exploration of Novel All-Purpose All-fiber Spectrometer Module for Scalable and Distributed Optical Fiber Sensor System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Frank Shi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 500,001.00

&lt;br/&gt;Fiber-optic sensors have become one of the most important sensors for
structural monitoring. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) based
sensors used in conjunction with a wavelength&lt;br/&gt;division multiplexing
(WDM) scheme, where each FBG sensor is dedicated to a sensor
channel&lt;br/&gt;while sharing a common fiber link and interrogation module,
have emerged as the most attractive&lt;br/&gt;approach for implementing large-
scale civil engineering monitoring systems. The strength of the&lt;br/&gt;FBG
sensor lies in its all-fiber nature. It can be easily connected to the
interrogation module by a&lt;br/&gt;fiber link thus bypassing the labor-
intensive packaging bottleneck. However, a major obstacle&lt;br/&gt;facing FBG-
based sensor technology in field deployment is the lack of a cost-
effective&lt;br/&gt;interrogation module capable of handling multiple FBG
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;Here we propose a novel all-fiber spectrometer as the
building block for a low-cost interrogation&lt;br/&gt;module. The proposed all-
fiber spectrometer consists of an Acousto-Optic Tunable Filter
(AOTF)&lt;br/&gt;implemented directly on a 10-30 cm long single-mode fiber and
an on-fiber semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;photodetector. The spectrometer is built on
our prior research experience in tunable all-fiber&lt;br/&gt;devices for dense
WDM fiber-optic communication applications. It combines the merits of an all-
fiber&lt;br/&gt;device and the wide tunability of an AOTF. The all-fiber
spectrometer is compact, light&lt;br/&gt;weight, fast, low cost and has a
performance comparable to existing grating-based and Fabry-
Perot&lt;br/&gt;spectrometers. In addition, its non-blocking characteristics
enables a distributed&lt;br/&gt;interrogation architecture that offers
scalability, interchangeability, and enhanced system&lt;br/&gt;redundancy.
Although the primary application of this proposal is on structural sensing, the
all-fiber&lt;br/&gt;spectrometer can be developed as a hand held portable sensor
system for chemical and&lt;br/&gt;biochemical applications.&lt;br/&gt;The basic
operating principle of our approach has been demonstrated in the laboratory.
Using a&lt;br/&gt;frequency-shift key (FSK) modulation scheme, we have
demonstrated wavelength accuracy of&lt;br/&gt;0.02 nm (this corresponds to a
strain of 20 ustrain) for a sensor channel spacing of 1.2 nm with&lt;br/&gt;room
for additional performance improvement. With further reduction of the filter
bandwidth,&lt;br/&gt;improvement of the packaging design, particularly thermally
stability, we aim at developing a&lt;br/&gt;prototype multi-section AOTF
spectrometer to be field tested in actual civil engineering&lt;br/&gt;structures
to demonstrate the practicality of this new approach.&lt;br/&gt;The project team
reflects a multi-disciplinary effort. Dr. H. P. Lee, the PI, is leading a group
with&lt;br/&gt;a proven research record in tunable all-fiber devices. Dr. M.
Feng has a distinguished research&lt;br/&gt;record in exploring various sensors
for health monitoring of civil engineering structures. Dr. F.G.&lt;br/&gt;Shi
brings in much needed expertise in packaging design, simulation, and reliability
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;The research infrastructure is already in place at the PI's
home institution, and the California&lt;br/&gt;Department of Transportation will
provide in-kind support for field trials on its highways
and&lt;br/&gt;bridges.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects are expected to have
strong impact on research, education, and potential&lt;br/&gt;technology
transfer. As reflected from the budget, the project is leaning heavily on
supporting&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. Based on our experience at UC Irvine, we
also expect active participation of&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students through the
campus-sponsored UROP (undergraduate research&lt;br/&gt;opportunity program) to
work with the graduate students and faculty.