* 0330713
* SGER: Dynamics of Wheeled Mobile Robots for Control: A Case Study of Advanced Nonlinear Control of Complex, Interconnected Mechanical Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Meihua Tai, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,905.00

Wheeled mobile robots belong to a class of complex interconnected mechanical
systems, which includes existing and emerging new applications in autonomous
systems in the air, on the ground, and under the water. As the performance
requirements on these control systems get more stringent, the existing nonlinear
control theories, mostly developed for general nonlinear systems, are found to
be inadequate. A possible solution would be to develop new control theories for
a special class of systems, which is yet broad enough to encompass wide range of
practical engineering systems, by fully exploiting the system inherent dynamical
characteristics. A class of complex interconnected mechanical systems is such a
special class of system. To gain insight into the underlining system dynamics
and its inherent structures, it is proposed in this SGER project to study the
dynamics of wheeled mobile robots as an example. The following problems are
addressed: (a) dynamical modeling of mobile robots considering the nonlinear
characteristics of the terrain-tire interactions for different motorization and
different configuration, and (b) dynamical analysis of mobile robots by
exploiting the inherent geometric structure of the interconnection of the
mechanical components and the nature of the interaction of the mobile robot with
the environment.

The successful completion of the proposed research will (a) lay a firm
foundation for developing advanced nonlinear control theories for a class of
complex interconnected mechanical systems, therefore contributing to the
advancement of state-of-the-art technology in high performance control of
spacecraft, aircraft, underwater vehicles and land-based vehicle; (b) add new
tools and techniques to the repertoire of analysis of nonlinear system dynamics;
(c) provide new avenues for developing path planning algorithms for sensor based
navigation, thus facilitating the transition of autonomous mobile robots from
research laboratory to practical applications in important areas of national
interest and commercialization; and (d) provide systematic guidelines in
improving or designing new mechanical platforms for mobile robots.