* 0330189
* SENSORS: Nanoparticles-based Biosensor for Direct Detection of Organophosphate Chemical Warfare Agents and Neurotoxic Pesticides
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* James Wild, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 678,563.00

Award 0330189, Simonian&lt;br/&gt;There is a broad spectrum of neurotoxic
organophosphates (OP) that are subject to widespread distribution in the
environment for insect and biopathogen control. In addition, there have been
bioterrorism threats and actual attacks involving the chemical warfare agents
Sarin and VX (also neurotoxic OPs). The potential threats of these neuroxins as
weapons of mass destruction necessitate the development of robust and sensitive
methods for OP detection that can discriminate between common garden pesticides
that pose little threat to society under normal usage and the weapons of mass
destruction that could decimate military and civilian targets. This project
explores enzyme-based biosensors, which are linked to gold nanoparticle
scaffolds, that permit the direct detection of ultra low concentrations (10-10
M) of OP neurotoxins in multi-component environments such as ground water, waste
water, food, and soil. The primary biosensor element consists of a metal
nanosurface, one or more broad-spectrum organophosphate hydrolase-enzyme
biorecognition elements, fluorescent decoys that compete specifically for
binding with neurotoxins of interest, and an optical system for fluorescence
detection. The nanoparticle-molecular interface is designed to alter the optical
properties of the fluorescent decoy when bound by the biorecognition element,
giving rise to a unique signal that changes when it is released. The development
of this technology into a family of robust, sensitive, and discriminating
chemical sensors capable of identifying and quantifying organophosphorus (OP)
nerve agents and pesticides involves: (i) the development of appropriate decoys
that can compete specifically with different agents, (ii) the selection or
modification of enzymes via rational, site-directed mutagenesis to finely tune
catalytic enzyme properties (both affinity and substrate specificities); (iii)
the development of the optimum sensor platform, both in terms of nanoparticle
properties and attachment chemistries and optical systems for light collection;
and (iv) the design of detection algorithms for robust sensor performance.
Intended applications of the proposed biosensor include the monitoring of soil,
air, and/or water quality, which will allow prompt, accurate reporting on
environmental contamination, thus initiating the appropriate response to toxic
agents in deployment of detoxification procedures and remediation of
contaminated sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many organophosphates, either in the
form of pesticides (phosphotriesters and phosphonthioates) or chemical warfare
(CW) agents (phosphonofluoridates and phosphono-thioates), are known to be
neurotoxic as inhibitors of acetyl-choline and butryl-choline esterases.
Existing methods for organophosphate detection are poorly discriminating and
technologically complex. Such capabilities are poorly suited to field conditions
and are not functionally available to first responders, military operations, nor
small companies, farmers, and communities. Thus, robust, easy to use, sensitive,
and selective organophosphate sensors, such as those developed in this project
are needed, both to protect public health and to ensure homeland security. This
inherently interdisciplinary project provides an excellent opportunity for
training of graduate and undergraduate students in technologies appropriate for
ensuring homeland security. This project also constitutes an easily understood
example for high school and middle school science classes of the application of
biotechnology and technology to solve important societal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;