* 0330806
* CRUI:  Historic Patterns of Fog Utilization and Climate Variability Using Stable Isotope Ratio Analysis of Redwood Tree Ring Cellulose.
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Todd Dawson, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 457,794.00

Fog represents a significant water resource for redwood (Sequoia sempervirens)
forests. The availability of fog for plants may depend on a number of climatic
factors, such as sea surface temperatures (El Nino events) and drought. The
objective of this study is to quantify historic fog utilization patterns by
redwood trees using stable isotope analysis of water sources and tree-ring
cellulose. This is an interdisciplinary project that links diverse fields of
study such as biology, biogeochemistry, paleoclimatology, ecosystem hydrology,
oceanography and meteorology. This study will lay the foundation for
understanding how the climatic signals associated with fog water utilization are
recorded in tree-rings. Slabs of already harvested ancient Redwood trees could
provide 1000+ year reconstructions of the periodicity and strength of important
climatic cycles. A historic record of hydrologic inputs for these trees is
critical for understanding how climatic change, climatic variation as well as
forest management practices influence the vigor of this endangered ecosystem.
The proposed research will primarily use stable isotope analysis of water
sources and tree-ring cellulose to determine current and past fog water
utilization by Redwood trees. Isotopes are passive tracers of transformations
within organisms and the biosphere. Weather records from nearby stations will be
used to calibrate recent tree ring signals with recent climatic events. Current
environmental conditions and water sources will also be quantified to enhance
modeling efforts to link cellulose isotopic composition and climate.