* 0330298
* Developing a Strategic Plan for Expansion and Renovation of Research and Training Facilities at the Gulf Coast Research Laboratory, Ocean Springs, Mississippi
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Judith Williams, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2004
* USD 24,970.00

This award supports the strategic planning by The University of Southern
Mississippi, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory (GCRL, located in Ocean Springs,
Mississippi) for the expansion and renovation of existing research and training
facilities for undergraduate research experience in marine science. Our goal of
providing the best undergraduate education in marine sciences means developing
and providing space for research projects in a designated laboratory setting
where students can run their experiments in an uninterrupted
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its initial summer course offerings in 1950,
GCRL has continued to grow in numbers of graduate and undergraduates served and
in the quality of the field and research experiences. Visiting professors and
students continue to enjoy the unique field experience, research opportunities
and the ideal location of the laboratory on Davis Bayou, facing the Mississippi
Sound. In the last 10 years there has been a growing concern for lack of
research space for undergraduate research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
believed a phase planning for this facility was needed to ensure the overall
vision and needs of visiting research faculty and undergraduate researchers are
wisely met. This award will provide funds to travel to other state-of-the-art
marine science facilities to obtain first hand information on making our
undergraduate research facility an exemplary site. Our award also provides money
for an architect to guide us through all phases of planning to ensure we comply
with the best management plans for our campus and research
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty, researchers and the architect will meet
regularly and investigate the separation of the teaching classrooms from the
laboratory space as well as moving the classrooms to a different location on
campus. The current buildings utilized for instruction will then be developed as
the research center and full time wet lab, containing running sea-water.
&lt;br/&gt;