* 0330429
* The Sevilleta Research Field Station:  Infrastructure Enhancements for High-quality Water Resources and Wireless Data Transmission
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Donald Natvig, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2008
* USD 98,815.00

Project Abstract.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to the
University of New Mexico for improving the research capabilities at the UNM
Sevilleta Research Field Station. The Sevilleta field station is located on the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) in
central New Mexico. The station provides logistical field support to a large
number of scientists and students studying the ecology, geology, anthropology,
and climatology of the Middle Rio Grande Valley. The research and training use
of the field station has continued at a high level of activity, having increased
dramatically in the early 1990s. Continual increases in the station's role in
hosting field research programs, research symposia, workshops, conferences and
educational activities have accentuated the need for several improvements and
additions in the station's infrastructure. This project will provide funds for
(1) enhancement of the field station's water supply for residence and laboratory
use, and (2) install a "wireless cloud" of radio relay systems for real-time
transmission of data between the Sevilleta station and field-situated computers,
data loggers, web-cams, and other automated instruments located across the
Sevilleta NWR study areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; These improvements will
enhance not only residence living conditions at the station, but also will
substantially improve the infrastructure capability for researchers using the
Sevilleta NWR as a field experimental site. The improved, high-quality water
system will provide deionized and distilled water for laboratory experiments and
measurements of such things as soil texture and plant nutrients. The new water
system also will provide better quality potable water for resident researchers
and workshop/conference attendees who use the field station facilities
throughout the year. The "wireless cloud" will provide the "backbone"
transmission system for current and future automated probes, instruments and
cameras that provide continuous, real-time measures of many environmental
parameters (these include weather data, soil temperatures and moisture levels,
carbon dioxide fluctuations, movements of animals,
etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;