* 0330778
* Symposium: Model Systems for the Basal Metazoans: Cnidarians, Ctenophores, and Placozoans (SICB Annual Meeting to be held in New Orleans, LA - January 2004 )
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Neil Blackstone, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 11/30/2004
* USD 5,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What was the nature of the
first animals? How have animals characteristics evolved since &lt;br/&gt;their
origin? How can we best utilize such knowledge? These are a few of the questions
that can &lt;br/&gt;be illuminated by comparative and evolutionary studies of
animals. Studies of .worms and &lt;br/&gt;flies,. the best-studied invertebrate
model systems of modern biology, have provided &lt;br/&gt;considerable insight
into such questions. Nevertheless, most recent phylogenies of animals
&lt;br/&gt;suggest that nematodes (worms) and arthropods (flies) not only may be
relatively derived animals &lt;br/&gt;but may also share some derived
characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The same recent phylogenies (and older
ones as well) generally agree that the basal, non-&lt;br/&gt;bilaterian
metazoans are represented by four groups: sponges, placozoans, cnidarians, and
&lt;br/&gt;ctenophores. At this time, sponges would seem deserving of an
entirely separate treatment, in &lt;br/&gt;part because they exhibit several
primitive features and in part because their systematics is in a
&lt;br/&gt;state of flux. The remaining three groups include: (1) ctenophores,
which are often considered to &lt;br/&gt;be the sister group of the bilaterians,
(2) cnidarians, which include some of the best-studied basal
&lt;br/&gt;metazoans, and (3) placozoans, which exhibit a number of unique and
enigmatic characteristics &lt;br/&gt;including the smallest genome yet found in
a metazoan. In evolutionary and comparative studies &lt;br/&gt;it is often the
character states of the basal taxa that have a decisive influence on
interpretations of &lt;br/&gt;character state changes throughout the cladogram.
Without detailed knowledge of the basal &lt;br/&gt;metazoans, it is impossible
to provide an effective comparative framework for animal evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;Developing a clearer picture of character evolution in the metazoans
requires both robust &lt;br/&gt;phylogenies and well-documented character states
of these crucial basal taxa. With the recent &lt;br/&gt;initiation of genomic
projects using cnidarians (e.g. the hydroid EST project and the
&lt;br/&gt;Nematostella BAC library project), it would be timely to consider
what sorts of cnidarian model &lt;br/&gt;systems should be developed and how
these systems can be used. Considerations of how &lt;br/&gt;ctenophores and
placozoans can complement and contrast to cnidarian models are also essential.
&lt;br/&gt;In this context, we propose a Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology (SICB) &lt;br/&gt;symposium, .Model systems for the basal metazoans:
cnidarians, ctenophores, and placozoans.. &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the symposium
will be to bring together a diverse group of molecular, cellular,
&lt;br/&gt;organismal, and evolutionary biologists to discuss appropriate basal
metazoan models and the &lt;br/&gt;topics of integrative and comparative biology
that these models are particularly relevant to. A &lt;br/&gt;simultaneous SICB
symposium, .Sponges: new views of old animals. will nicely complement
&lt;br/&gt;our efforts. To have a significant impact on the subsequent
development of these models, these &lt;br/&gt;discussions must occur soon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every effort has
been made to invite a diverse group of participants, including women,
&lt;br/&gt;people of minority background, as well as graduate students, post-
docs, and junior faculty. A &lt;br/&gt;noteworthy feature of the SICB annual
meeting is its emphasis on young investigators. &lt;br/&gt;Typically, more than
half of those in attendance are Ph.D. students, postdoctoral fellow, and
&lt;br/&gt;young faculty. Qualified undergraduates and high school teachers from
the surrounding &lt;br/&gt;community are also welcomed. SICB mounts an extensive
program of discounted registration &lt;br/&gt;and subsistence support for Ph.D.
students; literally every graduate student member who presents &lt;br/&gt;at the
meeting and requests such support will receive it. Thus, SICB symposium
participants &lt;br/&gt;receive exposure to a broad cross-section of the
relevant scientific community. Symposium &lt;br/&gt;proceedings will be
published in Integrative and Comparative Biology.