* 0330667
* Coordinated Planning of Field Station Support in the Jornada Basin, NM
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Laura Huenneke, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 11/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports a planning effort focused on two adjacent research
facilities in southern New Mexico, the Chihuahuan Desert Rangeland Research
Center (CDRRC) of New Mexico State University and the Jornada Experimental Range
(JER) of the Agricultural Research Service. The two boast long track records of
education and research. Both were established early in the last century for
research into desertification processes, semi-arid ecosystem structure and
function, and management of dry rangelands. Since 1982, the NSF-funded Jornada
Basin Long Term Ecological Research Program has carried out long-term
observations and experimental manipulations on a network of sites across both
properties. However, infrastructure investments have been uneven across the
facilities; in particular, the CDRRC lags behind in providing basic utilities
and services for visitors, researchers, and educational users. With the support
of this award, CDRRC, JER, and LTER researchers and other users are initiating a
joint planning program to outline and prioritize steps in upgrading services at
the sites. This will include study of similar planning efforts at other sites
with a mix of academic and federal ownerships, and the development of an orderly
plan for locating resources and investing in site improvements. Because of its
affiliation with New Mexico State University (a land grant, Hispanic-serving
institution in the US-Mexico border region), the sites also serve an important
training function for under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;