* 0330845
* RUI: Collaborative: Evolution of Host Use by Blepharoneura (Diptera: Tephritidae) on Guraniinae (Cucurbitaceae) Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Martha Condon, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2006
* USD 130,106.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Martha Condon (Cornell College, Mt. Vernon, IA)
and Dr. Susan Swensen (Ithaca College, Ithaca, NY) to test hypotheses about the
evolution of insect-plant interactions. Plants and the insects that feed on them
represent the majority of species on earth. Condon and Swensen address the
general question: Why do certain insects eat only certain kinds of plants or
certain parts of plants, and how does such specificity affect diversification?
The project is designed to discover the factors that affect patterns of host
use. To reveal and analyze those patterns, Condon and Swensen and their
undergraduate students will collect and analyze ecological, morphological, and
molecular data on newly discovered species of neotropical fruit flies and their
host plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, which includes undergraduates as
research partners, focuses on two economically important groups of organisms:
the Tephritidae (the Mediterranean fruit fly family) and the Cucurbitaceae (the
squash and gourd family). Inclusion of undergraduates in all aspects of the
research contributes directly to science education. This project also
contributes broadly to discovery and understanding of biological diversity,
especially in the tropics. Understanding factors that contribute to
diversification contributes directly to broad understanding of problems in
medicine and agriculture: emergence of new disease causing organisms and pests
is often related to changes in host use patterns. This study will test
hypotheses about the ways in which changes in host use patterns are associated
with diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;