* 0330320
* SGER: Interaction between Near-Wall Turbulent Flows and Compliant Surfaces with Shear-Stress Coupling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Dietmar Rempfer, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 06/30/2005
* USD 46,667.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0330320&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: DIETMAR
REMPFER&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTERACTION BETWEEN NEAR-WALL TURBULENT FLOWS AND
COMPLIANT SURFACES WITH SHEAR-STRESS COUPLING&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will
be conducted concerning the interaction between wall-generated turbulence and
complex compliant surfaces using analysis and direct numerical simulation. The
question of whether such interactions are possible is a long-standing and as of
yet unresolved issue. One of the main goals is to achieve the ability to design
compliant walls that can optimally reduce turbulent sound production and
turbulent drag. One of the main objectives is an improved understanding of the
dynamical mechanisms at work in such a situation. Ultimately, this understanding
then will be used to manipulate the turbulent flow such that some of its
characteristics are altered in a desirable way. The goals are to reduce the
turbulent drag generated by such boundary layers, and also to attenuate the
noise that is generated by the turbulent flow.&lt;br/&gt;If the design of a
compliant wall as proposed can successfully reduce turbulent drag, these
findings will facilitate economically attractive methods for improving the
efficiency of a large number of technical systems. The most promising candidates
would be devices that depend on or are affected by turbulent flow of dense
fluids, like water, petroleum, or other liquids. It could be possible to achieve
substantial drag reduction for ships and submarines, and it may also be possible
to reduce pressure losses in pipelines. In addition, a graduate student will be
trained in the field of turbulent research and numerical simulation of turbulent
flows, and who will be able to apply the knowledge gained in the process to a
wide variety of applications in technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;