* 0330286
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  Time-Scale Methods and Correlation Analysis for Monitoring and Diagnostics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sagar Kamarthi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development and application of novel signal
and image representation methods and time-scale and correlation analysis methods
to build effective monitoring and diagnostic procedures. Anomalies in some
manufacturing processes induce recurring traces in a sensor signal. In a
situation like this, the proposed algorithms automatically recognize the
repeated occurrence of a sub-signal or pattern of an arbitrary shape in a time
series generated by a sensor. There are several issues that need to be addressed
to develop such algorithms. For example, how can a method detect repetitive
patterns in a sensor signal when they are shifted in time and/or contaminated by
noise? A representative set of algorithms developed in this project includes (a)
the identification of signal statistics, which allow the direct construction of
a functional model, through correlation analysis, for the identification of
critical variables of a manufacturing process, and (b) the detection of blurred
or smeared surface defects in harsh environments. All these methods will be
constructed with the objective of general applicability so that several
crosscutting issues in the manufacturing and other areas can be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms developed in this project are
extremely useful for detection of component failures and unfavorable process
conditions at their incipient stage to avoid catastrophic breakdowns and
defective products. Theses monitoring and diagnostic methods have a good
potential to increase production yields by minimizing defective components,
preventing damage to machines, and avoiding idle times on machines. These
methods will also substantially improve work safety and provide better
mechanisms for human-machine interfacing. In the second phase of the research,
the methods developed in the first phase will be applied to real-world
monitoring and diagnostics problems. The information and data collected from the
industrial applications will be used for validating the knowledge generated
through research and also for building case studies for classroom
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;