* 0330568
* NMI:  Instruments and Sensors as Network Services: Instruments as First Class Members of the Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* John Huffman, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,587,299.00

This proposal researches a Common Instrument Middleware Architecture
(CIMA)&lt;br/&gt;to improve accessibility of instruments and to facilitate their
integration into the Grid. The proposed middleware will be based on current Grid
implementation standards and accessible through platform independent standards
such as the Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) and the Common Component
Architecture (CCA). Emphasis will be placed on supporting a variety of
instrument and controller types including creating a small implementation that
can be used with tiny wireless controllers such as the Berkeley Mote sensor
package as well as embedded PC-104- and VME-based controller systems. The
proposed CIMA implementation will be evaluated in three settings representing a
spectrum of shared instrument applications: X-ray crystallography at a
synchrotron source, real-time acquisition of network performance data with
embedded monitors, and small sensor network nodes using Berkeley Mote wireless
sensors. The end product will be a consistent and reusable framework for
including shared instrument resources in geographically distributed
Grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact and intellectual merit. The proposed
work will have important ramifications in the development of many instrument-
driven Grid computing projects, and by extension, to many science education
programs. Further implications exist for the development of industrial standards
for networking instruments and international e-Science collaborations, as well
as developing and evaluating new ubiquitous computing methodologies. The co-PI's
are active in the Global Grid Forum, the DoE CCA Forum, and other Grid and HPC
standards efforts, and together with industrial and DoD projects these will be
used to evolve and promulgate the results of the proposed work. The co- PI's
also have a track record of mentoring students from underrepresented groups, and
have education projects at all levels from K-12 to
postdoctoral.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;