* 0330224
* Sensors:      High Bandwidth and  Minimally Invasive  Micro-Cantilever Sensing Based on Transient Dynamics and Thermal Noise Effects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Murti Salapaka, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,686.00

&lt;br/&gt;One of the most promising technologies that has evolved in the last
decade that provides atomic precision is based on the micro-cantilever. Indeed,
these devices were amongst the first to demonstrate the feasibility of
nanotechnology. Micro-cantilever based devices have revolutionized interrogation
control and manipulation of matter at the nanoscale. However, the vast potential
of such devices is far from being harnessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal we will develop an innovative scheme where the micro-cantilever
transient is effectively employed to obtain microsecond time scales for sample
investigation. This new method called transient signal imaging will be several
orders of magnitude faster with all the desirable features of the present
dynamic mode. This will provide the first micro cantilever method of
investigation of dynamics at the nanoscale with microsecond temporal
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In many proposed applications of the micro-
cantilever based sensing, like single electron spin detection where the aim is
to detect a single electron spin at room temperature, it is imperative that the
sensing does not disturb the phenomenon being observed. Another key feature of
such studies is that the forces are often localized and could evolve over
relatively large time scales. An innovative aspect of the proposal is a thermal
noise based scheme that leads to a minimally invasive way of interrogation over
relatively large time scales. The high sensitivity will be achieved by
maintaining Angstrom scale tip-sample distances and by controlling the
cantilever tip to be in the gentler attractive regime of the tip-sample
interaction potential. This is achieved by estimating the equivalent frequency
of the microcantilever from its thermal noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To aid the
innovative methods to be developed in the proposed investigation we present
a&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive experimental setup which can be utilized to obtain
multi-mode models of the micro-cantilever. Such an instrument is crucial to the
development of the transient signal imaging and will be used to validate and
suggest future strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this proposal are significant. Micro-cantilevers are being used in diverse
areas with increasing impact and have influenced science in a fundamental
manner. The two methods are enabling technologies and will open doors for
investigating basic science issues by providing ultra-high bandwidth and
resolution. The innovative contributions of the proposals will directly impact
most aspects of scanning probe microscopy, as the proposed methods apply to most
of the existing setups. The experimental aspects of the proposed research will
be accomplished in collaboration with Asylum Research a leading biology related
scanning probe microscope (SPM) company. This collaboration is expected to
foster transfer of the theory and technology developed in this program between
the academic institution of the PI and the SPM
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;