* 0331404
* ME: Metabolic Engineering of Anthocyanin Production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Mattheos Koffas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/2006
* USD 142,001.00

This exploratory project will focus on two targets: 1. Elucidate the enzymatic
properties of proteins involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis, and 2. Construct
and achieve the heterologous expression of the anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway
that leads from flavanones and phenylalanine to the first stable colored
anthocyanin, anthocyanidin 3-glucoside (flavylium ion) in yeast. The primary
goal in the first target is the enzyme dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR) that
converts dihydroflavonols to leucoanthocyanidins. The reasons why this enzyme is
perhaps the most important and intriguing in the whole anthocyanin pathway are:
(i) it does not functionally express in Escherichia coli (but expresses in
yeast), (ii) it can utilize various other substrates, such as flavanones and
even anthocyanidins and (iii) it is one of the few flavonoid biosynthesis
enzymes that appears in the genome of prokaryotic species. The Principal
Investigator (PI) now has experimental evidence showing that plant and
prokaryotic dfr genes successfully translate into protein that appears in the
cytoplasm of Escherichia coli. That eliminates the possibility of codon usage
problems and inclusion body formation suggested by other researchers in the very
recent past. The PI is currently working on the enzymatic characterization of
the recombinant proteins using E. coli and yeast crude extracts and
permeabilized cells, and is also working on elucidating possible post-
translational modifications this enzyme might be undergoing in yeast (where it
appears to be functional), such as glycosylation and phosphorylation. The goal
on the second target is the construction of a functional anthocyanin
biosynthesis pathway in yeast. The PI now has available in his lab a complete
set of four genes from various plants that convert flavanones (naringenin) to
anthocyanin, and will be putting these four genes together in yeast and
investigate the conversion of naringenin (provided in the fermentation medium)
to anthocyanidin 3-glucoside. In addition the PI will be acquiring the complete
set of five genes that convert phenylalanine to naringenin in Arabidopsis
thaliana (provided by the RIKEN and Kazusa Research Institutes in Japan). The
pathway construction will be achieved by homologous recombination using plasmid
and chromosome integration.