* 0331864
* SGER:  Self-Assembled Nanowires for Spin Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Gary Mankey, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 04/30/2005
* USD 75,288.00

The promise of producing a paradigm shift from traditional semiconductor devices
to spin dependent devices to meet the sensing and storage demands of information
technology in the 21st Century sets the criterion of combining spin electronics
with nanoscience. To meet this criterion we offer a new method of fabricating
nanowires using a self-assembly technique, while utilizing novel techniques to
characterize arrays of nanowires. The spin transport properties of devices
fabricated from self-assembled crystalline nanowire arrays will be studied to
gain physical insight into the fundamental processes governing their
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a high-risk research activity, since the
application of self-assembly to fabrication of spin electronic devices is
untested. It is a high-payoff research activity, because a demonstration of the
viability of this fabrication technique would enable experimenters a wider range
of possible device configurations. Combining spin electronics and nanostructure
fabrication techniques is essential for the development of technologically
relevant devices and the technique of self-assembly is an enabling tool for
making this combination possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan builds
on the newly developed self-assembly process of glancing angle deposition to
produce crystalline nanowire arrays which have spin valves incorporated in them.
The research plan thrusts are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oNanofabrication of
crystalline multilayered nanowires by self-assembly.&lt;br/&gt;oNanocircuit
fabrication and performance testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These thrusts involve
the application of advanced experimental techniques in which we have
demonstrated expertise. The long-term goal of this research project is to
investigate the details of the recently discovered spin transfer effect by
studying the spin transport properties of nanoscale spin electronic devices. The
first step toward realizing the potential of this fabrication technique is
producing a magnetic field sensor that incorporates self-assembled nanowires in
the sensing element. The main technical goal of this one-year activity will be
to take the first step. Successful fabrication of a working magnetic field
sensor incorporating self-assembled nanowires will represent a significant
advancement in the field of spin electronics and lead the way toward fabricating
more complex structures using this promising technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity include instructing and
training the students and researchers involved in this technology development.
The objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oEnhancing the graduate education
program.&lt;br/&gt;oEncouraging active participation in the research by
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;oEnlightening researchers of spin transport
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives originated from the mission of
the Center for Materials for Information Technology at the University of
Alabama, and progress toward them greatly enhances the research goals by
insuring that the experiences are shared. The two graduate students working on
this project will experience the excitement of working toward a goal that offers
the opportunity of producing a breakthrough in nanofabrication and spin
electronics technology development.&lt;br/&gt;