* 0331333
* ME:  Collaborative Research:  Metabolic Engineering of Floral Scent
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* David Rhodes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 09/30/2007
* USD 344,976.00

Floral scent is an important character for both crop plants and ornamentals.
Floral scent in insect-pollinated, agronomically important plants is crucial for
seed and fruit set. For ornamental plants, scent increases the plant's aesthetic
value, thus directly benefiting consumers. Recent advances in the isolation of
scent biosynthetic genes have opened up the possibility for the genetic
manipulation of floral scent. The long-term goal of this research is to use
tools of metabolic engineering in combination with metabolic flux analysis and
modeling to improve and enhance floral scent in ornamental and cut flowers. Two
different approaches will be used to achieve this goal: increasing the amount of
pre-existing scent compounds by shifting the metabolic flux, and introducing new
scent compounds into the floral scent bouquet. The research is expected to
provide a quantitative description of the metabolic networks involved in scent
production in petunia and carnation, and uncover the effects of targeted
metabolic engineering on steady-state levels of metabolites and fluxes in the
pathways. The integration of targeted metabolic engineering with metabolic flux
analysis will provide a comprehensive understanding of the regulation of floral
scent production in plants. Moreover, this research will fill important gaps in
our understanding of floral metabolism in general, and provide powerful modeling
tools for general use in the engineering of plant metabolic pathways. The
research will also build a foundation for the future metabolic engineering of
floral scent of crop plants cultivated for their seed, forage, or food value,
with the purpose of increasing their attractiveness to pollinators and thus
ensuring efficient pollination. In addition, the project will provide a
significant multidisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as postdoctoral associates, including women and minorities, in plant
physiology, in vivo isotopic labeling, analytical biochemistry, molecular
biology, genetics and integrative modeling. The information and methodologies
obtained in this project on secondary metabolism, metabolic engineering, and
integrative modeling will be incorporated via WebCT into existing courses at
Purdue University and the University of Michigan.