* 0331752
* Membrane-delimited Modulation of Ionotropic Glutamate Receptor Channels by Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Shan Ping Yu, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 04/30/2004
* USD 19,160.00

Abstract: Yu, Shan Ping Membrane-delimited Modulation of Ionotropic Glutamate
Receptors by Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors In the brain, the major excitatory
neurotransmitter released by nerve terminals is glutamate. Glutamate can act on
two types of proteins or receptors on the cell membrane: ionotropic glutamate
receptors (or NMDA, AMPA/kainate receptors categorized according to specific
agonists) and metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). NMDA and AMPA/kainate
receptors are associated with ion permeable channels while mGluRs affect several
intracellular signal systems; these two receptor families play critical roles in
neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity, as well as in neuronal cell death
(excitotoxicity). The proposed investigation will test the hypothesis that
selective activation of mGluR subtypes 1/5 can suppress NMDA receptor activities
by a mechanism involving a G protein that acts independently of diffusible
second messengers. This type of ion channel modulation has been called membrane-
delimited modulation, because it can be observed in small membrane pieces
excised from intact cells. It is proposed that this membrane-delimited
modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors may provide a unique way of local
regulation of synaptic transmission and excitotoxicity. The investigators will
characterize the membrane-delimited modulation of NMDA and AMPA/kainate
receptors by specific mGluRs and study the crucial mediating role of G proteins
and their subunits. Ion channel activities will be examined using whole-cell and
single-channel recordings in cultured cortical, hippocampal neurons, and
glutamate-receptor-transfected HEK293 cells. Three specific aims will be
investigated: 1) Membrane-delimited modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors
by specific mGluRs 2) Effect of mGluR activation on ionotropic glutamate
receptor single channel currents 3) Role of G proteins in the mGluR-induced
membrane-delimited modulation of ionotropic glutamate receptors. By
accomplishing these aims, scientist will be able to understand better how those
two types of glutamate receptors can communicate after concurrent stimulation by
the neurotransmitter glutamate.