* 0331047
* An Integrated Computational Framework for Optimally Allocating Diversity in Directed Evolution Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,743.00

The Principal Investigator's (PI) research plan proposes an integrated
computational framework that will aid in enhancing the portion of combinatorial
DNA libraries, generated through directed evolution methods, that codes for
proteins with the desired functionality. By linking genomic information in the
form of protein family member sequence data with predictive modeling frameworks,
the presence of improved protein hybrid phenotypes in the combinatorial
libraries will be enhanced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directed evolution methods
rely on the mixing of genetic material between an original small library of DNA
sequences through recombination and/or mutagenesis. This diversity generating
step produces a new expanded library spanning a much wider range of DNA sequence
space.&lt;br/&gt;Many directed evolution success stories have been reported,
ranging from peptide therapeutics to industrial enzymes. It is widely accepted
that screening is the most expensive, time consuming, labor intensive and thus
limiting step in directed evolution studies. This project will help alleviate
this bottleneck to discovery in the fertile area of combinatorial protein
engineering. By boosting the percentage of functional members in the
combinatorial library, the chances of identifying novel proteins will be
substantially improved while simultaneously reducing the extent of
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;