* 0331124
* NSF/Sandia:  Atomistic-Based Continuum Models of Micro- and Nano-Scale Engineered Systems/Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* YongGang Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

Nanotechnologies have been recognized as a key technological area critical to
the economic well-being of the United States in the 21st century, with
potentials of unparalleled improvement in our future standard of living. To
realize the potential benefits of nanotechnologies, however, one must develop
enabling technologies to scale up the nano-scopic components to micro/meso-
scopic products and beyond. This project assembles a multidisciplinary research
team with complementary expertise to investigate integrated processing,
manufacturing and modeling issues of a class of very important engineering
material for nanotechnologies Carbon nanotube composites. The goal of this work
is to use the atomistic-based continuum models to investigate the properties and
manufacturability of carbon nanotube composites. The proposed research program
includes three main thrust areas: i) studying the processing and
characterization of nanotube-polymer composites; ii) exploring the applicability
of various manufacturing techniques for these composites; and iii) developing
multiscale, atomistic-based models for processing, manufacturing, and mechanical
properties of nanotube composites. The research project is expected to produce
physically sound models that can be used to study the manufacturability and
properties of nanotube composites, and to address the critical issues related to
processing and manufacturing of nanotube composites.

Many potential benefits may accrue from this research. At present, there is very
limited understanding of the manufacturability of ultra-hard, nano-materials.
The proposed study, through understanding of the mechanisms of material removal
and the role of Carbon Nanotubes during the machining process, combined with
multi-scale modeling efforts, will provide guidelines for Carbon Nanotubes
composite processing to enhance both the mechanical properties and the
manufacturability of the composites. The mechanics analysis will give rise to
powerful tools to link nano-structures to the macroscopic behavior of the
material. The results of the proposed research could also be used to model
performance of Carbon Nanotubes composites in future applications, such critical
load-carrying components in aerospace industry, medical and bio-medical devices.
In addition to the research activities, the proposed program contains a
comprehensive educational plan. The educational plan aims at the broader
objective of training and educating graduate and undergraduate students, K-12
school teachers, and the general public on potentials and issues of nanoscale
science and engineering and nano-manufacturing. Specifically, the program
highlights efforts to train next generation leaders in nano-manufacturing; to
involve middle school and high school teachers in the research through Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) program as a vehicle to reach out to K-12
students; to boost participation of members of underrepresented groups by
partnering with women and minority student organizations on campus; and to
educate the general public about the opportunities and implications of nano-
science and engineering by participating in the annual Engineering Open House
program. Furthermore, the proposed educational program is expected to
significantly stimulate younger generation's interests in this emerging field,
and to improve U.S. industry's future competitiveness in nanotechnology by
producing well-trained researchers and engineers.