* 0331277
* Cooperative Research:  Coastal Effects of Tsunamis
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Harry Yeh, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2004
* USD 72,131.00

This action is to support a group research project focusing on specific aspects
of tsunami coastal hazards mitigation. To mitigate tsunami coastal hazards, the
first priority is to improve the identification of the tsunami-inundation zone.
Recently, NOAA (National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration) has
launched a comprehensive program to estimate potential inundation zones along
the coastal areas of the Pacific States (California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska
and Hawaii; http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tsunami/time/). The next level of
mitigation strategy is to reduce loss of life and property damage within the
tsunami inundation zones by considering the runup process in detail: flow
patterns, induced forces, the impact of debris and floating objects, and their
implication for improved design of waterfront structures and decisions
concerning land use.

The five primary objectives are to: Understand the fundamental turbulence
phenomena associated with tsunami runup and its effects on tsunami forces on
structures and scouring; Improve the prediction capability of tsunami runup
models, by more accurately including the effects of dispersion and wave
breaking;Achieve a practical means of describing the complex runup flows within
the context of their interactions with structures, trees and other typical
complex coastal features (e.g. dunes, earthen dikes and river intlets);Develop
benchmark problems and their solutions for validating numerical models and for
determining the adequacy of different approximations for different applications
in tsunami hazard reduction;Develop scenarios focusing on four interrelated
issues: single and multiple structures (rectangular and cylindrical forms),
porous media, missiles/debris impacts, and scouring.

The project involves researchers from Cornell University, Southern Methodist
University, the University of Washington, Urban Regional Research, and a
Professor Emeritus from Harvard University. In addition, it includes
collaboration on scouring during tsunami runup with researchers at Japan's
Public Works Research Institute (PWRI), using PWRI's large and unique
experimental facility.