* 0331895
* SGER: Linking Physiological Performance to Population Demography in a Temperate Reef Fish
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Todd Anderson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2006
* USD 47,721.00

Links between physiological processes and their ecological implications to
individuals and populations are poorly understood despite suggestions that such
links may have important consequences. Both physiologists and ecologists
underscore the need to couple physiology and population ecology in explaining
variation in recruitment success and the ecological relevancy of physiological
condition, respectively. Experiments designed for this purpose have never been
published or possibly even attempted. The goal of this project is to couple
physiological performance with the survival of recent settlers of a temperate
reef fish, the kelp bass Paralabrax clathratus. A novel approach will be
employed in which specially constructed submersible swim tunnels will be
positioned on the sea bottom for in situ measurements of swimming performance
and metabolic rate, followed by placing fish on experimental kelp beds and
subsequently recording predator?induced mortality rate. This approach is meant
to reduce as much as possible any effects of stress in recording physiological
measurements. Kelp bass settle readily to plastic mesh devices suspended in the
water column. Working completely underwater on SCUBA, fish will be collected
from these devices, placed in swim tunnels stationed nearby, swimming
performance and metabolic rate measured, fish marked individually with elastomer
(colored silicone), and then released to small experimental kelp beds
constructed on sand bottom. Monitoring of marked fish will be done over a 2?3
week period to determine if mortality from older conspecifics is correlated with
previously measured individual swimming performance or metabolic rate.

