* 0331270
* QSB:  A Principled Mapping of Regulatory Networks to Asynchronous Circuit Models for Stochastic Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2007
* USD 431,864.00

Microarrays and other new technologies are now giving us vast amounts of data on
how genes interact to perform complex biological functions. In order to reason
about genetic systems, a systems biology perspective must be taken in which new
models and efficient analysis methods must be developed. Electrical engineers
have vast experience modeling and analyzing electronic circuits and systems.
McAdams and Shapiro in their 1995 Science paper took an electronic circuit view
of a genetic network with encouraging results. Therefore, as in the sequencing
of the human genome, collaborations between engineers and systems biologists may
be extremely beneficial to the success of functional genomics. &lt;br/&gt;This
grant will fund continuation of a new collaboration between the PI and Professor
Adam Arkin's Laboratory for Dynamical Genomics at UC Berkeley. The PI has
modeled the Phage_ virus using a stochastic asynchronous circuit model. A
stochastic model appears to be essential as the survival strategy taken by this
virus has a random component which may be key in the evolutionary survival of
this and other species. Dr. Arkin's original model based on the chemical master
equation and Monte Carlo simulation required substantial runtime on a
supercomputer while the new stochastic asynchronous circuit model produces
comparable results in under a minute on a PC. The Phage_ case study has led to
the development of an abstraction methodology from reactions with kinetic rates
and critical concentrations to a stochastic asynchronous circuit model. After
this abstraction, efficient Markov chain analysis methods can be applied to
reason about the systems behavior.&lt;br/&gt; The first major goal of this work
will be to apply this methodology to other systems that exhibit stochastic
behavior, such as the E. Coli Fim system or the B. Subtilis stress response
network. The goal is a complete methodology for the efficient analysis of
genetic regulatory networks and its demonstration on several example systems.
All models and tools developed in the course of this research will be made
available via the web for research and teaching at other institutions. The
efficient analysis of biological systems in silico has the promise of helping
our understanding of the causes of disease and our development of drugs to treat
them.&lt;br/&gt;