* 0331737
* Structure and Dynamics of Composite, Fluid Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Gerald Fuller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed research will investigate the dynamics and structure of composite,
fluid interfaces comprised of combinations of colloidal particles and molecular
amphiphiles. Two-dimensional suspensions of asymmetric particles will also be
studied. Since many commercial and naturally occurring systems (emulsions,
foams, and the alveoli in our lungs) are complex mixtures of amphiphilic
materials, fundamental understanding of their interfacial rheology is central to
advancing the performance of products and treatment
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work, which is primarily experimental,
will take advantage of new measurement methods developed in our laboratory
(interfacial rheometry, interfacial flow-microscopy) to reveal the relationship
between interfacial microstructure and interfacial rheology. This work will
focus on mobile interfaces comprised of colloidal particles that coexist with
molecular amphiphiles. This results in two-dimensional suspensions that are
expected to have a unique rheological character. In addition to spherical,
colloidal particles, prolate and oblate particles will be studied since these
systems offer the possibility of mimicking fatty acids and alcohols where
positional and orientational order come together to create complex 2D phase
diagrams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Complex fluid interfaces can
be classified in ways that are similar to their complex fluid counterparts (2D
melts, solutions, suspensions, etc.). Indeed, restricting molecules and
particles to two dimensions often increases rheological nonlinearities. Most
physical systems, however, are mixtures of amphiphilic constituents, but little
attention has been offered in this direction. The experiments planned here will
provide the first systematic data on two-dimensional suspensions where particles
are collected within monolayers on nonNewtonian, molecular
amphiphiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The interfacial rheology of
complex, composite monolayers is important to many commercial activities, such
as the processing of food products and personal products.&lt;br/&gt;These
systems are often in the form of emulsions and foams that require stabilization.
Furthermore, colloidal systems are useful model systems for the study of basic
physical phenomena and in this case two-dimensional monolayers comprised of
asymmetric particles will be used to mimic the rich phase behavior of fatty
acids and phospholipids. &lt;br/&gt;