* 0331272
* SGER:  A Non-Conductive Pressure Cell for Pulsed Magnetic Field Experiments in Anisotropic Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Charles Agosta, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2005
* USD 81,186.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project will develop a novel,
non-conducting pressure cell for use in pulsed magnetic fields. The miniature
gas pressure cell will be designed and built out of plastic or ceramic
materials. It will be useful from ambient pressure up to about 3 kbar. This
range is very difficult to control with clamp-type cells. There are many
important and interesting changes in the properties of electronic materials in
this low-pressure range. The cell will be designed for use with a tunnel diode
oscillator (TDO), which can be used in arbitrarily small volumes. The TDO
apparatus uses an rf signal to probe the penetration depth, resistance, or
magnetization of a sample, and works equally well in dc and pulsed magnetic
fields. This unique combination of the TDO in a pressure cell will allow
detailed studies of the physics of anisotropic organic and heavy fermion
conducting systems as a function of pressure. The cell will be used to study how
the physical structure of a material affects its electronic structure, and how
the electronic structure determines the ground state. In particular, the
anisotropic nature of organic and heavy fermion superconductors allows one to
eliminate the orbital destruction of superconductivity and to probe the spin
coupling or Pauli paramagnetic limit. In this limit the critical magnetic fields
are near both the Zeeman energy and the Fermi energy. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in this project. These students will
have the experience of working on an exploratory research project. They will
also gain the experience of designing and building new apparatus.

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project will develop a novel,
non-conducting pressure cell that will be useful to study the electronic
structure of superconductors. Superconductors are advanced materials that can
conduct electricity without losing any of their electrical energy.
Superconductors are already used to make the high magnetic fields necessary for
MRI imaging in hospitals, and if made more practical, superconductivity would
revolutionize the entire electrical power industry. The cell will be designed
for use with a tunnel diode oscillator (TDO), which can be used in arbitrarily
small volumes. A TDO uses a radio signal to probe the penetration depth, a
fundamental property of superconducting materials. The unique combination of the
TDO in a pressure cell will allow detailed studies of the physics of anisotropic
organic and heavy fermion superconducting systems as a function of pressure.
These systems are layered materials that show special properties because of
their physical structure. The cell will be used to learn how the physical
structure of a material affects its electronic behavior. In particular it will
be used to understand how the layered structure of the organic and heavy fermion
superconductors makes them behave differently from traditional superconductors.
Both graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this project. These
students will have the experience of working on an exploratory research project.
They will also gain the experience of designing and building new apparatus.