* 0331139
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Models for Convective Heat Transfer: Algorithms and Experimental Vaildation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Morteza Gharib, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 179,699.00

The PI's will collaborate to develop and validate new stochastic approaches in
order to incorporate and propagate uncertainty in direct numerical simulations
and reduced-order models of convective heat transfer. The uncertainty may be
associated with free stream turbulence, thermal boundary conditions, geometric
roughness or even transport coefficients and source terms. On the simulation
side, they will employ the generalized polynomial chaos approach -- an extension
of Norbert Wiener's pioneering ideas but with enhanced robustness and
efficiency. It employs a correspondence between probability distribution
functions and polynomial functional representations. On the experimental side,
they will use DPIV (Digital Particle Image Velocimetry) and DPIT (Digital
Particle Image Thermometry) to measure accurately probability distributions
functions. The emphasis of the experiments will be on analyzing uncertainties
associated with boundary conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will have broad
impact as it will set the foundations of data assimilation and rigorous
sensitivity analysis of convective heat transfer. The proposed approach will
affect fundamentally the way new experiments are designed and the type of
questions that may be addressed, while the interaction between simulation and
experiment will become more meaningful and more dynamic. This, in turn, will
find its way in the design of heat transfer equipment and will provide a
rigorous reliability framework. On the education front, the new knowledge will
contribute towards understanding nonlinear systems subject to noise,
fundamentals in stochastic dynamics, data assimilation, and design under
uncertainty. The PI's plan to incorporate these new ideas in engineering and
applied mathematics courses that they teach at Caltech and Brown
University.&lt;br/&gt; The award has been funded by the Thermal Transport and
Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division, and
it is part of a joint program involving Sandia National Laboratory and the NSF
in the area of "Engineering Sciences for Modeling, Simulation, Decision-Making
and Emerging Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;