* 0331707
* Information Technology Research (ITR):   Responding to the Unexpected
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Ronald Eguchi, University of California-Irvine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2010
* USD 9,480,928.00

The long-term goals of this project are to radically transform the ability of
organizations that respond to man-made and natural disasters to gather, process,
manage, use and disseminate information both within the emergency response
agencies and to the general public. The project explores a multidisciplinary
approach consisting of two interrelated research thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;- Scalable
and robust information technology solutions to facilitate access to the right
information, by the right individuals and organizations, at the right time,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Social science research that investigates the distinctive nature
of dynamic virtual organizations, and the social and cultural aspects of
information sharing across organizations and individuals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research challenges addressed include mechanisms to:
enable crisis responders to become rich sources of vital situational
information; seamlessly collect data from heterogeneous sources; translate low-
level noisy data into meaningful information that can be effectively used for
damage assessment and situation awareness; facilitate information sharing and
collective decision-making across emergent virtual organizations; and rapidly
disseminate information in the form most useful to recipients. Close
collaborations with multiple government agencies have been developed to test and
validate research in live environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
expected to result in robust information systems that enable first responders to
make well-informed and better decisions, to prioritize their response, and to
focus on activities that have the highest potential to save lives and property.
The resulting timely and effective response can contain or prevent secondary
disasters, and reduce the resulting economic losses and social disruption during
disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create new shared data sets
for text, video and data mining. This will allow a larger scientific community
to test algorithmic innovations against these field gathered data sets. Our
community outreach programs will help generate greater awareness of the role of
IT, stimulating new innovations as first responders interact more closely with
researchers. Our educational programs will generate a better trained crisis
management work force.