* 0331771
* Antarctic Science and Advanced Computer Networking Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Robert Loewenstein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/2005
* USD 40,350.00

The communications and networking capability at the three-year round United
States Antarctic stations has improved over the past decade to include Internet
access and bandwidth capability for modern scientific research and
communications purposes. Challenges remain to provide similar access to remote
field camps. Providing networking capability to field camps in the McMurdo Dry
Valleys and other sites near McMurdo and South Pole Stations would allow
scientists at those camps to conduct their research in a more efficient manner.
In particular, networks would provide scientists with not only the benefit of
connectivity to the Internet, but also better methods of data retrieval from
sensors and interactions with experiment hardware. T The latter would allow for
an expansion of data collection activities over the winter period, and thus
allow for year round data collection and retrieval. The intent of the workshop
is to bring together a group of interested parties, including experienced
investigators from Antarctic, CISE and engineering communities. The purpose will
be to identify specific problems in Antarctic communications and networking, to
summarize current and projected states of wireless, sensor and power
technologies for field locations, to identify solutions where possible and to
design a way forward to solve remaining problems. The product of the workshop
will be a report of the meeting, a PowerPoint presentation for use by the
community, a website for easy access to the results of the workshop and a
listserv for continuing discussion. This interdisciplinary activity is expected
to lead to improvements in the ability of scientists to conduct their research
in Antarctica.