* 0331645
* Information Technology Research (ITR):  Virtual Grid Application Development Software (VGrADS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Ken Kennedy, William Marsh Rice University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sampath K. Kannan
* 09/30/2009
* USD 8,250,000.00

The "Computational Grid", as described in The Grid: Blueprint for a New
Computing Infrastructure and demonstrated by many proof-of-concept applications,
promises to connect computers, databases, and people in a network to solve
problems in scientific research and other diverse fields. However, the
complexity, unreliability, and overhead of low-level operations in today's
systems obscure the Grid's potential. The five-year Virtual Grid Application
Development Software (VGrADS) project attacks a fundamental part of this problem
- how to more effectively program these highly complex and dynamic systems. It
will develop software tools that simplify and accelerate the development of Grid
applications and services, while delivering high levels of performance and
resource efficiency. This improved usability will greatly expand the community
of Grid users and developers. In the process, VGrADS will contribute to both the
theory and practice of distributed computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
these aims, VGrADS will explore, define, and implement a hierarchy of virtual
resources and a set of programming models for Grid computing. It will conduct
research in three key areas: &lt;br/&gt;1. Virtual Grid (vgrid) architectures
enabling a separation of concerns between high-level services and the Grid's
inherent complexity.&lt;br/&gt;2. Programming models, compilers, component
libraries, and tools supporting creation of Grid applications.&lt;br/&gt;3. Core
software technologies, including performance-efficient scheduling, fault
tolerance, and economic models for resource management, allowing scalable Grid
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VGrADS will pursue this agenda by
collaborating with leading scientific applications to elicit key challenges,
validate results, and disseminate technology. It will distribute software that
it creates in open-source form for the research community. It will also build on
its PIs' past successes in human resource development by using existing programs
to attract and retain women and minorities in computational science.&lt;br/&gt;