* 0331786
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Robot Localization and Robot Mapping Based on Shape Matching
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,410.00

0331786&lt;br/&gt;Latecki&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI and a students
from Temple University in a collaboration with Christian Freksa of the
Department of Informatics at the University of Bremen, Germany. The technical
focus of the project is to develop an elaborate and cognitively motivated
geometric representation and reasoning formalism for robot localization and
mapping. The problems of self-localization, which allows a robot to determine
its position using its internal spatial representation, and robot mapping, which
uses mobile robots to acquire spatial models of physical environments, are of
high importance to the field of mobile robotics. Although current robot mapping
and localization techniques are very sophisticated, they do not yield the
desired performance. The German group is well known for its work in this field
and the Freksa is head of center on Reasoning about Paths, Shapes, and
Configurations funded by the German equivalent of NSF, the DFG. Furthermore, the
collaboration brings together complementary expertise and
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this collaboration are
that it increases interactions between US researchers and those in Germany, it
promotes collaborative opportunities and career development for US students, and
it enhances the infrastructure for research and education by laying the
groundwork for future international research and education
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;