* 0332052
* SGER:  Development of a Perfused Heart Model for Heat Shock Protein Preconditioning
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 01/31/2005
* USD 65,111.00

Extensive empirical data within the medical and scientific communities indicate
that cells subjected to mild thermal stress will over-express heat shock
proteins (HSP), which are known to have protective and reparative effects on
injured cells and tissues. We have completed extensive quantitative measurements
of the thermal stimulation conditions optimal to HSP expression in cell
cultures. This proposal presents a unique set of experiments designed to take
this technology to the next level of development by establishing a new protocol
for producing and measuring HSP expression in a whole organ model. The
experiments are based on an existing perfused working rat heart model developed
and used by one of our medical school colleagues for more than two decades.
Thermal stress will be produced by irradiation with a microwave source, which is
well suited for adaptation to the perfusion rig and to producing a uniform
energy absorption field throughout a rat heart. The focus of this first aspect
of the whole organ study is to determine the effectiveness of measuring HSP
production in a rat heart and of extending the duration of the perfusion trial
to as long a period as possible. We will implement novel measurement techniques
to quantify the temporal thermal field, via multiplanar magnetic resonance
temperature imaging (MRTI), in the heart. Although we have several decades of
experience in bioheat transfer research in our laboratory, this project is the
initial foray into a brand new domain of study in which there is no existing
experience anywhere in the world (to our knowledge.) Recent developments in the
field of molecular biology have made this work possible, and the project has a
huge potential eventual payoff in medical applications. The award has been
funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical
and Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;