* 0332554
* Center for Innovative Biomaterial Education and Research
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,07/31/2005
* David Orloff, Institute of Paper Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2005
* USD 277,516.00

0332554 Ragauskas

This award is to the Institute of Paper Science and Technology to support the
activity described below for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response
to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include the Institute of Paper Science and Technology
(Lead Institution), Chalmers University of Technology, Dacula Middle School,
Freeman's Mill Elementary School, Georgia Institute of Technology, Georgia State
University, North Carolina State University, University of British Columbia,
University of Georgia, Royal Institute of Technology, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute, VTT Biotechnology and Food Research, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Georgia Department of Natural Resources,
USDA Forest Service, Appletonideas, Georgia Pacific, Iogen Corporation, Kemira
Chemicals Inc., Kimberly Clark Corporation, Novozyme Inc., and Shell Global
Solutions International.

The activity creates a Center for Innovation for Biomaterials Education and
Research that will train students both in classroom settings and using
electronic technology to develop scientific and technological advances in the
conversion of biomass into novel materials. The Center will serve as a
clearinghouse of information to the general public and will serve as a means to
create a collaborative team of national and international scientists who are
focusing on the same problems in wood technology. The proposal addresses a
challenge that is important to the economy and the environment of the US and the
rest of the world, i.e., how to shift to renewable, environmentally benign
materials stemming from the agro/forestry sector. The move from hydrocarbon to
carbohydrate technologies can have a wide variety of ancillary benefits,
including enhancing rural employment and improving the environment. The proposed
activity is critical to advancing our knowledge and understanding in the area of
converting abundant biomass into biomaterials. Two deliverables are proposed:
(2) development of new scientific and technological advances in conversion of
biomass into novel materials, and (2) development of knowledge-rich workforce
skilled in these technologies. The program will train students in innovative
methods of converting biomass to novel biomaterials; develop a public outreach
program describing the benefits of this technology; and discover new scientific
processes for the efficient and practical conversion of renewable wood polymers
into novel biomaterials including polyesters, nylon-4 polymers and polycarbonate
nano-cellulose derivatives.

Potential Economic Impact The activities will create job opportunities in rural
areas of the US where, during the past decade, more than 50 pulp and paper
manufacturing plants have been closed jobs are declining due changes in
international markets. The partnership will enable the development of new
innovative forest products technologies that will be developed with
scientifically and technologically empowered workforce. These results will
improve the economic, technical and environmental well-being of the nation.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in the creation of the science basis
for conversion of the plastics industry from hydrocarbon-based technologies to
carbohydrate-based technologies. This will dramatically improve rural employment
opportunities, enhance national security by decreasing dependence on imported
oil, and improve the environment by reducing carbon dioxide emissions.

This proposal is excellent in terms of Broader Impacts. The project will educate
professionals and the general public on the opportunities and science of
converting biomass into innovative bio-materials, and develop new technologies
that will provide valuable and practical materials for packaging,
transportation, and health-care industries.