* 0332957
* NSF/FDA Scholars:  Computer Modeling of EM Energy Deposition within Human Subjects under Various RF Sources
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Ji Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert J. Jaeger
* 02/28/2007
* USD 98,248.00

0332957&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;This work is supported under the guidelines of
the NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence at FDA Program (SIR). SIR is an interagency
partnership for the investigation of scientific and engineering issues
concerning emerging trends in medical device technology and is designed to
enable investigators in science, engineering, and mathematics to develop
research collaborations within the intramural research environment at the
FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation includes two related projects to
utilize computer software packages for analyzing the absorption of
radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic energy in humans exposed to emissions from
certain RF transmitters. The first project deals with the characterization and
development of realistic human models for assessing safety with respect to
exposure of pregnant women and children to certain types of RF electronic
surveillance devices, such as those used in department stores. The goal of the
second project is to characterize the uncertainty in analyzing exposure to RF
devices such as cellular telephones using a recently developed model of the
human head that is now being widely used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No human
subjects are involved in the investigation as data is available in an existing
and extensive data base of human images. The researchers will work closely with
the Electrophysics Branch of the FDA Center for Medical Devices and Radiological
Health (CDRH), and the Principal Investigator is to work full time for two
summer months each year of the two year project in the FDA intramural
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation may answer two important
questions that currently are points of debate: (1) How does body shape/size/age
effect the calculations for specific absorption rate (SAR) of radio frequency
energy, and (2) Is the Specific Anthromorphic Mannequin (SAM) head a valid model
generally?&lt;br/&gt;