* 0332580
* WORKSHOP:  13th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2004
* William Miller, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 01/31/2004
* USD 11,828.00

The FAIM conferences focus on current research, best practices and future trends
within the areas of global competitiveness and rapidly advancing technologies in
flexible automation, information management, and integrated manufacturing. The
conferences' objective is to provide a forum for both researchers and
practitioners in the fields of Flexible Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing
to share the latest research, developments and practices in the areas of the
conference scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's FAIM conference includes
nano-manufactuing and biomedical manufacturing as a part of its focus topics.
These topics are an important direction of research for the College of
Engineering, as well as the whole University of South Florida. Lead by the
Industrial and Management Systems Engineering Department, the College of
Engineering is working on developing an Industry-University Cooperative Research
Center for Biomedical Manufacturing. The conference is expected to attract
several leading researchers, providing a forum to share the latest research,
developments and practices in these areas. Special tracks are planned in both of
these topics. The biomedical manufacturing track will involve the Biomedical
Manufacturers Consortium in the Tampa Bay area. The conference is promoted
within the companies that are members of Consortium and a track is planned where
biomedical manufacturing related issues will be discussed. Both of these topics
are at the forefront of National Science Foundation's initiatives as indicated
by special solicitations and workshops to motivate research in these areas and
fit perfectly with the University's goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;