* 0332769
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Plio-Pleistocene Hominin Teeth from Dmanisi, Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* G. Philip Rightmire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2004
* USD 4,000.00

The identity of the first human species to disperse out of the African homeland
and the timing of this event remain highly controversial. The problem lies in
the fact that few sites of critical age have yielded both significant hominin
remains and artifacts from geologic contexts which can be reliably dated. The
Dmanisi site in the Republic of Georgia challenges the doubts raised in respect
to other, potentially early sites in China and Java, and adds to our
understanding of the first hominin dispersals from Africa. Dmanisi, which dates
to the earliest Pleistocene (1.77 mya), is a site rich in paleontological and
archaeological evidence, and it has produced the largest sample of early Homo
remains from a single level at a locality anywhere in the world. In addition,
the fossils occupy an intermediate position, both morphologically and
temporally, between earliest Homo and later Homo erectus.

Many studies have demonstrated that information about tooth crown and root size
together with observations of morphological traits can contribute significantly
to taxonomic, phylogenetic, and functional analyses of Plio-Pleistocene
hominins. This study focuses on the continually growing hominin dental sample
from the site of Dmanisi. The Dmanisi dental sample now includes teeth from
three mandibles, two crania, and a number of isolated finds, which together
represent a minimum of 3 individuals. Many of the specimens are currently
unpublished. All will be documented through description and measurement, aided
by imaging techniques such as digital photography and radiography. Patterns of
variation will then be analyzed to determine if the metric and morphologic
differences among the teeth likely reflect interspecific or intraspecific
variation, including differences between the sexes. The Dmanisi dental remains
will be compared with other early Homo erectus (=ergaster) teeth from East
Africa and Southeast Asia, and to specimens of earlier Homo from the Turkana
basin and Olduvai Gorge. This analysis will document the range of dental
variation for Homo habilis and early Homo erectus, establish the position of the
Dmanisi specimens within that range, and help to identify any probable
phylogenetic (ancestor-descendant) relationships between the Dmanisi sample and
the other hominin groups. This quantitative work on dentition will contribute to
a better understanding of intra- and inter-populational hominin variation and
the taxonomy of the earliest members of the genus Homo. This research will also
provide a unique dataset with which to evaluate scenarios concerning the initial
migration of hominins from the African homeland and the paleobiology of the
earliest Eurasians.

The broader impact of project funding is that it will permit the Co-PI to travel
to Georgia for analysis of the dental material and allow for collaboration with
both Georgian and US scientists. The proposed research also offers outstanding
educational opportunities in laboratory data collection and analysis, to both
the Co-PI and others involved in the project.

