* 0332602
* GDSE/RES: Women's Science Equity Online
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2007
* USD 964,124.00

TERC proposes to study the characteristics of online science courses for
teachers that correlate to positive learning outcomes for women. There are now
hundreds of science courses offered online for teachers, yet there are very few
aggregate studies or meta-analyses of online courses. At the same time, women
teachers are the largest users of online education, and there are no large-scale
research studies focusing on women learners in online professional development
courses in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of the project is a
descriptive survey and analysis of 100 online science courses for teachers. The
second phase will use the analysis of course characteristics to select a subset
of 20 courses for in-depth examination. Finally, the team will develop a set of
guidelines for online course developers that include general recommendations on
issues of alignment to national professional development standards,
interactivity, and accessibility, along with examples and vignettes from
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TERC has been a leader in research and development
of telecommunication-supported learning since the 1980's. The project staff and
the advisory committee comprises highly experienced online developers, science
educators, teacher professional development experts, and educational researchers
with experience in diversity and gender issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the
course providers interested in participating are the National Teacher
Enhancement Network (NTEN), University of North Carolina, and the American
Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potentially, the research will
inform organizations who are currently investing in online professional
development for science teachers with little benefit of research underpinnings.
Improving the science skills of teachers - mostly women at this time -
indirectly improves science education for all students and builds national
capacity in education. TERC's research will promote higher quality learning
experiences for teachers by identifying best practices (suggested elements of
program structure, format, and facilitation) and design factors in online
learning that are particularly effective for women as learners.&lt;br/&gt;