* 0332692
* Dynamics in Complex Molecular Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Michael Fayer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2008
* USD 772,393.00

This project aims to use a variety of ultrafast nonlinear optical and infrared
experiments and theory to increase understanding of glasses and complex liquids,
such as supercooled liquids, liquid crystals, and hydrogen bonding liquids
(water and alcohols). Ultrafast infrared vibrational echoes, spectrally resolved
vibrational echoes, and vibrational echo correlation spectroscopy will be used
to study the dynamics of hydrogen bonded systems, such as glycerol, as normal
liquids, supercooled liquids and glasses. The vibrational echo experiments
provide a direct probe of hydrogen bond network dynamics. Ultrafast (&lt; 100
fs) to slow (ms) optical heterodyne detected optical Kerr effect experiments
will be used to study supercooled liquids, the approach to the glass transition,
liquid crystals, and ionic organic liquids. Comparisons among the liquids and to
Mode Coupling Theory will provide insights into the connection between dynamics,
intermolecular interactions, and structure. New tools and experimental methods
using ultrafast pulse sequences of visible and infrared light, are being
developed and applied to gain understanding of such systems. The methods permit
examination of changing molecular structures on the time scales on which the
important events occur. Graduate students and postdoctoral students
participating in all aspects of the research will train the next generation of
first-rate scientists. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Disordered molecular materials,
such as liquids and glasses, play important roles in a wide range of scientific
fields from astronomy to zoology, as well as in chemistry, materials science and
biology. Crystals are ordered solids. Their structures are fixed. Using x-ray
crystallography, the arrangement of the molecules and atoms is well known.
Liquids, particularly complex liquids, for example, liquid crystals, alcohols,
and water, and glasses (amorphous solids), are very different from crystals.
They do not have a regular structure and the structure is constantly changing.
Even glasses, which are solids, do not have fixed structures. The structures
evolve with time. The macroscopic properties of complex liquids and glasses are
determined by details of the relationship between their microscopic structure
and dynamics. Explication of complex molecular systems can lead to their control
and utilization. Participation of graduate students and postdoctoral students in
all aspects of the research trains the next generation of first-rate scientists.
Liquids and glasses are materials of high importance to industry, and students
trained in these areas will compete extremely well in the high-technology job
market.&lt;br/&gt;***