* 0332988
* International Workshop on Dynamic Data Driven Application Systems as a Mechanism to Foster International Collaboration, Melbourne, Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Joel Saltz, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 12/31/2003
* USD 20,000.00

0332988&lt;br/&gt;Saltz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for thirteen US computer scientists to participate in a US-
organized workshop at the International Conference on Computational Science,
being held in Melbourne, Australia in June 2003. The thirteen scientists are
representatives of thirteen U.S. information technology research (ITR) groups
funded by NSF. The unifying theme of these researchers' work and for the
workshop is the new computational paradigm, Dynamic Data Driven Application
Systems (DDDAS). Computational science offers application-driven solutions for
problems in a wide range of disciplines including but not limited to atmospheric
sciences, geosciences, biology; these challenges are increasingly being tackled
through the collaborative efforts of international multidisciplinary research
teams. The funded participants will focus on the role of distributed and grid
based computing systems in the modeling of complex systems and in the
development of sophisticated algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
showcase ongoing research of the US ITR research groups and it is also firmly
planned in advance to serve as a catalyst for the development of new long-term
collaborations between US researchers in this field and their counterparts in
Australia, New Zealand and East Asia. The proposal described highly relevant
research by over a dozen leading-edge researchers and groups in Australia and
New Zealand that are either current or past collaborators or the focus of
planned visits to establish collaborative research plans. These new
international research partnerships will be designed to provide opportunities
for US graduate students, post-docs and junior faculty to interact directly with
the foreign collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;