* 0332259
* Mechanism of Viral RNA-dependent RNA Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2003,07/31/2007
* C. Cheng Kao, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 556,529.00

Replication and transcription from RNA templates are required for RNA viruses to
cause diseases. These processes are also mechanistically interesting since the
viral replication enzymes are the only class of template-dependent polymerases
that naturally initiate and terminate RNA synthesis from the termini of the
templates. Viral replication enzymes, hereafter called the replicase, are
generally composed of a virally encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and
additional viral and host subunits. The replicase from Brome mosaic virus (BMV)
can be enriched and solubilized from infected plants, thus permitting
biochemical characterization. The BMV replicase can specifically recognize BMV
RNAs and then precede through a number of biochemical steps, including de novo
initiation, elongation, termination, and RNA recombination. Requirements for
these steps in vitro nicely mimic the requirements for replication and
recombination in vivo, thus providing insight into the least understood class of
template-dependent polymerases. The goal of this project is to better define how
the BMV replicase recognizes specific RNA sequences and goes through different
steps of RNA synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has four specific
aims: 1) to examine the interaction between the replicase and core promoter
RNAs; 2) to identify and characterize RNA sequences that cause pausing of the
elongating replicase complex during RNA synthesis; 3) to examine the mechanism
of RNA recombination in vitro; and 4) to further purify and characterize the
components in the BMV replicase. Knowledge gained from the execution of these
objectives will contribute to the basic understanding of virus replication. The
use of BMV as a model system will directly benefit less well-studied systems
that can cause diseases such as encephalitis, measles, and hepatitis. The
detailed understanding of the different steps in viral RNA replication should
uncover targets for the design of highly specific antiviral drugs.