* 0332139
* CAREER: Study of the Suburban Citizenry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2006
* John Oliver, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2006
* USD 232,485.00

Over the past fifty years, the suburban portion of the population has nearly
doubled and today one in two Americans calls a suburb home. Sub urbanization has
changed fundamentally the types of political communities where most Americans
live: rather than being crowded in diverse central cities or isolated in rural
towns, they now live in specialized municipalities that are often highly
singular in their economic and racial composition and land-use. Despite the
enormity of this change, we have little understanding of how these suburban
social contexts are influencing citizens' perceptions of community or their
attitudes towards government. Many critics bemoan the alienation and hostility
to government that suburbs putatively foster, but little research has either
adequately defined suburbs or tested their effects. Consequently, there is
little systematic theory to explain whether or why suburbanites may be
different, not just from residents of large cities but also from other people
who live across the vast diversity of suburban
locales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project fills this information gap
with the first-ever comprehensive Study of the Suburban Citizenry (SSC). It has
three interrelated components. First, by collecting survey data from more than
2,400 respondents from 40 locales across six states and doing intensive field
studies of suburban election campaigns, this project advances and tests a
"conflict theory" of local democracy. This theory promises to link disparate
areas of research on local political attitudes and provide a systematic
explanation for how social contexts influence citizens' views on local
government and community. This research focuses on how social diversity and
conflict in suburbs (or the lack thereof) structures people's political beliefs,
the nature of campaigns, and voting behavior. Utilizing computer assisted survey
technologies, the study contains both questions specifically tailored to each
locality and standard items asked of all respondents. Using data from the 2000
Census, other sources, and field research, information is appended to the survey
about each locality's social composition, political institutions, media sources,
and other important contextual factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, this
project provides a valuable resource for scholars both within American political
science and social studies at large. Using these data, scholars can examine many
questions such as whether suburban citizens act as "consumers" of public
services, how voters make decisions in low information, non-partisan elections,
and how social environments influence political attitudes. The availability of
good, geo-coded data that measure community attachments and attitudes helps
further multi-level analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, as a CAREER
investigation this project contains a strong educational component. It develops
a community based learning curriculum for undergraduate teaching at Princeton.
As part of their coursework, undergraduates will conduct intensive studies of
the municipalities chosen in the survey instrument, particularly in the week
before their elections. Their research will be utilized in the creation of
contextual variables and their reports will be collected and published in an
edited volume on suburban political campaigns. This project allows for advances
in graduate student research, linking the study of local politics with that of
survey research, two areas, &lt;br/&gt;