* 0332457
* SGER:  Characterizing Sampling Error for Optimization Under Uncertainty - A Fractal Geometry Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,12/31/2003
* Urmila Diwekar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Suvrajeet Sen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 6,709.00

The objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) are to
develop innovative and powerful approaches for solving problems of decision
making under uncertainty applied to large scale design, manufacturing, planning,
and management related problems. However, efficient estimation of performance in
the presence of uncertainty is a critical first step. The problem of decision
making under uncertainty is posed as a stochastic optimization problem, which
fundamentally involves constrained optimization of one or more probabilistic
output functions constructed from multiple deterministic simulations for input
parameter sets obtained by sampling uncertain input parameter distributions. The
power and usefulness of the approach has been demonstrated by the Principal
Investigators, but the computational burden of this approach can be extreme and
depends on the sample size used for characterizing the parametric uncertainties.
Sampling accuracy plays an important role in enhancing the efficiency of these
optimization algorithms. The proposed approach is aimed at filling an important
void in assessing the width of the sampling error-bandwidth in specialized Monte
Carlo approaches. It draws on concepts from fractal geometry to derive error
estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust decision making amidst a cloud of
parameter uncertainties is of fundamental importance in many applications. These
uncertainties can arise from operational, environmental, and market parameters
(e.g., ambient temperature, customer demand), erroneous model representations
(model simplifications and assumptions),and model parameters and data (e.g.
reaction constants, physical properties, errors in measurements), to name a few.
Furthermore, a decision maker has to deal with discrete decisions, like whether
to choose a particular option or not, and also with decisions on a continuous
space such as the choice of the operating temperature in a plant. &lt;br/&gt;