* 0332826
* Collaborative Research: The Art of Conversation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,01/31/2006
* John Morgan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 153,541.00

As information technology has become more widespread, it is now increasingly
possible for decision makers, such as CEOs and legislators, to obtain advice
from a variety of experts with di!ering areas of expertise. Conventional wisdom
suggests that, as a result, the decision maker will reach better decisions.
This, however, ignores the fact that experts may withhold or distort information
in the hope of influencing the decision in a direction favorable to them. Thus,
a decision maker needs to consider how the structure of communication -- the
conversation --affects how informative is the advice received from experts. This
project investigates how the structure of communication a!ects the quality of
decisions. The first part of the project concerns conversations between an
uninformed deci- sion maker and an informed expert. When the expert sends a
written report, unac- companied by any dialogue, this results in substantial
information loss. A face-to-face meeting between a decision maker and an expert,
however, leads to an improvement in the informativeness of expert advice--even
though the decision maker is completely uninformed. Both the decision maker and
the expert benefit from the conversation. This leads us to examine the following
questions: How much information can be cred- ibly transmitted in a face-to-face
meeting? Is it possible to induce the expert to fully disclose his information?
In many situations, the decision maker himself may be knowledgeable about some
aspects of the decision. As an example, an entrepreneur may have detailed knowl-
edge about the growth prospects of his product, but still require financial
expertise in taking his company public. The second part of the project concerns
communication in such situations--where both the decision maker and the expert
have some rele- vant information. Once again, the structure of communication can
critically affect the amount of information exchanged. For instance, there are
many circumstances where back-and-forth communication does not lead to
information gains--even if the decision maker is informed--and we identify these
circumstances. This leads us to ask the following questions: Is the situation
improved by adding more rounds of com- munication? Is a face-to-face meeting
superior to a back-and-forth exchange, such as via E-mail? The third part
concerns situations where decisions are multi-faceted and informa- tion is
dispersed among many "specialist" experts. For instance, a piece of legislation
may impact both employment and the environment. Different lobbying groups are
likely to possess expertise in each of these areas. We study whether providing
experts with an opportunity to communicate with one another improves the
informativeness of their advice. Is the situation improved if the decision maker
also participates? Is the situation improved if there is overlap in the experts'
specialized knowledge?