* 0332968
* SGER: Developing FRET as a Dynamic Tool for Studying SNARE Proteins During Synaptic Transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Zucker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marc D. Servetnick
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,001.00

This is a proposal for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research, to develop
methods and procedures for using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
to dynamically measure changes in the structure and interactions between SNARE
proteins during and following neurotransmitter release. SNARE proteins form a
complex that docks synaptic vesicles to the plasma membrane and holds them in
readiness for secretion by exocytosis triggered by neuronal action potentials.
Component proteins will be labeled with fluorescent probes (cyan and yellow
fluorescent proteins, CFP and YFP), and FRET between those probes will be used
to measure dynamic changes in the SNARE components. The main thrust of the
proposal is to develop and perfect the methodology of dynamic FRET detection. As
techniques are refined, they will be applied to detecting the assembly and
disassembly of SNARE proteins, which should occur before secretion and during
recovery of fused vesicles by endocytosis, respectively. This will be
accomplished by labeling vesicle associated membrane protein (VAMP) with CFP and
SNAP-25 (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein attachment protein of
25 KDaltons) with YFP. A second application involves the detection of vesicle
fusion, accomplished by labeling the extracellular domain of syntaxin with CFP
and the intravesicular domain of VAMP with YFP. Procedures will be developed for
quantitative evaluation of FRET, and for simultaneous detection of vesicle
fusion, by monitoring the FRET-induced change in CFP fluorescence along with the
fusion-associated pH-change-induced increase in YFP fluorescence.

This is a novel, high-risk project. Its successful conclusion would be a major
methodological breakthrough, enabling the dynamic study of conformational
changes among secretory proteins, and allowing the sequencing of molecular
events during vesicle priming, fusion, and recovery. This project will serve as
proof of concept for subsequent regular research proposals to NSF or NIH.
Results will be disseminated broadly by publication and discussion at open
meetings. In its broader impacts, the project will involve the advanced training
of a ostdoctoral fellow, contributing to the national scientific talent bank.
Undergraduate assistants receive an opportunity for immersion in cutting edge
research. Previous NSF support has involved the training of high school teachers
of minority students in modern scientific methods (supported by a Research
Experience for Teachers supplement to an NSF Research Grant). Finally,
development of new techniques strengthens the methodological infrastructure of
modern biological research.

