* 0332964
* Quantifying the Thermal and Permafrost Impacts of a Tundra Wildfire
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Alaska is a fire-dominated ecosystem differing from the northern forests of the
continental U.S. and Canada in many important aspects. The fire-prone areas of
Alaska are primarily in the interior boreal forest region. The discontinuous
nature of the permafrost distribution tends to promote a mosaic of vegetation
types with dense forests of fire-prone black spruce and thick organic layers
developing in permafrost areas that have not burned in recent history. Fires
also occur, on a lower frequency, in the treeless tundra regions of the Seward
Peninsula and Yukon Kuskokwim Delta. Although the cause is uncertain, fire
records demonstrate a marked positive trend in the numbers of fires over the
last 50 years on the Seward Peninsula. It is obvious that these fires will have
marked impacts on surface energy balance, soil moisture dynamics and permafrost
thermal regime, but these changes and their interactions have not been
quantified in tundra regions. The PIs have operated numerous meteorological
stations with extensive soil instrumentation in four locations on the Seward
Peninsula and near Ivotuk for four years. One of these stations was destroyed in
a severe fire last fall, presenting a devastating loss of instrumentation and at
the same time, a unique opportunity to document quantifiably how this system
will change following a fire. The damaged equipment was replaced within a few
months to maintain a nearly continuous record of measurements in the burn area.
This work would maintain six meteorological stations currently operating in that
area. The significant annual variation previously documented at these sites
necessitates maintenance of all stations to permit characterization of changes
due to the fire as opposed to those due to temporal variations in climate. In
addition, the group will utilize this opportunity to investigate the impacts of
tundra fire on the surface energy balance and subsurface thermal regime. These
studies will attempt to characterize the subtle influence of burn severity on
both short-term impacts and consequences for long-term recovery. They will
maintain the series of meteorological stations to document changes in the
surface energy balance and collect distributed measurements of active layer
thickness on the existing 1 km2 CALM grid (half of which was burned) to enable
comparisons with measurements collected during the previous four years. They
will supplement these measurements with other distributed measurements of
subsurface moisture and temperature to characterize the impacts of wildfire,
particularly with respect to burn severity. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: While wildfires in the boreal forest regions of the world have been
extensively studied, little is known about the impacts of tundra fires on the
local ecosystem, regional climate or the permafrost and hydrologic regime. The
permafrost is quite close to the surface due to the insulative capability of the
thick tundra mat. How this system responds to such a drastic disturbance has not
been rigorously studied. The existing climatologic network within this basin
provides the basis of immediately and economically documenting the impacts and
the process of recovery. Quantitative information on these processes is very
important in light of the recent changes in climate and hydrologic regimes.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Wildfire is probably the dominant agent
controlling land surface change in Arctic and subarctic regions. The dramatic
impacts immediately following a fire are quite obvious, but the longer-term
effects are probably more important in their influence upon regional and global
climate dynamics. This research will document those impacts and project long
term trajectories of recovery. This understanding is critically important for
correct parameterization of dynamic vegetation models and the climate
simulations that consider a changing land surface. &lt;br/&gt;