* 0332550
* 2003 Coastal Ocean Modeling Gordon Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Daniel Lynch, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

Support is requested for the 2003 Gordon Research Conference on Coastal Ocean
Modeling. The funds requested will offset travel and conference fee costs of
invited speakers and special requests from students and postdoctoral fellows,
for long-distance travel. This conference is devoted to the understanding and
prediction of processes occurring in the Coastal Ocean. Many important phenomena
in the coastal ocean are either highly site-specific, or nonlinear, or both, and
invoke a blend of coupled physical, chemical, and biological processes. What is
novel today is the scope and complexity of the simulations which are of interest
to governmental, industrial, and scientific communities, and these topics are
the subject of massive new data campaigns and large community partnerships aimed
at marshalling theory, experiment, and simulation toward scientific resource
management. Understanding the scientific use of simulations is an added focus of
this Conference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The complementary Coastal Ocean
Circulation GRC is focused on coastal ocean circulation dynamics and related
process studies. It is also held quadrennially (1997, 2001, 2005, - - -). The
Coastal Ocean Modeling GRC is focused on numerical modeling on a regional scale
where multiple processes and space-time scales exist and interact. Again, it is
held quadrennially (1999, 2003, 2007, - - -). Thus, these two related but
different GRCs are held in alternate biennia. The program committees are
structured to complement each other. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2003, six themes
will be emphasized: Operational Forecasting, Data Assimilation, Shelf-Ocean
Interactions, Physical/Biological Coupling, Lagrangian Methods, and Turbulence
Closure Schemes. A Program Committee drawn from private and state universities,
and scientific agencies is broadly representative of the research world. There
are 35 senior people that have agreed to attend as the leadership corps, giving
presentations and/or organizing sessions. The broader impacts of the proposed
conference include the seeding of new fundamental ideas and approaches across
the multidisciplinary scientific landscape; the closing of the apparent gap
between observational and theoretical science via operational data-assimilative
modeling; the enabling of operational systems within agencies devoted to
scientific resource management; and the co-mixing of young students and scholars
in the field with their established senior counterparts, across institutional
boundaries of university, governmental agency, and private sector.&lt;br/&gt;