* 0332874
* GDSE/RES: Increasing the Participation by Women in Undergraduate Physics:  What Can We Learn from Women's Colleges?
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Barbara Whitten, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 01/31/2006
* USD 113,954.00

Colorado College proposes to study the factors that explain the success of
women's colleges in producing women scientists at about twice the rate of
coeducational schools, with a particular focus on physics departments. The study
will look at how the colleges recruit and retain physics majors, the
departmental culture, faculty attitudes, curriculum, pedagogy, and student
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a study just completed
that surveyed nine coeducational undergraduate physics departments, including
two HBCU's, to learn what works to encourage women to major in physics. Key
factors appear to be particularly female-friendly departmental culture, the
presence of adult female role models, an emphasis on cooperation rather than
competition, and a strong connection with alumni. These factors tend to be
strong in women's colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By visiting physics
departments in women's colleges, PI will study the effect of their culture of
achievement on the production of female physics majors, and learn if there are
methods that can be adapted to coeducational schools. The findings will
contribute to a fruitful dialogue between single-sex and coeducational
institutions, and find ways to help all physics departments improve on how they
recruit and retain women students.&lt;br/&gt;