* 0332613
* InfinitEnergy:     A Coastal Georgia Partnership for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Carlise Rathburn, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2007
* USD 641,085.00

0332613 Chameau

This award is to Georgia Tech Research Corporation to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).

Partners The partners include Georgia Institute of Technology (Lead
Institution), Georgia Tech Economic Development Institute, Savannah State
University, Savannah Technical College, Savannah-Chatham County Public Schools,
Advanced Control Systems, Advanced Technology Development Center, AGL Resources,
Coastal Business and Education Technology Alliance, Energy and Environmental
Enterprises, Georgia Department of Industry Trade and Tourism.

This award establishes a full scale applied demonstration and evaluation
laboratory or Beta site for Alternative Energy Technologies. The laboratory is
located in the coastal Georgia region, which provides the resources necessary to
demonstrate and evaluate a number of alternative energies. The activity provides
a mechanism for technology transfer from academia to society. It spreads
knowledge from one leading research institution (Georgia Tech) to other academic
institutions (Savannah State University, Savannah Technical College, and the
public school system). It partners with industry to apply the technology in real
world environment. Industry partners will ensure that successful projects in
this effort will achieve national and international attention and transition to
society rapidly. The partnership ensures a broader dissemination of knowledge,
and the connections in Africa and South America provide further outreach into
the economically deprived regions of the world. Information on alternative
energy technology will be disseminated through job training, coursework, and
public outreach. Research and development activities will be integrated with
education and training. Curricula will be available nationally. Minorities will
be targeted for education and training. A regional alternative energy center is
likely to spur job creation, and the educational component will provide a
technologically literate workforce for those jobs. Development of clean,
renewable energy will benefit society at large.

Potential Economic Impact Current energy production and usage are emitting high
levels of harmful pollutants. World oil reserves are typically found in regions
that are threatened by political considerations. World oil supplies are
projected to peak by 2020. U.S. oil production is projected to decline while
U.S. consumption is projected to increase considerably. The proponents for
alternative energy sources predict a large market in manufacturing alternative
energies technology. In addition alternative energies will create new job
opportunities.

The intellectual merit of the activity lies in its focus on much needed
advancements in applied alternative energy technology systems. Research efforts
have led to considerable reductions in costs of various alternative energy
forms. Cost reductions alone are not sufficient to result in widespread adoption
of the technologies. An integrated and combined approach is being taken to
provide systems that maximize energy utilization that is acceptable to a wide
spectrum of the U.S. economy and society. The approach requires innovation at
every level of the alternative energy value chain, including public awareness
and workforce education and training.

The broader impacts of the activity include improving technical workforce
skills, improving public awareness and acceptance through community programs and
demonstration programs, development of knowledge-based curricula for university
through secondary school levels, economic development, and knowledge and
technology transfer for commercialization. Underrepresented groups will be
involved in all of the activities of the grant.