* 0332690
* TALPA:    Technology Applications and Learning for Professional Achievement
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Herb Schroeder, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0332690&lt;br/&gt;Schroeder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to University of
Alaska Anchorage to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include University of Alaska Anchorage (Lead Institution), University of Hawaii
Manoa, University of Washington, Alaska Technical Center, Halau Ku Mana High
School, Kotzebue High School, Mt. Edgecumbe High School, Northwest Arctic
Borough School District, Wellpinit High School, White Swan High School,
Confederated Bands and Tribes of the Yakama Nation, Hewlett-Packard, NANA/Colt
Engineering, NANA/Dowl Engineering, Siemens Building Technologies, and Alaska
Native Tribal Health Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
connect remote regions of Alaska, Hawaii, and Washington to college curriculum
in mathematics and science via modern state-of-the-art computer laboratories and
distance learning and to maintain a program at the University of Alaska-
Anchorage, University of Alaska-Fairbanks, University of Washington, and
University of Hawaii to foster and retain the students in science and
engineering curricula. The team of educators, Native organizations, engineering
firms, contractors and research laboratories is working to provide opportunities
for Indigenous Americans to put young people on career paths to leadership in
industry and academia. The program is a pipeline for students from rural
communities to universities and industry partners ready to hire them upon
graduation. The program will engage 325 students in five years. The partners
have committed approximately $5 million through 2006 to support the activity.
This program can be replicated for other regions and indigenous societies in
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in establishment of state-of-the-art
computer laboratories in very remote locations, working with local indigenous
high school systems to establish the science and mathematics curriculum to
prepare the students for college, training the local teachers to use the
computer systems and tutor the students, and collaborating with industrial
partners who provide equipment, scholarships and job opportunities for the
students when they graduate from college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
brings computer technology to remote communities, provides high school students
with a vision of a career in science and engineering, connects students with
professionals in industry and academia, provides industrial partners with a
technologically trained workforce, and develops the enabling infrastructure
necessary to sustain the effort long term. &lt;br/&gt;