* 0332461
* Innovative Ventures for Emerging Technologies in Rural North Louisiana
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,05/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 05/31/2007
* USD 599,937.00

0332461&lt;br/&gt;Guice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the Louisiana Tech
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include the Louisiana Tech (Lead Institution), A.M. Pappas and Associates,
Louisiana Board of Regents, Louisiana Department of Economic Development,
Louisiana Partnerships for Technology and Innovation, Microtec Associates, VCE
Capital Partners, LLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fosters innovation as a
catalyst for innovations in emerging technologies, such as microsystems and
bionanosystems, to be deployed in new business ventures in North Louisiana. The
project exploits technologies produced from the research programs of the
university's Institute for Micromanufacturing and other science and engineering
research centers. Coordination is provided by the Center for Entrepreneurship
and Information Technology, which is a state-funded partnership between the
College of Engineering and Science and the College of Administration and
Business. One of the major activities is to develop and commercialize the
intellectual property in the region to create economic and societal well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The region is
primarily rural with a focus on agriculture, forest products, chemical
processing, manufacturing, and transportation. The number of technology-based
companies is small. The cultivation of entrepreneurship among the faculty,
students, and business communities will create new companies and provide a
technologically literate workforce based on commercialization of intellectual
property from the university's research and on workforce education and training
programs. The effort will be self-sustaining.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in the creation, transfer and
application of emerging technologies and novel education and training of the
technologically literate workforce through collaboration of the College of
Engineering and Science and the College of Management and Business with the
regional companies and the state and regional
governments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity include
integrating high school students with undergraduate and graduate college
students, creating a model for technological innovation for rural regions, and
integrating engineering and science with business and management for education
of the workforce. Underrepresented groups are involved in the research and
workforce development programs.&lt;br/&gt;