* 0332780
* GDSE/RES: A Study of Gender-based Differences and Ethnic and Cultural Models in each of the Computing Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Antonio Lopez, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2007
* USD 920,598.00

Xavier University of Louisiana proposes to: (1) Scientifically investigate by
gender, ethnicity, and culture the under-representation of women in Computer
Science (CS), Computer Information Systems (CIS), and Computer Engineering (CE)
-- collectively referred to as the computing sciences, (2) Increase the
knowledge-base of gender, ethnic, and cultural models, creating newer models
that lead to a more equitable and inviting CS, CIS, or CE education, and (3)
Increase national capacity in the field of gender diversity and education in the
computing sciences by encouraging new researchers and research-oriented
education practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed in this
project is an investigation with a mixed design. It is primarily a three-year
longitudinal study. The primary theoretical and empirical approach will be the
Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) model. There has been limited exploration
of SCCT's utility in explaining choice actions or goal implementation relative
to STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subjects are 210 first year, male and
female undergraduates in computing sciences (over three successive years) at
each of 50 institutions of higher education from across the nation: 25
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and 25 non-HBCUs. As a
control/baseline for the study each year at each institution, Xavier will also
survey 30 first-year undergraduates who are from a non-computing sciences
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By participating in this research effort, several of
the faculty members from the 50 institutions of higher education should become
more interested in gender diversity and education. Microsoft Research and
Science and Engineering Associates, Inc. (Louisiana's largest information
technology company) will be corporate
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Based upon a large,
nationwide sample, the team expects to be able to scientifically support from
survey evidence some of the anecdotal or small sample findings previously put
forth by other researchers. They expect to greatly improve the granularity of
the current knowledge regarding gender, ethnicity, and culture in the computing
sciences and to better support understanding of the computing sciences across
the fields of psychology, sociology, and education. The comprehensive study
features a multidisciplinary, culturally diverse, collaborative team capable of
conducting the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: The results of
the study could have a profound impact on teaching and learning in the computing
sciences. It will inform new approaches to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, creating new networks and partnerships crossing
disciplinary and geographical lines. Finally, it will give a scientifically
sound basis from which others in society might work to increase the numbers of
women obtaining bachelor's degrees in CS, CIS, or CE. &lt;br/&gt;