* 0332614
* North Louisiana Partnership for Innovation:  Creating Infrastructure for Technology Growth
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Terry McConathy, Northwestern State University Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2005
* USD 599,474.00

0332614&lt;br/&gt;Scheffler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Northwestern
State University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Northwestern State University (Lead Institution), Consortium for
Education, Research, and Technology of North Louisiana (Bossier Parish Community
College, Biomedical Research Foundation of Northwest Louisiana, Centenary
College of Louisiana, Grambling State University, Louisiana Delta Community
College, Louisiana State University Health Sciences in Shreveport, Louisiana
State University in Shreveport, Louisiana Tech University, Louisiana Technical
College, Northwest State University, Southern University in Shreveport,
University of Louisiana at Monroe), Louisiana Board of Regents, Louisiana
Department of Economic Development, Enterprise Computing Systems, Greater
Shreveport Chamber of Commerce, InterTech Science Park, Natchitoches Economic
Development Commission, Praeses Corporation, Softdisc,
SeriFx&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this partnership is to
facilitate the transformation of knowledge into innovations that will create new
wealth and strengthen the regional economy in the area. University partners
provide the research and development and the technologically literate workforce,
and the company partners provide the manufacturing and commercialization. The
academic partners actively identify needs of the industrial partners in both
technology and workforce and match research and educational programs at the
eleven academic institutions in a coordinated manner to these needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana ranks very
low nationally in technology-based innovation. The state has recognized this and
is mounting a concerted effort to change this as stated in the Louisiana Vision
2020. The university consortium is poised to provide knowledge through the
combined research of its members to the regional private sector to promote
technology-based innovation. In addition the academic consortium covers the
entire spectrum of education and training for a technologically literate
workforce. The proposed effort of knowledge transfer, workforce education and
training, and establishment of a strong enabling infrastructure for sustainable
innovation will provide jobs and a workforce to perform those jobs will result
in economic and societal well being in the state. The partners have committed a
very large sum to this effort. The management plan is sufficient to give the
infrastructure a very high probability of being sustained after the award has
terminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies in
creating the web-based informational infrastructure and organizational skills to
coordinate the needs of the industry in the region with the research and
education of the combined academic institutions in the consortium. The resources
of the state government and the regional Chambers of Commerce are all pledged to
promote the activities with funds and agency skills and
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity include
educational diversity, educational outreach to industry, and regional economic
development to ensure long-term sustainability of economic and societal well
being. Underrepresented groups will participate in the activities of the
award.&lt;br/&gt;