* 0333715
* The Tree of Life Project: A Digital Library of Biodiversity Information
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jennifer Franklin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/2006
* USD 615,996.00

The Tree of Life Project (ToL) is an open-access, database-driven system
providing information over the Internet about biodiversity and phylogeny of all
organisms. It contains state-of-the-art content contributed by researchers who
are experts in particular groups of organisms, compiled collaboratively by more
than 350 biologists from over 20 different countries. The ToL currently provides
over 3000 web pages with scientific content to approximately 50,000 visitors per
week. Originally designed as a tool for biological research, the project has
widened its scope in response to interest shown from K-16 students, science
educators, and the general public. Its initial goals were to describe the
characteristics of the world's organisms and their phylogenetic relationships,
to promote an appreciation for biodiversity, and to encourage and facilitate
research about biodiversity and phylogeny. The ToL now seeks to collect more
materials that are aimed at diverse, non-specialist audiences. This project aims
to achieve four main goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) Improve core scientific content of the
ToL collection, focusing on important groups (protists, fungi, flowering plants,
insects, and dinosaurs) that are currently underrepresented and that include
model organisms and organisms of economic significance; they also include the
majority of known species on Earth. These are also groups of special appeal to
K-16 learners.&lt;br/&gt;2) Implement new technical features focusing on needs
of users from the education and research communities. Examples of such features
include a presentation system that allows visitors to customize views of site
content and tools that facilitate collaborative projects between different user
communities. Implementation of Gateway to Educational Materials cataloguing
tools and instructional metadata will make it possible for the project to share
learning objects with other collections.&lt;br/&gt;3) Initiate collection of
content specifically aimed at K-16 learners, including exercises, lesson plans,
media, educational games, news items, and user-generated
materials.&lt;br/&gt;4)Develop and implement robust policies pertaining to the
administrative structure of the ToL (archiving, editorial policies, peer-review,
intellectual property rights, etc.) &lt;br/&gt;As well as providing detailed,
expert content, a notable merit of the ToL is its presentation of the
evolutionary tree of life as an integrated whole. The navigational structure of
the project is in one-to-one correspondence with the basic structure of
evolutionary history. In navigating through the ToL, users are thus instilled
with a vision of the genetic connectedness of all life, the cornerstone of
modern biological knowledge and its organization. Facilitating the casual or
systematic exploration of broad-scale patterns, this approach encourages both
K-16 learners and researchers to trace the distribution of characteristics
across the branches of the tree and to ponder the forces that may have shaped
the observed diversity of living things. The architecture of the project, based
upon the connections between the subjects it sets out to catalogue and describe,
also makes the ToL an ideal tool for the investigation of learning technology
interfaces. The ToL has broad impact within and beyond the biodiversity research
community. A community-oriented administrative model encourages
interdisciplinary and international collaborations, and the project is designed
to facilitate the sharing of content and open-source software tools with other
projects. In addition, the ToL provides scientists with a platform for the
dissemination of research results to the general public. In providing the
highest-quality content contributed by specialists, and yet presenting this in a
way that is accessible to non-specialists, the ToL also facilitates life-long
learning in the larger community of visitors to the web. The proposed project is
significantly enhancing the impact of the ToL by (1) extending its content in
key groups of organisms, (2) rebuilding its architecture to add features
specifically designed for educational users and those with disabilities, and (3)
integrating its content with other educational resources, thereby improving
services for our diverse user communities. The Division of Environmental Biology
in the NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences is providing significant co-
funding for this project in recognition of the role ToL is playing in advancing
the educational goals of the Directorate.