* 0333100
* Processes of Change in Agricultural Systems: Impacts of Intervention in Ivorian Rice Cropping Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2002,01/31/2005
* Laurence Becker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2005
* USD 48,805.00

Technical changes to agriculture in Africa have long been promoted and
introduced with the aim of improving food security in the region. The results of
recent research on the relationship between technology transfer and agricultural
production in Africa south of the Sahara are, however, inconsistent at best,
indicating the need for new conceptualizations of the problem. This project
examines changes to rice production systems in Ivory Coast in the context of the
neo-liberal reforms of the 1990s in order to determine the conditions under
which rice growers have responded positively to the new policies. The research
will test three main hypotheses:(1) that the reforms have had little impact on
national rice output but that they have affected regional market orientation of
rice production; (2) that farmer-led innovations can be expected in commercial
rice systems but that the macro-level economic reforms will have had little
impact on the regional rice cropping patterns; and (3) where small-scale milling
operations provide a market outlet for rice producers, positive farmer response
to the reforms will be greatest. The research will include a mix of techniques
involving both qualitative and quantitative information. The methods to conduct
this study include establishing accurate information on current rice production
and area from data provided by local extension service offices throughout the
country and interviews with local extension workers responsible for rice, rice
farmers, millers, and traders. From these updated data, the project will use
survey research techniques in selected villages using a farming systems approach
and in selected urban milling and marketing centers using a commodity chain
analysis approach.

This project will contribute to debates on the role of technology transfer and
market incentives to stimulate production, and in particular on the potential
role of intermediary regional commodity chains in the development and diffusion
of agricultural technology. This research will be of value to social scientists,
applied agricultural researcher, and policymakers.

