* 0333161
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Complete Genomic Sequencing of Arthrobacter aurescens strain TC1
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Karen Nelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 705,245.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Michael Sadowsky and Lawrence Wacket at the
University of Minnesota, Dr. Patrick Hamilton at the Science Museum of
Minnesota, and Dr. Karen Nelson at The Institute for Genome Research (Maryland)
to obtain the complete DNA sequence of and identify the major genes in the soil
bacterium Arthrobacter aurescens strain TC1. Arthrobacter strains are widespread
in soil around the globe and contribute to recycling organic matter and breaking
down environmental pollutants. Despite their environmental importance, no member
of this group has had its total DNA content sequenced. Modern DNA sequencing
technologies and computer tools will be used to obtain sequence information and
the potential function of all the genes, including those involved in ridding the
environment of harmful chemicals. Drs. Sadowsky and Wackett will partner with
the Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) in St. Paul, MN, which hosts more than one
million visitors annually, to develop exhibits that display the genomic
information obtained in this project and its importance for the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of complete microbial genome
sequences is revolutionizing microbiology, medicine, and environmental sciences.
Genome sequencing provides information on how bacterial genes are organized on
their chromosome, what genes are present, and how they evolved. Arthrobacter are
unique bacteria in that they have relatively complex life cycles, survive in
extreme environments, such as the arctic, and are extremely resistant to drying
and starvation. These bacteria are capable of degrading a variety of toxic
substances in the environment, including pesticides, gasoline additives,
explosives, and industrial solvents. The genomic sequence of Arthrobacter
aurescens will provide invaluable information concerning this microorganism's
fundamentally important biological properties. Given their ability to break down
a large number of environmentally relevant compounds, knowledge obtained from
the complete genomic sequence will help guide the use of these microbes in the
bioremediation of contaminated environments. &lt;br/&gt;