* 0333411
* IGERT:  Hybrid Neural Microsystems: Integrating Neural Tissue and Engineered Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 11/15/2003,04/30/2012
* Robert Butera, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 04/30/2012
* USD 3,857,757.00

This IGERT program is focused on the creation of a training environment that
combines cellular and systems neuroscience with microelectronics/computing
technology and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The novel combination of
disciplines will result in a program whose intellectual merit is embodied in the
development and application of systems that integrate neural tissue and
engineered components. Research applications range from enhancing knowledge of
living organisms, to augmenting damaged neuronal tissue, to creating
biologically-inspired engineered systems. The participating faculty members have
a strong track record of interdisciplinary education and research that has laid
the foundation for this effort. The IGERT program will build upon this
foundation through a combination of educational infrastructure and
interdisciplinary research opportunities that will facilitate the training of
IGERT fellows, who will emerge from the program as a new breed of scientist-
engineer that understands and can apply knowledge that crosses these two,
previously disparate disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will impact
the participating institutions and the broader neuroengineering community
through its educational, recruitment, and professional-development components.
Educational efforts formalize interactions among programs at Georgia Tech and
Emory, resulting in the integrated training of biology and engineering students
to address issues at the intersection of these two disciplines. The program
includes many interlinked educational components, including the capstone Hybrid
Neural Microsystems course, which combines laboratory experience, problem-based
learning, and implicit mentoring. The recruitment and retention efforts target
the creation of a candidate pool of potential neuroscience and engineering
students who are prepared for this program. These efforts will focus on the
recruitment of a significant population of under-represented minority students,
capitalizing upon existing partnerships between Georgia Tech, Emory, and the
colleges of the Atlanta University Center. Career development will be fostered
by engaging the fellows in collaborative international experiences and in
industrial internships, enhancing, in the process, existing relationships with
these international and industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an
NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year
of the program, awards are being made to institutions for programs that
collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;