* 0333444
* IGERT: Marine Biodiversity - Understanding Threats and Providing Solutions
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Dale Squires, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2009
* USD 3,576,520.00

Human beings profoundly affect many of the physical and biological processes of
the planet, with consequences for the future that are poorly understood. For
many years concern focused on the land, but the degradation and vulnerability of
marine ecosystems is now apparent. Identifying the magnitude and causes of
environmental change is a complex task, but this alone is not enough. The
environmental and socioeconomic consequences of alternative policy responses
must be evaluated, and this information must be conveyed effectively to policy-
makers and the public. In order to accomplish this, we propose an integrated
research and training plan designed to answer the following questions for
specific marine ecosystems where we have expertise: (1) How have marine
ecosystems changed over time and what are the main forces influencing those
dynamics? (2) How do marine ecosystems currently function and what services do
they provide? (3) What are the policy options available for protecting and
restoring marine biodiversity and ecosystem function? (4) What information
(biological and socio-economic) is needed by decision-makers and how is it best
communicated to them and to the public at large?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet
this need, we plan a new type of graduate training whose centerpiece is a series
of interdisciplinary, team-based, problem-solving experiences to foster
analytical and communication skills with a global outlook. Key novel elements of
this IGERT program are: an intensive introductory course in the relevant natural
and social sciences (1st summer); a year-long, case-studies course Marine
Science, Law and Policy in which interdisciplinary teams of students work
together on marine-related problems facing society (1st academic year); a summer
internship (national or international, governmental or NGO; 2nd summer);
assembly of interdisciplinary teams to elaborate and coordinate research
strategies for targeted ecosystems (year 2); an Informatics in Biodiversity
class and workshops in ethics and communication skills (years 2 &amp; 3); and a
dissertation bridging the natural and social sciences that addresses an
important marine conservation problem, with advisors from within and outside
academia (years 3-5).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The IGERT program
will provide greater understanding of marine biodiversity, the threats that it
faces, and provide methods to address those threats. Its interdisciplinary
structure will facilitate creation of novel links across the natural, social and
informatic sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The primary purpose of
the program is to train a new generation of students capable of confronting
important societal issues with respect to the health of the world's oceans.
Specific elements include building links outside academia (nationally and
internationally), increasing representation of under-represented groups, and
communicating the results of investigations outside traditional academic
circles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;