* 0333420
* IGERT: Interdisciplinary Research Training in Assistive Technology
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Sebastian Thrun, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2009
* USD 3,718,105.00

This IGERT will support PhD students at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and at
the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt) pursuing training and research in assistive
technology. The focus of this IGERT is to support training and research that
provides both a deep understanding of human needs and what technology can do to
provide for those needs. This IGERT brings together a number of research
institutes in CMU's School of Computer Science (Robotics, Human-Computer
Interaction, Language Technology, and the Center for Automated Learning and
Discovery) and departments within Pitt (Rehabilitation Science and Technology,
Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Nursing, Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Bioengineering, and Communication Science and Disorders). A key
feature of this IGERT is that, after appropriate course work and training, each
student will (1a) engage in a full time clinical internship program for at least
one semester or summer or (1b) produce a conference quality paper describing a
clinical study that student performed, and (2) produce a conference quality
paper describing the design, implementation, assessment, and/or refinement of an
assistive technology. This requirement will necessarily mean that technological
students have a substantial clinical experience, and clinical students have a
substantial technical experience. Additional cross-over clinical and technical
experiences will be encouraged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the proposed activity includes getting technical and clinical departments to
talk to each other, understand each other's thinking, and create a truly joint
educational program. The IGERT program ensures that students gain exposure to
basic technological research as well as the translation of research to clinical
applications. Collaboration with Pitt will provide opportunities for CMU
students and faculty to get exposure to real clients with real problems in real
contexts, rather than the usual 2nd or 3rd hand problem descriptions isolated
from context. Collaboration with CMU will provide opportunities for Pitt
students and faculty to get exposure to state of the art technology, and
exposure to a wider range of students and faculty who could serve as sources of
expertise and collaborators. This IGERT will facilitate communication and
understanding among rehabilitation and technology disciplines by bringing
together students and faculty working on assistive technology in several
different CMU institutes and departments at Pitt. Participants in this IGERT
will work to develop online courses and open source software to make our
learning resources accessible world wide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of increased research and training in assistive technology is to improve
the lives of people with disabilities, the elderly, children with developmental
disorders, and ultimately help make everyone more perceptive, smarter, and more
capable. Our definition of assistive technology is quite broad, and thus we
expect to have a wide impact. There are huge needs and opportunities for
assistive technology. Each year the number and percentage of senior citizens in
our society increases. Many need assistance to live independently as long as
possible. Nursing-home care can be improved in many ways with assistive
technology. The number of diagnoses of developmental disorders in children is
increasing, and technology can assist these children to develop and participate
in our society more fully. The use of technology to reduce the effect of
disabilities in perception, reasoning, memory, and movement is rapidly
increasing. The Americans with Disabilities Act mandates greater integration of
people with disabilities. Rehabilitation engineering and assistive technology
will need to play a substantial role in the order for the goal to be reached.
Central to our research and education is outreach to individuals and groups with
needs or disabilities that technology can help. Pitt's Department of
Rehabilitation Science and Technology (RST) has one of the highest
concentrations of people with disabilities as faculty, staff, and students of
any academic program in the world. In addition, we will model our diversity and
outreach programs on the successful recruitment of women by Pitt's RST and CMU's
School of Computer Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program
intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers
with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline,
and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career
demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;