* 0333528
* Process Connectors: Supporting Information Transactions Between Residential Construction Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2005
* William O'Brien, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2005
* USD 199,698.00

The residential construction industry has changed markedly in recent years yet
the information transfer between in participants has remained relatively
unchanged. Most builders now work with a large team of suppliers and
subcontractors to accomplish construction. The result of the increased number of
participants (and associated variation in sophistication) has been significant
lapses in communication and coordination. The degree of fragmentation also makes
implementation of IT support difficult with existing technologies. Hence much of
the coordination tasks and data sharing continues to be performed manually with
paper documents. The cost of such manual processes in terms of time, errors, and
rework has been well documented by studies undertaken by the US Department of
Housing and Urban Development. In response to these structural and information
issues, this proposal identifies the development of process connectors to
increase information usability and applicability to all participants of what is
a very complex supply and installation chain. A process connector links
processes and data resident in one firm with processes and data in another firm.
It provides an explicit way of articulating information about a firm's internal
processes. This allows industry participants to understand what information
other participants require from them and how other participants use that
information. The project objectives are to generate the necessary theory and
understandings to enable the rapid and consistent generation of process
connectors in the residential construction industry. Specific deliverables are
an extension and meta-extension of the Industry Foundation Classes to support
process connection as well as a series of documented test cases. To guide the
development and testing the research team will collaborate with the residential
construction industry throughout the project. Collaboration with industry
provides directed opportunities to foster the educational objectives of the
grant to involve students in the research and to develop examples and systems
for classroom pedagogy. The research is expected to be of broad significance as
management of many interacting processes is one of the most challenging and
expensive aspects of housing construction. The potential contributions to the
annual $320 billion residential construction industry are large even if the work
is only partially successful. Further, the information management challenges of
residential projects are representative of challenges in other domains (e.g.,
other AEC projects, shipbuilding, custom manufacturing, etc.). Hence the
proposed project promises development of significant theory and understandings
applicable process coordination challenges in0333528 many industries.

