* 0333380
* IGERT: Multidisciplinary Graduate Education and Research Training in Nanomaterials Science and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,08/31/2011
* Derrick Dean, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 08/31/2011
* USD 3,146,100.00

Tuskegee University started its first Ph.D. program in Materials Science and
Engineering in fall 1998 with initial support from the National Science
Foundation through a grant to establish the Center for Research Excellence in
Science and Technology (CREST). The program also received subsequent support
from various federal agencies (ONR, ARO, AFOSR, and NASA) and industry (Boeing
and Raytheon). It is a multidisciplinary program whose primary objective is to
substantially increase the number of minorities, particularly, African Americans
with Ph.D. degrees in Materials Science and Engineering. The IGERT project is
intended to provide additional fellowships to meet the demand from students to
enter the Ph.D. program. It also includes stipends for some undergraduate and
Master's level students who could be appropriately prepared to enter the Ph.D.
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thematic area of research is the development
of structural nanocomposites. Recent studies show that an infusion of a small
percentage of nanoparticles into a polymer can bring about significant changes
in the chemical and mechanical properties of composite materials. To bring these
benefits to structural composites, we are planning to continue a development of
the science and technology of nanocomposites. A diverse team of researchers has
been assembled to study the entire spectrum of technology related to synthesis,
fabrication, and characterization of structural nanocomposites. The three
subprojects of the proposed research theme will be: (i) Synthesis and Analysis
of Structural Nanocomposites, (ii) Modeling and Manufacturing of Structural
Nanocomposites, and (iii) Performance Evaluation of Structural Nanocomposites.
The proposed research activities will be a systematic and logical expansion of
studies of the synthesis, modeling, and manufacturing of advanced nanocomposites
that are already being performed by the Tuskegee team under various research
grants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each subproject will consist of several student
research projects. Several faculty members will be involved in each research
project. A faculty member from this team will also serve as the thesis advisor
to the Ph.D. student. Each project will include a Ph.D. student, a Masters
student and two undergraduate students. In conducting the proposed research and
educational activities, members of the Tuskegee team will collaborate with two
majority universities with internationally recognized research centers in
nanomaterials (Rice University and the University of Wisconsin), federal
research laboratories (Air Force Research Laboratory, Army Research Laboratory,
and Oak Ridge National Laboratory) and industry (Boeing and Raytheon). Three new
graduate level courses related to nanomaterials science and engineering and one
course dealing with issues of ethics in research will be developed as part of
this IGERT project. We also intend to make arrangements for the students in the
Ph.D. program to intern at national and industrial laboratories to acquire
additional research and professional development experience. The Ph.D. students
who express a desire to join the professorate will be given opportunities to
teach selected undergraduate courses and team with the faculty in teaching
selected graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal lies in the fact that the benefits of nanoparticle infusion into a
polymer are being harnessed for the manufacture of nanophased structural
composites using a comprehensive approach. These structural composites will
consequently have significantly superior mechanical, chemical, and thermal
properties. Fulfillment of the stated objectives will expand our knowledge of
the science of nanoparticle-polymer interactions as well as provide, in the
short term, comprehensive technical information on a new generation of
structural materials. The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activities
include production of a large number of African American graduates, including
many at the Ph.D. level, in an emerging area of materials science and
engineering. Such graduates should become role models for many young minority
science and engineering students in years to come. Moreover, these graduates
will help bring much-needed diversity to the nation's advanced technological
workforce. It is also anticipated that the methodologies developed here for the
manufacture of nanocomposites may well lead to patentable processes for the
large-scale production of nanophased structural
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;