* 0333969
* Cooperative Grain Boundary Sliding and Heterogeneities of Grain Boundary Character Distribution in Superplastic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Hamid Garmestani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 01/31/2006
* USD 193,815.00

0109535 Garmastani

This project is aimed at greater understanding of fundamental mechanisms of
structural superplastic deformation in different aluminum alloys using the most
current digital imaging and insitu microscopy techniques. It has been
established that grain boundary sliding during micrograin superplasticity
operates heterogeneously and in a cooperative manner. The nature of
heterogeneity of cooperative grain boundary sliding remains unclear. Fundamental
understanding of the origin of this important deformation mode can be fruitful
for the improvement of theoretical models of superplasticity as well as for the
design of advanced materials with improved superplastic properties. The main
goals of this study are: (1) to determine the relationship between cooperative
grain boundary sliding and grain boundary disorientation (mesotexture) in three
fine-grained aluminum alloys (AA7475, AA5083 and D19) that manifest different
micro-mechanical behavior; (2) to study topological modes of grain boundary
sliding in these alloys; (3) to investigate accommodation mechanisms for
cooperative grain boundary sliding. To reach these goals two different micro-
characterization techniques are combined together: Orientation Imaging
Microscopy (OIM) in Scanning Electron Microscope and Nanoscratching with
Scanning Probe Microscope. The work is based on insitu micro-tensile stage
capability that will be used in conjunction with real time OIM analysis to
provide important information on the nature of the grain boundary sliding. The
funding for this research provides a first hand exposure to research in
forefront of science and technology to minority students at FAMU-FSU College of
Engineering. %%% This research develops new understanding of the mechanisms
involved with superplasticity beyond the present state of the art. The results
are applicable for cost savings for metal fabrication through near net shaping.
The research will make significant contributions to minority education and
research. ***