* 0333190
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Salinibacter ruber: A Bacterium that Behaves Like a Haloarchaean
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Karen Nelson, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 349,973.00

Hypersaline environments were considered to be the exclusive preserve of
halophilic archaea, specialists at coping with these extreme conditions. It has
recently been discovered however, that many of the prokaryotic inhabitants of
crystallizer ponds are actually bacteria of the Cytophaga cluster.
Representative strains of this cluster have now been isolated from several
locales, and have been described as the new species Salinibacter ruber, an
aerobic heterotroph that grows readily in pure culture and exhibits many
"haloarchaeal" physiological properties. These properties are likely the result
of remarkable convergence, extensive inter-domain gene transfer, or most likely
a combination of both of these events. Salinibacter, has turned out to be a
significant player in an extreme and highly productive microbial ecosystem, and
as far as we know, is the only halophilic bacterium that, rather than producing
compatible solutes and excluding salt, has adapted each of its proteins to
function at very high internal ionic concentrations. In addition to these
interesting physiological aspects, S. ruber belongs to a complex and genomically
under-sampled lineage (the Cytophaga-Flexibacter- Bacteroides group). The main
goal of this research project is to sequence, annotate and analyze the entire
genome of S. ruber. In addition, the genome sequence will be closely examined
for evidence of gene transfer events and convergent evolution. It is anticipated
that S. ruber will prove to be one of the extraordinary contributors to the
understanding of evolution and molecular biology, and at the gene and protein
level will demonstrate a mix of independently achieved (convergent) and
laterally acquired adaptations.