* 0333297
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequencing of Agrobacterium biovar Type Strains
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Derek Wood, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,067,782.00

The goal of this project is to produce annotated genome sequences for two
biovars of Agrobacterium; the biovar II strain, A. radiobacter K84 and the
biovar III strain, A. vitis S4. Previous analysis of the biovar I representative
of this diverse species provided intriguing insights into the evolutionary
relationship shared between this pathogen and symbionts of the Rhizobiaceae. Our
choice of K84 as the bv II representative is based on the large amount of
published data available regarding the field properties of this strain as well
as its position as the single most effective biological control agent available
for any bacterial disease of plants. The bv III representative, S4, was chosen
based on a number of intriguing biological properties including its narrow host
range, its unique T-DNA composition and organization as well as its ability to
produce a hypersensitive response on non-host plants via a mechanism that is
apparently distinct from that of other phytopathogens. This project brings
together expertise from five independent groups with significant experience in
Agrobacterium biology, genomics and undergraduate education. A key portion of
this project is geared towards providing a training platform in genomics
technology for undergraduate researchers at different participating
institutions. Such participation will both facilitate our project goals and
provide key training for new scientists. Access to the genome sequence of these
organisms will allow extensive comparative genomic analyses, relate genotype to
field biology and behavior, and facilitate the molecular characterization of
biological control, host range and the unique factors mediating the
hypersensitive response.