* 0333902
* STI:  Self-Organizing Spectrum Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2008
* David Staelin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 05/31/2008
* USD 616,178.00

This proposed research program will address the challenges posed by the
continuing growth of the Internet and shared-spectrum networks in a finite-
spectrum world. Current spectrum allocations are generally either "static," or
allow user transmissions insensitive to nearby users and overall network
efficiency. To maximize wireless network performance it will be necessary to
understand and develop efficient "self-organizing methods of spectrum
allocation" in which transceivers cooperate using new wireless prototcols to
locally maximize total wireless channel capacity (bits s-1 Hz-1 m-2) and network
utility (reliability, latency, equity, and economic factors). The performance
limits of alternative architectures for spectrum self-organization will be
explored, including networking schemes: 1) without "side-channel" control
information, 2) with side-channel information from active transmitters only, and
3) side- channel information from passive ports too, permitting power and
antenna control by local transmitters that boosts network performance. Any side-
channel information would supplement that which is always available by
monitoring transmitter emissions. Methods to be Employed Urban user and
multipath propagation models will be formulated using existing and/or new
wireless data recorded using equipment to be developed. Based on these models,
wireless multi-user network configurations will be statistically analyzed using
quantitative metrics that facilitate understanding and development of
alternative self- organizing approaches to spectrum allocation. New methods for
multivariate blind signal separation will be developed for multi-antenna systems
that employ self-organizing spectrum-allocation strategies. Strategies and
protocols for self-organizing wireless networks will be formulated and tested
using these models and metrics, and the results will be integrated to inform
policy makers and technologists of limits and new options. Intellectual Merit of
the Proposed Activity The intellectual merit lies in the development and
evaluation of: 1) new strategies for efficient cooperative use of wireless
spectrum in crowded urban environments, 2) effective new methods for blind
multivariate signal separation, 3) stochastic models for multi-user wireless
multipath environments, and 4) integrated models for the nominal limits to
wireless performance and economics. Broader Impacts Successful completion of
these program elements should provide a useful foundation for: 1) formulating
telecommunications regulations that promote increased spectral efficiency and
wireless utilization for internet and other services, 2) development of devices
and systems by the private sector that increase spectrum capacity and
utilization, and 3) further research utilizing: the models to be developed for
the wireless environment, the multi-antenna multi-channel wireless sensor, the
databases characterizing the observations and models, improved algorithms for
blind separation of multivariate signals, and new algorithms for self-organizing
spectrum allocation.