* 0333378
* Macromolecular Interfaces with Life Sciences:Oxidative Processes
* EHR,DGE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2011
* Timothy Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 01/31/2011
* USD 3,400,800.00

Many boundaries at the chemistry-biology interface remain unexplored and
represent unique opportunities for the discovery of advanced technologies and
the education of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers. Oxidation processes
occur within both synthetic macromolecules and biological systems, offering a
common theoretical base. Oxygen-centered radicals are implicated as
intermediates in key chemical and biological processes such as lipid oxidation,
cellular aging and product deterioration, as well as certain enzyme-mediated
processes. The profound irony underlying all oxidation chemistry is that, in
general terms at least, the same element that nature uses to sustain and
regenerate life also plays a role in aging, disease, and death. Oxidative stress
is implicated in many chronic diseases, including cancer, diabetes, obesity and
the compromise of immune function. These chronic diseases contribute
significantly to the projected $1.6 trillion in health care costs at the
national level in 2003, costing 15% of &lt;br/&gt;the national gross product.
The development of antioxidant delivery systems, including antioxidant enriched
foods, novel biocompatible synthetic polymer delivery systems, or new natural
and synthetic macromolecular antioxidants would have major applications in
combating oxidation-based diseases and aging. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the MILES
Program is to construct a unique educational framework and collaborative
research program, using free radical and oxidative processes as the thematic
basis for scientific connectivity that bridges the gap between traditional
macromolecular science and evolving biological disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Integration of Research and Education &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fifteen
interdisciplinary research faculty in four colleges at Virginia Tech will
collaborate with domestic and international universities, industries and
national laboratories to provide unique cooperative research, multidisciplinary
education, and outreach experiences for 36 graduate students. The Program will
prepare doctoral-level candidates in chemistry, engineering, and life sciences
as future leaders in academia, industry and government. The research efforts
will include basic through applied research in four areas: 1) Fundamental
investigations of oxygen-centered free radical mechanisms; 2) Oxidation in bio-
derived monomers and macromolecular synthesis; 3) Oxidation control mechanisms
in complex matrices; and 4) Oxidation processes in human and animal aging and
disease. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the program are to: 1) Expand
fundamental understanding and scientific vision of the macromolecule-biomolecule
interface; 2) Develop creative and analytical thinking; 3) Integrate advanced
research training with ethics education; 4) Develop practical skills in
communications; 5) Enhance teamwork and develop leadership; 5) Promote diversity
in culture and worldview; 6) Construct new avenues for community outreach; and
8) Create novel mechanisms to attract academically gifted students to graduate
school. In order to be awarded a MILES program certificate, students will be
required to submit an electronic portfolio that documents successful completion
of required elements and optional selections that meet both the program goals
and the individualized interests of the student. Unique outreach programs
incorporate partnerships with the Science Museum of Western Virginia, the
Collaborative Laboratory with historically black colleges, and domestic and
international industry internships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The university.s education and research infrastructure
will be strengthened considerably by an interdisciplinary program design that
crosses the boundaries of traditional academic disciplines. Broad societal
impact will result from improved control of free radical and oxidative processes
in biological and macromolecular systems, yielding important advances in
nutrition, biomedical science and engineering, food biochemistry and
functionality, and sustainable polymeric materials from bio-derived precursors.
This training program will contribute to a new generation of professionals
prepared to move society forward into an era of sustained health, well-being,
and quality of life through technological advancements. Ultimately, the program
will equip future scientists and engineers with the broad-based skills necessary
to transcend conventional boundaries.