* 0334961
* ATOL:  Collaborative Research:  The Deep Scaly Project:  Resolving Squamate Phylogeny Using Genomic and Morphological Approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Olivier Rieppel, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2010
* USD 553,414.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EF-0334961&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Dr. Maureen Kearney and Dr. Olivier Rieppel of the Field Museum of Natural
History to study the evolutionary history of squamate reptiles (lizards and
snakes). With over 7,700 species, squamates are the second largest group of
terrestrial vertebrates. Many critical questions in squamate evolution remain
unresolved, such as identification of the most primitive lineage of squamates,
the origin of snakes, and the relationships of venomous snakes to other snake
lineages. An international team of eight investigators from diverse institutions
(Brigham Young University, Field Museum of Natural History, San Diego State
University, State University of New York-Stony Brook, University of Adelaide,
University of Texas-Austin, and Yale University) will collaborate to resolve
squamate relationships. Anatomical data from living and fossil forms will be
combined with DNA sequences from 50 genes for 142 representative squamate
species. Anatomical data will be obtained using traditional methods, as well as
new technology such as high resolution X-ray CT scanning. DNA data will be
generated by incorporating new tools and databases from recent vertebrate genome
projects. Drs. Kearney and Rieppel will be responsible for the collection of
anatomical data for extant and fossil species, and Dr. Jessica Maisano
(University of Texas-Austin, subcontracted through the Field Museum) will be
responsible for the CT-scanning portion of the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary history of squamate
reptiles is critical for a complete picture of vertebrate evolution and ecology.
Venomous snakes pose an important threat to human safety in many parts of the
world, and identification is critical for effective treatment; an innovative
web-site will be produced allowing snakebite victims and medical workers to
identify the venomous snakes in their area. Postdoctoral researchers and
students will be involved in all aspects of this project; thus the training of
many future biologists and educators will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;