* 0334611
* CEDAR: Exploration of Trends in Thermospheric+Exospheric Hydrogen Using H-Alpha Emission Intensities and Hydrogen Column Abundances Retrieved from the Wisconsin Long Term Record
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Roland Woodward, Jr., University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 12/31/2008
* USD 271,528.00

Upward fluxes of hydrogen containing molecules such as methane, water vapor, and
molecular hydrogen are the primary source of hydrogen-containing chemical
species in the middle and upper atmosphere. Understanding the sensitivity of the
thermosphere and exosphere to hydrogenous species distributions below, to
sources of natural variability, and to possible long-term climatic changes are
central questions for geocoronal research. Observations of thermospheric and
exospheric hydrogen-alpha column emissions by the Wisconsin H-alpha Mapper
Fabry-Perot (WHAM) over the 1997-2001 rise in the solar cycle are the first
Wisconsin-based observations to show a statistically significant solar cyclical
variation in the geocoronal H-alpha emission, with higher emissions during solar
maximum periods. These observations are scheduled to continue over the decline
in the solar cycle, through at least 2005. The WHAM observations corroborate
suggestions of such a trend seen in past mid latitude Wisconsin-based H
observations. Collectively, this long term, consistently calibrated data record
now spans two solar cycles. The research focuses on: analysis of and examination
of trends in Fabry-Perot observations of thermospheric and exospheric H
intensities; forward modeling retrieval of the thermospheric and exospheric
hydrogen column abundance using a global resonance radiative transport code; and
comparison of hydrogen column densities retrieved from H observations with those
generated using output from a global mean model and the Thermosphere-Ionosphere-
Mesosphere Electrodynamics General Circulation Model (TIME-GCM) as input to the
radiative transfer code. A primary component to understanding the earth's
climate and climate change due to human activities is knowledge of natural
variability in the atmosphere. This study contributes to this effort by
investigating the influence on upper atmospheric hydrogen of changes in the
sun's ultraviolet output over the solar cycle. Upper atmospheric hydrogen is a
byproduct of hydrogenous species chemistry in the middle atmosphere, involving
molecules such as methane and water vapor, two primary atmospheric greenhouse
gases. It is anticipated that characterization of upper atmospheric hydrogen,
together with observational diagnostics lower in the atmosphere, will contribute
to studies of vertical patterns in hydrogen containing species and their
influence upon one another. The WHAM data add to a long-term body of hydrogen
emission data now spanning a 20 year period. Their high precision and signal-to-
noise facilitate comparisons with past and future data sets. This work will
continue current educational and public outreach efforts focused on enhancing
scientific literacy concerning climate change and other atmospheric topics, and
on promoting diversity in the study of science.