* 0334386
* US- India Cooperative Research:  Improvement of Biohydrogen Production by Investigation on the Hydrogenase Coding Gene of High Yielding Strain of Enterobacter cloacae IIT-BT 08
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Hongtan Liu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2009
* USD 30,456.00

Description: This award supports a US-India cooperative research project
entitled Improvement of Biohydrogen Production by Investigation on the
Hydrogenase Coding Gene of High Yielding Strain of Enterobacter cloacae IIT-BT
08 in Fast Growing Escherichia coli. US PI Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
and Debabrata Das, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur (IITK) will
investigate unique strains of the microbial hydrogenase gene that will lead to
new information on hydrogenases and hydrogen-producing microorganisms that could
be applied to biohydrogen production. The microorganisms chosen are suitable for
utilization in waste treatment plants for more economic production of hydrogen.
&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Extensive research is being carried out on different aspects
of biological hydrogen production at the University of Miami. IITK's Department
of Biotechnology is very experienced in conducting research on fermentative
hydrogen production using a high yielding strain of Enterobacter cloacae IIT-BT
08, suitable for biological hydrogen production. This is a research area of high
current interest that holds considerable promise from both technical and social
standpoints, which has the potential for developing a clean, easily distributed,
and inexpensive source of chemical energy. The collaboration is mutually
beneficial. It is cofunded by NSF's Division of Bioengineering &amp;
Environmental Systems and the Indian Department of Science &amp; Technology
under the NSF/DST joint program.