* 0334849
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic Adaptation to Disease: Tuberculosis Susceptibility in Native South Americans
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Anne Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 6,030.00

Biological anthropologists have long been interested in the question of
population differences in disease susceptibility, but Native American
communities have historically been underrepresented in research on host-pathogen
co-evolution. Given that a longstanding, unresolved controversy in
paleopathology concerns the origin of New World tuberculosis, inclusion of these
groups is of utmost importance to the understanding of the evolution of this
disease and its historical and current impact on native communities.
Tuberculosis incidence in Native American populations since European contact has
been high, and extreme susceptibility of Native Americans was traditionally
considered evidence against pre-Columbian tuberculosis, but recent studies
confirm presence of the disease in the New World prior to European contact.
Thus, susceptibility of Native American groups must be examined as a potential
adaptive mechanism to other environmental factors.

Mounting evidence from research performed on other world populations indicates
that a complex interplay of host genetics and the environment play an important
role in determining tuberculosis susceptibility. In Asian, African and European
populations studied to date, for example multiple genes are involved in
susceptibility, and these genes differ by population. This dissertation examines
the role of host genetics and environmental factors in tuberculosis
susceptibility in the Ache of Paraguay. Candidate genes associated with
tuberculosis in other populations (vitamin D receptor, natural resistance-
associated macrophage protein, and mannose binding lectin) will be analyzed for
linkage to tuberculosis.

The scientific merit of this project is that it is the first large-scale study
of Native Americans to incorporate extensive pedigree, demographic and
epidemiological data to examine genetic and environmental causes of tuberculosis
susceptibility. The longitudinal nature of the data set will allow examination
of the underlying genetic causes of the high case rates in Native American
populations relative to European ones. At a broader level, this project can
serve as a model for examining susceptibility to TB in other Native American
groups in that similar loci may be involved. The research proposed here can add
to the growing body of information on the co-evolution of human populations and
their pathogens by identifying loci that are involved in TB susceptibility in an
as yet unexamined Native American group.

The broader impact of this research can be divided into two stages. At an
individual level, a graduate student, and an undergraduate assistant will be
trained. At the level of the population, there may be health and economic
consequences for Ache and perhaps other native South American communities, who
have been underrepresented in this type of research. Disease susceptibility in
native communities is more than a biological question: high rates of disease
lead to social disruption and loss of economic productivity. Information about
genetic vs. environmental causes of disease susceptibility may be key for future
public health strategies.

