* 0334035
* STI:  Development of an Infrastructure for Real-Time Super Media over the Internet
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Matt Mutka, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2008
* USD 777,371.00

The proposed research aims to develop and experimentally test new methods,
algorithms, and tools to establish an infrastructure for real-time super media
transport over the Internet to support tele operations. Super media includes
video, audio, haptic, temperature, control commands andother media. As a result
of this research, improvements will occur in the manner that people buy, sell,
learn, and explore via the Internet by improving the ones ability to touch,
feel, and manipulate an object over the Internet. For example, new opportunities
are possible when the sense of touch is achieved by receiving haptic information
due to remote commands of touch, especially when it may be combined with sight
and sound in areas of tele-medicine to enable a physician to feel the patient at
a remote location for abnormalities, or in tele-commerce to allow a customer to
touch and manipulate an item before its purchase. Tele-education opportunities
enable students to feel objects to enhance learning that otherwise would be
inaccessible to them. Further opportunities are open in areas of handing waste
materials, tele-manufacturing, and games and entertainment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major merits of this proposed research include
&lt;br/&gt;(i) Development of a perceptive reference frame for Internet-based
real-time teleoperations to overcome random communication time-delays;
(ii)Development of a new planning and control method in a perceptive reference
frame to achieve a stable force reflected teleoperation; (iii) Development of
QoS parameters for measuring network quality of the Internet during real-time
tele operation; (iv) Development of QoS driven dynamic resources allocation
scheme to plan the teleoperation tasks and allocate the available Internet
resources to ensure the QoS of the tele robotic services; (v) Development of
Supermedia Application Tools for the Internet (SATIN) for implementation of the
proposed QoS based control and resource allocation methods. The success of this
project will not only provide important technologies to further development of
the Internet infrastructure and control systems that use the Internet, but will
also contribute to the development of the future manpower base of innovative and
competent engineers and scientists by utilizing the recent advances in Internet,
information, and robotics technologies. This project will have broad impacts in
both education and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and
education effort will be incorporated into College strategies for improving
representation of under represented groups and minorities. The PIs plan to
incorporate the proposed research activities into departmental undergraduate
courses, such as the capstone courses, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing
course, which the PIs teach. Since the researchers have already participated in
collaborative projects with researchers in Asia and Europe, it is proposed that
super media transport would enable an opportunity to have collaboration among
student design groups across different continents. This activity would promote
undergraduate student participation as well as opportunities for sharing
cultural experiences. &lt;br/&gt;