* 0334025
* Travel Grant for Graduate Students to Attend the Third ACM InternationalWorkshop on Data Engineering for Wireless and Mobile Access (MobiDEÆ03) in San Diego, CA
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Panos Chrysanthis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Travel Grant for Graduate Students to Attend the Third ACM International
Workshop on Data Engineering for Wireless and Mobile Access (MobiDE'03) in San
Diego, CA &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support for travel expenses
for graduate students to attend the 3rd ACM International Workshop on Data
Engineering for Wireless and Mobile Access (MobiDE' 03). The workshop is held in
conjunction with ACM MobiCom in San Diego, CA and is sponsored by ACM Sigmobile.
The special mission of MobiDE is to act as a bridge between the data and
information management community and the mobile computing community. Thus,
MobiDE brings together researchers in databases, networking, and mobile and
pervasive computing. The workshop provides opportunities for a full day of
exciting discussions on the topic of data and information management in mobile
environments; in addition to paper presentations, we are soliciting panels on
emerging topics. The workshop, as many other academic activities, relies on the
experience of senior members of the community, but also aims to generate fresh
ideas, foster new collaborations, and expose new people to emerging research
opportunities. This grants enables graduate students to participate in the
exciting technical program. This will have a broad impact on the students'
ability to form future (international) collaborations and will also contribute
to making the workshop an excellent forum for exchanging of ideas. Young
attendees will also have the opportunity to meet distinguished scientists-
educators and be inspired by them to follow careers in academia. For these
reasons, students from underrepresented groups (for example, women, minorities
and disabled students) are especially encouraged to apply for sponsorship
through this grant. Travel support for student attendance will be advertised
nationwide.