* 0334940
* Evaluation of Landfill Gas Emissions from an Instrumented Bioreactor Landfill Cell
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Syed Hashsham, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2006
* USD 68,722.00

The key environmental impacts from a municipal solid waste (MSW) landfill are
the discharge of leachate constituents into ground water and surface water; and
emissions of landfill gases including methane and volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) into the atmosphere. State and federal regulations (RCRA Subtitle D)
require that a MSW landfill, upon closure, be capped with a final cover
containing soil layers and a geomembrane - a flat geosynthetic product about 1
to 1.5 mm thick. Advective flux of liquid or gas through an intact portion of a
geomembrane is negligible. However, contaminants can diffuse through an intact
geomembrane, and gases or liquids can leak via advection through defects such as
holes, punctures, and irregular welds. Currently, in the U.S. alone, there are
over 2,000 MSW landfills in operation, and these will receive final caps
progressively as they close.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A bioreactor landfill operates
to rapidly transform and degrade organic waste, and differs in concept from the
traditional "dry tomb" municipal landfill approach. In order to operate a MSW
landfill as a bioreactor, a key operational requirement is the addition of
leachate or moisture to accelerates the decomposition of the organic fraction of
waste, and hence accelerate gas generation. Moisture can be added using a
leachate recirculation system, or by allowing controlled infiltration from the
final cap of the landfill. However, under current regulations, use of a
geomembrane virtually eliminates the moisture flux through the cap in the form
of infiltration. In addition, the geomembrane is the most expensive component of
the final cap.&lt;br/&gt;This action, to quantify landfill gas emissions from
the final cap of a MSW landfill operated as a bioreactor, is supported under the
Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) program. The final cap of an
existing field-scale bioreactor cell located in Michigan will be instrumented
with: (1) gas probes to measure inorganic gas concentrations and pressure
profile; and (2) flux chamber to measure inorganic and organic gas emissions
from the surface. These gas emissions will be measured through a RCRA final cap
containing a geomembrane. The gas emissions will be measured to evaluate these
three scenarios of the cap: (1) intact condition; (2) 1 cm 2 hole made in the
geomembrane; and (3) a relatively large size window cut in the geomembrane to
simulate an earthen cap. The bioreactor cell has been instrumented below the
final cap as part of an ongoing research project funded by the Department of
Energy (DOE), and administered through Environmental Research &amp; Education
Foundation (EREF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gas emissions data collected will be
comprehensive and unique due to the extent of the instrumentation already
installed in the field-scale (~1 acre) bioreactor cell. Such a comprehensive
dataset will be used to test gas generation and gas emission models requiring
comprehensive physical, chemical, and biological input. In addition, the project
promotes teaching, training, and learning, and broadens the participation of
undergraduate students in field data collection.&lt;br/&gt;