* 0334986
* Optical:  Ultrafast all-optical switches, modulators, and wavelength converters based on intersubband transitions for Tb/s operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Farhan Rana, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0334986&lt;br/&gt;Rana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At data rates exceeding 100 Gb/s it
is desirable to perform pulse processing functions entirely in the optical
domain. The research proposed here aims to develop ultrafast all-optical
switches, modulators, wavelength converters, and devices for all-optical pulse
retiming, reshaping, and reamplification (3R generation) capable of performing
at speeds close to 1 Tb/s by using intersubband transitions in semiconductor
quantum wells. Intersubband relaxation times of electrons in semiconductor
quantum wells are around 1 ps. Such short relaxation times allow for the
realization of ultrafast optical devices. The research proposed here will
develop devices for all-optical signal processing operating at 1.55 mm using
GaN/AlGaN/AlN multiple quantum wells. The devices proposed here offer the
potential of switching speeds close to 1 Tb/s and require pulse energies as low
as 100 fJ. All-optical switching, modulation, and wavelength conversion by
cross-loss modulation (XLM) in intersubband saturable absorbers, and all-optical
3R generation by differential cross-phase modulation (XPM) in intersubband
optical amplifiers will be explored. The proposed research covers all aspects of
device design, material growth, device fabrication, and device characterization.
A successful demonstration of the devices proposed in this research will create
a new technology platform for ultrafast optoelectronic devices operating at 1.55
mm. The proposed research will contribute to the development of other ultrafast
intersubband optoelectronic devices operating at 1.55 mm, such as lasers,
detectors, electro-absorption modulators, and fast saturable absorbers for
modelocked lasers. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project
will get training in cutting edge optoelectronics. In addition, the broader
impact of this work will be in the development of course curricula that will
synthesize various perspectives of electrical engineering, quantum engineering,
optics, and solid state physics at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;