* 0334928
* AToL: Collaborative Research:  Amphibia Tree--An Integrated Phylogenetic and Phyloinformatics Approach to the Tree of Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Linda Trueb, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 249,408.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Linda Trueb and Rafe Brown at the University of
Kansas to study phylogenetic relationships of the living amphibians and their
close fossil relatives. Modern Amphibians are a prominent part of the Earth's
vertebrate fauna and include three orders: the caecilians (Gymnophiona),
salamanders (Caudata), and frogs and toads (Anura). Despite recent advances in
discovering and describing their diversity, many critical questions in amphibian
evolution remain unresolved and a fresh analysis of evolutionary relationships
is needed to take new discoveries into account. Furthermore, the recent decline
and apparent extinction of amphibians from many environments makes it urgent
that we discover and classify the diversity present today. A team of seven
investigators from diverse institutions (University of Texas, University of
California at Berkeley, Harvard University, and the University of Kansas) will
collaborate to resolve modern amphibian relationships. Anatomical data from
living and fossil forms will be combined with DNA sequences from a set of
defined mitochondrial and nuclear genes for as many species as possible, and
will be integrated with existing data sets. Analysis of these large data sets
will be used to gain insight into such questions as repeated patterns of
evolution, geographic patterns, and rates of evolution. Dr. Trueb will oversee
morphological studies of fossil and Recent frogs and toads, and Dr. Brown will
conduct research on anurans of Southeastern Asia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary history of modern
amphibians is critical for developing conservation strategies for amphibians as
well a completing the vertebrate portion of the tree of life. The project will
involve extensive student training and interaction with US and international
colleagues. Communication with the public will use web resources, especially
AmphibiaWeb, an existing site that will be expanded and further developed to
provide information on all species of amphibians for professionals and the
public at large. AmphibiaWeb will also provide training opportunities for
students and senior professionals to enable them to more effectively communicate
their findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;