* 0334544
* SGER:     High Volume Fraction Aluminum Nanocomposites with Optimized Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Challapalli Suryanarayana, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2005
* USD 96,120.00

The project explores synthesis and consolidation of aluminum reinforced with a
high volume fraction of nano-alumina, thereby producing a composite with a
unique microstructural configuration that includes a nano-channel like
morphology. Because of the relatively small inter-particle spacing combined with
higher volume fraction of the reinforcement, these materials are expected to
exhibit superior mechanical properties. A major objective is to obtain a
uniform, high volume fraction, nano-sized dispersion of the reinforcement in an
economical way. Aluminum-alumina powders will be mechanically alloyed followed
by subsequent hot-isostatic pressing. The mechanically alloyed powders and the
consolidated composites will be examined using x-ray diffraction, scanning
electron and transmission electron microscopy. The composites will be
mechanically characterized using conventional mechanical testing, neutron
diffraction, and instrumented nanoindentation. Structural and mechanical
characterization is expected to result in identifying optimized microstructures
in such composite systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While such composites were not
synthesized to-date, based on the current understanding of strengthening
mechanisms, these composites are expected to possess superior mechanical
properties. The research is expected to lead to the synthesis of a new class of
composites. The research activities will be integrated with education in
updating the content of an undergraduate instruction laboratory course, thereby
making undergraduate students aware of recent developments in the area of
composite materials.