* 0334590
* US-UK Dissertation Enhancement: Controlled Photon Entanglement for Quantum Information Processing using Nonlinear Photonic Crystals
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2007
* USD 15,000.00

0334590&lt;br/&gt;Raymer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-U.K. dissertation
enhancement project supports a Ph.D. student, Brian Smith of the University of
Oregon, to pursue thesis research under the guidance of Michael Raymer,
University of Oregon and Ian Walmsley, University of Oxford. It adds an
international dimension to the University of Oregon's ITR (Information
Technology Research) award aimed at engineering controlled single-photon sources
and using them to develop all-optical means for Quantum Information Processing
(QIP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum entanglement of the states of two particles
carries potential to serve as a basis for a new class of technology - Quantum
Information Processing. QIP includes quantum cryptographic key distribution,
quantum communication and quantum computation. Generation and manipulation of
quantum entanglement of optical light fields are key techniques in the further
development of practical QIP. The objective of this work is to develop practical
technologies for achieving a high degree of control over the space-time wave-
packet modes in which single photons or pairs of photons are created. To achieve
the QIP goals, the Oxford and Southampton groups will design and fabricate
patterned crystals that then will be tested and used at the Oregon and Oxford
labs. The student will contribute to the design and fabrication aspects and gain
experience with the technology developed by the Oxford
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the development of new
nonlinear optical materials that are useful for a range of applications such as
doubling of light, telecommunications and classical optical computing. New
techniques for characterizing the spatial coherence studies of light will be
developed and may have applications in other fields of optics.&lt;br/&gt;