* 0335074
* Ultra High Capacity WDM Device Based on Novel Phased Array Design and Laser Fabrication of 3-D Optical Waveguides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Okan Ersoy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal was submitted and funded in response to solicitation NSF 03-537
High Speed Optical Communications and
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological interest in dense wavelength
division multiplexing (DWDM) systems is fast increasing since DWDM systems offer
a very large transmission capacity and new novel network architectures. Major
components in DWDM systems are the wavelength multiplexers and demultiplexers,
such as arrayed waveguide grating (AWG). However, the capacity of current AWG
devices is limited in terms of the number of channels that can be manufactured
in a given volume because of their 2-D geometry using lithography techniques as
well as algorithms used involving regular sampling and limited use of phase
modulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will design and manufacture
a new generation, 3-D AWGs by combining novel design methodologies of AWGs and
novel laser-based manufacturing techniques. A major bottleneck in phased-array
types of devices used in DWDM is the free spectral range (FSR) allowed. We will
develop a novel dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) system in which
there is only one effective order per wavelength so that the number of channels
or images corresponding to different wavelengths is not restricted due to FSR.
The method involves irregular sampling of zero-crossings of phase with linear
and/or spherical reference waves. This method also allows the design of 3-D
systems with a very large increase in the number of AWG channels. We will
implement regularly and irregularly sampled AWGs in the design of 3-D DWDM
systems using the femtosecond laser manufacturing technology. By focusing a
femtosecond laser beam inside a dielectric media to increase the index of
refraction at the laser focal point, and with the aid of 3-D computer aided
design and manufacturing, truly 3-D waveguides, which are essential parts in the
3-D AWG devices can be fabricated. In order to optimize against various error
sources and to incorporate multifunctional system behavior, we will also
incorporate diffractive optical elements optimized with iterative minimum mean-
squared error methods and a closed loop manufacturing
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of the proposed work will have very
high potential for progress in multispectral communications, networking and
computing. Topics such as ultra high capacity WDM will be more significant in
the upcoming progress for communications of parts in complex micro/nano systems,
and the demand for more and more number of wavelengths will increase. Progress
in 3D will open up completely new possibilities and bring along tremendous
increase in capacity, and totally new design techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being jointly sponsored by the Thermal
Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems
Division and the Materials Processing and Manufacturing Program of the Design,
Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;