* 0335799
* Dowling College Robert Noyce Scholarsip Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2012
* Sandra Monteferrante, Dowling College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2012
* USD 667,764.00

This project addresses the critical shortage of science and mathematics teachers
in New York, and in particular in the Long Island and New York City area. The
Dowling College Robert Noyce Scholarship Program provides scholarships for
science and mathematics majors in the teacher training program, and has a
particular emphasis on attracting minorities, underrepresented genders and
persons with disabilities.

Proven recruitment strategies are conducted off-campus through visits both by
faculty and Enrollment Services personnel at community colleges and college
fairs, as well as mailings to targeted audiences. On-campus recruitment is
carried out at semiannual Open Houses and Early Decision Scholarship Days.
Selection is based on NSF Noyce Scholarship criteria as well as GPA, a personal
essay, and interviews focusing on the commitment to fulfilling the post-graduate
Noyce program requirements.

Every Noyce Scholar is paired with a faculty mentor who directs academic and
personnel interventions if needed and encourages extra curricular involvement in
research and internship opportunities, especially those that enhance preparation
for teaching in high need school districts. This relationship continues as a
support mechanism during the induction stage of the Noyce Scholar's career.
Post-graduate activities include an annual four-session Professional Development
Seminar Course, follow-up classroom observations and consultations.