* 0335614
* NSFCHEMBIO Workshop:  Neutron Scattering For Chemistry and the Chemistry/Biology Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Linda (Lee) Magid, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kuczkowski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 72,880.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
Program in the Division of Chemistry and the National Facilities Program in the
Division of Materials Research, Linda Magid of the University of Tennessee in
Knoxville is organizing a 3-day workshop at Florida State University. The
workshop has the following three goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a) To inform the
chemistry and chem-bio communities of opportunities at the Spallation Neutron
Source (SNS) and at the Center for Nanophase Materials Science (CNMS), both at
Oak Ridge National Lab (ORNL). &lt;br/&gt;b) To query the community re: needs
for instrumentation and sample environment development, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;c) To develop concept teams that would be responsible for
developing science cases and funding proposals for instrumentation, sample
environments, supporting lab facilities, best practices for education of new
users, and fellowship programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
travel support and subsistence for 50 grad students, postdocs and/or junior
faculty as well as 30 invited speakers. The Joint Institute for Neutron Sciences
(JINS), and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State
University are also providing partial support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beamlines
at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
should be operational in 2006. Opportunities exist for scientific advances with
neutron scattering and spectroscopic investigations there by chemists and by
biologists working at the chemistry-biology interface. However, the number of
active neutron users in the US among these communities is woefully small. This
workshop will provide an opportunity to attract and inform potential new users
in these communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;