* 0335297
* NRT:  Micro-Buffered Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Rene Cruz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed project will investigate a broad class of packet-based network
architectures, protocols, and services where the core switch/route fabric has
limited or no buffering capability. These networks - called mbuffered networks -
have two distinguishing features. First, packet loss due to contention is
treated as an erasure that can be corrected via coding techniques. Information
is encoded into code words and each codeword is divided into fragments. The
redundancy built into the codeword acts like a "virtual buffer" that mitigates
contention and packet loss so that if several of the codeword fragments are
erased as they pass through the network, there is still a high probability that
the information within the codeword can be decoded correctly at the destination.
Adaptive flow control can be implemented by adjusting the coding overhead (code
rate) as well as the fragment generation rate. The second distinguishing feature
is the robustness with respect to hardware and routing failures. In particular,
different codeword fragments belonging to the same codeword can be sent using
different routes within the network to increase resilience. Route diversity also
provides unique security and authentication features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed project is the exploration of new
architectural approaches that use little or no buffering in high-speed networks
where buffers are becoming increasingly difficult to implement. Results of this
project will impact research directions in optical systems technology, and
increase the base of knowledge in communication systems theory. The project will
provide unique training of both undergraduate and graduate students in a
systems-oriented multi-disciplinary effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;