* 0335151
* Austenite Formation and Decomposition Symposium, Materials Science &amp; Technology 2003 Conference; Chicago, IL; November 10-12, 2003
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Alexander Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2004
* USD 8,000.00

The Minerals, Metals, and Materials Society (TMS) and the Iron and Steel Society
(ISS) jointly sponsor this planned symposium and the MS&amp;T 2003 conference.
Objectives of this symposium include: (a) disseminate the most recent advances
in understanding austenite formation and decomposition; (b) disseminate
practical applications of these advances; (c) educate symposium attendees,
professionals, young researchers and students; (d) publish a peer reviewed
proceedings volume that will be donated world wide to many libraries of
educational institutions granting degrees in the fields of metallurgical
engineering or materials science and engineering. The dissemination of this
proceedings to educational institutions is of particular importance because it
has been a long time since the last major technical symposium focused on
austenite decomposition, and a great many advances have occurred since
then.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned symposium includes experts from various
countries (Japan, Europe, Asia) with 44 accepted papers. The resulting peer-
reviewed proceedings are an important event by which descriptions of these
advances can be collected and disseminated to current and future specialists,
educators, young researchers and students in the field. The NSF funds support
publication of the symposium proceedings as bound volume along with a CD-ROM.
Distributing it worldwide as an information or reference source to universities
will enable an understanding of austenite applications and formation by
educators, young researchers, and students.