* 0335013
* Optical: Robust, Spectrally Efficient Optical Fiber Transmission Techniques: Nonlinear Analysis, Coded Modulation Techniques and System Experiments
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Joseph M. Kahn, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

0335013&lt;br/&gt;Kahn &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As optical fiber systems rapidly
approach the limits of binary modulation and direct detection, alternative
modulation, coding and detection techniques will play increasing roles. This
project will address this evolution with several thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of nonlinear DPSK, PSK and QAM systems. Differential phase-
shift keying (DPSK), phase-shift keying (PSK) and quadrature-amplitude
multiplexing (QAM) offer increased spectral efficiency and robustness. Fiber
Kerr nonlinearity fundamentally limits system performance, but is typically
studied using Monte Carlo simulation. Analytical techniques to compute error
probability in nonlinear systems using these modulation techniques will be
developed. These analyses will provide insight into system optimization and will
yield practical engineering design criteria.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear
phase noise: analysis and compensation. Nonlinear phase noise (NLPN) arises when
signal and amplifier noise together modulate the fiber refractive index via the
Kerr effect. NLPN potentially limits systems using DPSK, PSK or QAM. NLPN will
be characterized analytically, and electrical techniques to compensate NLPN will
be demonstrated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Coded nonbinary modulation techniques.
Current optical systems use binary modulation and coding schemes matched to
binary modulation. In order to realize the full benefits of nonbinary
modulation, appropriate coding techniques will be investigated, including
trellis-coded modulation (TCM) and turbo TCM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;System
experiments. Coherent detection of PSK will be performed using MEMS-based
external-cavity lasers. These experiments will verify the nonlinear system
analysis, test electrical compensation of NLPN, and demonstrate that coherent
detection can yield substantial improvements in spectral efficiency and
robustness. &lt;br/&gt;This project will make several broader contributions, by
educating students from diverse backgrounds and genders, involving undergraduate
students in research, and training future educators. Results will be
incorporated into graduate-level lecture and laboratory courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;