* 0335670
* Building an Indigenous Framework for Evaluation: The American Indian STEM Evaluation Resource Center
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 04/30/2005
* USD 247,936.00

The goal of the project would be for evaluation to "become a vital tool for high
quality and sustained STEM learning and improvement in Indian Country." That is,
the project will provide a model for the design and evaluation of culturally
responsive educational interventions. The proposer explains "... as American
Indian communities develop and implement new strategies for improving the
educational attainment of their youth that draw from traditional values and
culture, an equally compelling need exist to establish new evaluation processes
that are robust enough to accommodate and value different "ways of knowing",
build ownership and a sense of community within groups of Indian educators; and
efficiently contribute to the development of high quality and sustainable STEM
education programs. These goals would be accomplished through the development of
four specific products, all stemming from the (1) development of an indigenous
framework for the evaluation of STEM education. Related products include (2) the
development of the American Indian STEM Evaluation Resource Center, which will
provide technical assistance and support resources to tribal college staff and
faculty and administrators and teachers in K-12 tribal schools; development of
an Evaluation Institute to include (3) a four-day regional evaluation seminar
for Indian educators and (4) a graduate level evaluation practicum on-line for
graduate credit. The PI also plans to work with the University of Michigan to
develop an on-line portal to support distance learning and collaborative work.
The project portal will be designed to facilitate the delivery of training and
other support services, to disseminate resource materials, to establish a forum
for an on-going dialogue re: evaluation theory practice and standards and to
provide access to related websites.