* 0335082
* Optical:  Next-Generation Optoelectronic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Kent Choquette, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

0335082 Coleman

The goal of nanotechnology is to create materials and devices which exhibit
novel and significantly improved properties due to their nanoscale size. The
technology convergence of electronic quantum dots (QDs) and photonic crystals
(PhCs) will enable a revolution for the next generation of nano-photonic sources
for high bandwidth optical communication. However, to achieve this requires that
both systems, electronic and photonic, must be intimately engineered to enable
spatial and spectral overlap between their respective wavefunctions and density
of states. This proposal seeks to combine aggressive advances in 3-dimensional
electronic confinement obtained from quantum dots with the unprecedented optical
confinement achieved from photonic crystals to develop the next generation of
highly efficient microcavity optical sources. There are three technical
objectives of this proposal: (1) demonstrate photonic sources incorporating
engineered quantum dots through control of growth synthesis; (2) demonstrate
engineered and electrically injected optical nano-cavities within a
2-dimensional (2D) photonic crystal; and (3) integrate a single or few coupled
quantum dot(s) within an engineered optical nano-cavity in a 2D photonic
crystal.

The development of high efficiency optical sources with high modulation
bandwidth and controllable wavelength will be a revolutionary advance for
optical communications, by virtue of ultra-high operation performance and/or by
enabling all optical signal processing and advanced computer processing. In
addition, the proposed research will provide a new context to extend the
understanding of nanofabrication techniques for novel optical materials.
Therefore the proposed research will impact nanotechnology, microcavity physics,
and the next generation of photonic applications. In addition, a guiding
philosophy of the work is substantial involvement of undergraduates, targeted
toward the participation of underrepresented groups. The PI plans to continue
the incorporation of middle and high school teachers into the research programs
to train and inspire them in new areas of science, to enable them to pass this
on to their pupils.

