* 0335476
* International Workshop on Power System Operation and Planning will be held in Cape Town, South Africa Fall 2004 (ICPSOP 2004/2006)
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Victor Dzidzienyo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2007
* USD 142,024.00

This grant supports the organization of the first ICPSOP international workshop
devoted to discussing "Sustainable Energy and Technology Development in Sub-
Sahara Africa in the 21st Century". This multi-year workshop will be in two
phases and will bring together energy experts, researchers, and university
scholars and students, as well as policy makers and market players. The ICPSOP
2004 workshop is the first phase and will be hosted by South Africa. The
workshop will strengthen and enhance the search for sustainable energy options
that will improve the quality of life. The power infrastructure (the grid
network, generation and distributed generation resources) with its vertical
organization of all utility companies is now being replaced by a decentralized
structure to induce and promote competition at all stages of energy generation,
transmission and distribution. The 2006 workshop is the second phase and will be
held in Cape Verde. The workshop will address the joint research collaboration
efforts in energy, environment and information technology made by US and African
researchers. Subsequent research results will also be presented at the workshop.
Globally, various countries are at different stages of restructuring the power
sector or studying the impacts of renewable energy, environmental issues and
information technology on designing for a deregulated or regulated electricity
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the emergence of the competitive
environment, a sustainable technology must be assessed, developed, deployed and
utilized in the planning operations of the power system. These new challenges
have been addressed, or are being addressed currently, in varying ways in
different parts of the world. In the last few years, the countries of Sub-Sahara
Africa have engaged in several options for energy sustainability, economics and
provision of enabling environments for high performance power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to organize a
workshop to address these challenges by offering an improved focus for US-
African researchers already engaged in joint collaborative research efforts in
the last 2 years. The intellectual merits of the proposal
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promotion of renewable energy sources for
sustainable quality of life and civilization, advancing the use of intelligent
systems, hybrid intelligent systems, as well as heuristic methods, for enhancing
the reliability of the power system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification of
necessary control applications for power electronics technology for improving
the electric transmission system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaming or risk management
and hedging for market operations and dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvement of the quality of generation, transmission and
distribution resources using state-of-the-art technology.&lt;br/&gt;