* 0335585
* SICB Symposium:  The Coevolution of Frugivorous Animals with the Natural Occurrence of Ethanol in Fermenting Fruit, January 5-9, 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Robert Dudley, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 09/30/2004
* USD 11,550.00

This symposium brings together speakers from diverse backgrounds to address the
natural occurrence of ethanol within ripe and fermenting fruit, together with
the concomitantly evolved physiological and behavioral responses to ethanol in
diverse frugivorous taxa. Until recently, animal exposure to ethanol in taxa
other than humans and Drosophila has been largely viewed as incidental. The
ubiquity of yeasts and fermentative processes within sugar-rich fruit, however,
suggests that low-level ethanol exposure via dietary ingestion has historically
characterized all frugivorous animal taxa. Development of this novel
evolutionary perspective has been paralleled by renewed interest in the use of
Drosophila mutants to identify those molecular pathways underlying inebriation
and addiction. This symposium will address natural patterns of ethanol exposure
in a variety of non-human metazoan taxa, including those yeasts that engage in
fermentation, ripe fruits within which are found both yeasts and sugars, insect
taxa that metabolize and benefit from low-level ethanol concentrations, and
frugivorous primates and other vertebrate taxa that depend on ripe fruits as
their primary nutritional resource. This program is thus fully interdisciplinary
and integrative, uniting otherwise seemingly unrelated themes such as yeast
biology, fruit ripening, primate ancestry, and genetic variation in Drosophila.
This symposium will provide the relevant ecological and evolutionary backgrounds
to these diverse phenomena, and will illustrate broadly the comparative
physiological and behavioral aspects of exposure to naturally occurring ethanol
in diverse non-human taxa. This symposium is very appropriate for the membership
of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology, which now emphasizes
broader and evolutionary perspectives on diverse biological phenomena. Although
not a theme of this symposium, study of the comparative biology of ethanol
ingestion may be of relevance to evolutionary interpretations of ethanol
consumption by humans. Also, annual meetings of this society are well-attended
by graduate students and postdocs who will have the opportunity to hear and
interact with those working in this emerging field of comparative biology.