* 0335359
* US- South Africa Planning Visit:  Developing a Project on the Genesis of the Platreef Mineralized Zone
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Michael Brown, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,400.00

This planning visit award will enable the PI, two colleagues, and a graduate
student to work with several South African scientists from the University of the
Witwatersrand and from Potgietersrust Platinums Limited (PPL), conducting field
work in South Africa and finalizing plans for a collaborative research project.
The aim of the project is to understand the origin of the Platreef, which is the
most significant platinum deposit in the Bushveld Complex, the world.s largest
and most mineralized igneous intrusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transgressive
base of the Bushveld Complex crosses metapelites, metacarbonates and basement
granites, and thus affords an opportunity to investigate not only the different
response of these host rock units to metamorphism and melting, but also
differences in Platreef mineralization related to contamination from the
different host rocks. We postulate that the contamination in the Platreef is a
consequence of partial melting in the aureole rocks, and that the fugitive melt
was the principal contaminant. However, whether the melt is derived from the
basement granites or the metapelites is unknown, although a basement granite
source has been previously suggested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
prograde contamination from aureole rocks, there is the issue of retrograde
redistribution involving a volatile phase, which is not adequately understood.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will help support the development of an
international research collaboration and will provide international research
experience for the graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;