* 0335247
* Collaborative research:  Testing and Benchmarking Methodologies for Future Networking Security Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Eugene Spafford, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 523,000.00

Networks and computer systems are becoming increasingly attractive targets to
large-scale programmed&lt;br/&gt;attacks such as worms and Distributed Denial of
Service attacks (DDoS), which can compromise a vast&lt;br/&gt;number of
vulnerable targets in a few minutes. Critical end-user applications vulnerable
to such attacks&lt;br/&gt;include e-commerce, e-medicine, command-and-control
applications, video surveillance and tracking, and&lt;br/&gt;many other
applications. While there is a growing body of research techniques, prototypes,
and commercial&lt;br/&gt;products that purport to protect these applications and
the network infrastructure on which they rely, there&lt;br/&gt;is little
existing scientific methodology by which to objectively evaluate the merits of
such claims. Moreover,&lt;br/&gt;thorough testing of a defense system for worms
or for attacks on the infrastructure cannot be evaluated&lt;br/&gt;safely on a
live network without affecting its operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make rapid
advancements in defending against these and future attacks, the state of the art
in the&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of network security mechanisms must be improved.
This will require the emergence of large-scale&lt;br/&gt;security testbeds
coupled with new standards for testing and benchmarking that can make these
testbeds&lt;br/&gt;truly useful. Current shortcomings and impediments to
evaluating network security mechanisms include lack&lt;br/&gt;of scientific
rigor;lack of relevant and representative network data;inadequate models of
defense mechanisms;&lt;br/&gt;and inadequate models of both the network and the
transmitted data (benign and attack traffic). The latter&lt;br/&gt;is
challenging because of the complexity of interactions among traffic, topology
and protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to develop thorough,
realistic,and scientifically rigorous testing frameworks and methodologies for
particular classes of network attacks and defense mechanisms. These testing
frameworks will be adapted for different kinds of testbeds, including simulators
such as NS, emulation facilities such as Emulab, and both small and large
hardware testbeds. They will include attack scenarios; attack
simulators;&lt;br/&gt;generators for topology and background traffic; data sets
derived from live traffic; and tools to monitor and&lt;br/&gt;summarize test
results. These frameworks will allow researchers to experiment with a variety of
parameters representing the network environment, attack behaviors, and the
configuration of the mechanisms under test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
developing testing frameworks, the researchers propose to validate them by
conducting tests on representative network defense mechanisms. Defense
mechanisms of interest include network-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS);
automated attack traceback mechanisms;t raffic rate-limiting to control DDoS
attacks; and mechanisms to detect large-scale worm attacks. Conducting these
tests will require incorporating real defense mechanisms into a testbed, and
applying and evaluating frameworks and methodologies. Conducting these tests
will also help us to ensure that the testbed framework allows other researchers
to easily integrate and test network defense echanisms of their
own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team includes experts in security,
networking, data analysis, software engineering, and operating systems who are
committed to developing these challenging integrated testing
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The development of testing
methodologies for network defense mechanisms requires&lt;br/&gt;significant
advances in our understanding of network attacks and the interactions between
attacks and their&lt;br/&gt;environment including:deployed defense technology,
traffic, topology, protocols, and applications. It will&lt;br/&gt;also require
advances in our understanding of metrics for evaluating
defenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: The research into testing
methodologies for network defense mechanisms will involve &lt;br/&gt;graduate
students and provide new curriculum material for
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: By providing new testing
frameworks, the work will accelerate improvements in&lt;br/&gt;network defense
mechanisms and facilitate their evaluation and deployment. The researchers will
hold yearly workshops to disseminate results and obtain community feedback.