* 0335632
* Population Dynamics in a Heterogenous Environment: The Effect of Variance in Plant Quality on Herbivore Populations in Time and Space
* BIO,DEB
* 04/14/2003,01/31/2005
* Nora Underwood, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2005
* USD 144,390.00

0089570. Nora Underwood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable ecological research
has documented the way in which herbivores respond to mean characteristics of
their food; however, little is known about the way in which variability in food
quality affects individual herbivores or populations of herbivores. The proposed
research will quantify the way in which variance in quality among plants affects
the movement of individuals, as well as the population dynamics of insect
herbivores. A spatially explicit model will be used to examine how herbivore
movement influences the interaction between the variance in plant quality and
population dynamics in time and space. This model will then provide a framework
for understanding how variance in quality among phenotypes, genotypes, or
species of plants affects insect demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field
experiments will examine how variability in the genetically based quality of
strawberry populations affects the movements and population dynamics of the
strawberry aphid. Short-term experiments will quantify the way in which the
movement of individual aphids is related to population-level variance in forage
quality. Longer-term experiments will relate the dynamical response of aphid
populations to different kinds of variance in food quality, ranging from that
characteristic of plant monocultures to that characteristic of mixed cultures of
two to six different genotypes. This approach will facilitate a critical
examination of the hypothesis that agricultural mixtures of plant varieties
(genotypes) support lower population densities of pests than will monocultures.
Finally, linking the genetic variance in plant quality to the demographics of
herbivores provides a critical synthesis of ecological and evolutionary
perspectives in understanding plant-herbivore
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;