* 0335527
* U.S.-Costa Rica Workshop:  Twelfth Latin American Symposium on Mathematical Logic
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Edgar Lopez-Escobar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2004
* USD 34,855.00

0335527&lt;br/&gt;Lopez-Escobar, Edgar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas
Program award will provide support for 10 U.S. researchers and 10 Latin American
students/postdocs to participate in the Twelfth Latin American
Symposium&lt;br/&gt;(and pre-symposium school) on Mathematical Logic, to be held
at the University of Costa Rica, January 7-16, 2004. The activity, which is
being organized by Dr. Edgar Lopez-Escobar of the University of Maryland and Dr.
Jorge Guier of the University of Costa Rica, will bring together some of the top
researchers in logic from the USA and Latin America, and encourage young
researchers in the United States and Latin America to further studies in the
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Latin American Symposia on Mathematical Logic
(Simposios Latino&lt;br/&gt;Americanos de Logica Matematica, SLALM) aim (1) to
establish working relationships between researchers in Latin America and the
United States, (2) to produce, as a result of joint work, both new areas of
investigations as well as new results in the traditional areas, and (3) to
encourage graduate students and junior faculty from Latin America to obtain
higher degrees and postdocs at universities in the United States; the majority
returning to their country and assuming leadership positions at their
institutions. The SLALMs have been organized, since their inception in 1976, in
the form of a working symposium preceded by a series of training mini-courses,
some given by the symposium plenary speakers. The pre-symposium school
(01/7-10/2004) will consist of 4 mini-courses. The symposium (01/12-16/2004)
will consist of invited and contributed talks as well as working sessions on
various areas of mathematical logic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publication of the
Proceedings of the XII SLALM is an expected outcome. Furthermore, the Web page:
//www.vinv.ucr.ac.cr/slalm04 has been set up for day to day updates on many
aspects of the symposium, including participants and
lecturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Division of Mathematical Sciences are jointly supporting
this activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;