* 0335949
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Evolutionary Genetics of Kloss's Gibbons (Hylobates klossii): Systematics, Phylogeography, and Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Don Melnick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

The critically endangered Kloss's gibbon (Hylobates klossii) is found only on
Indonesia's Mentawai Islands, a small chain of four islands located off the west
coast of Sumatra. The Mentawai Islands have been long isolated from the rest of
the region, and therefore little is known about the relationships of this
little-studied ape to other gibbon species in neighboring areas.

In addition, some researchers have suggested that the other three Mentawai
primate species have two distinct subspecies with different coloration and
behavior: one on the northernmost island of Siberut, the other on the three
southern islands. No distinction has been proposed for populations of Kloss's
gibbons, since all Kloss's gibbons have completely black fur, exhibiting no
obvious variation, and no behavioral studies have been conducted outside of
Siberut. However, the Kloss's gibbon shares a biogeographic history with the
other three species, strongly suggesting that the separation between Siberut and
the southern islands affecting differentiation in the monkeys should also affect
the gibbons. Genetic patterns of intraspecific variation within H. klossii have
never been studied.

Fecal samples from wild gibbon groups will be non-invasively collected from
sites on all four Mentawai Islands. Using mitochondrial and nuclear DNA markers,
this project will address the following research questions:

1)How is the Kloss's gibbon related to other members of the genus Hylobates?
2)What is the relationship between geography and genetic population structure
within and between the Mentawai Islands? 3)What are the implications of these
data for conservation planning in the Mentawai Islands?

Broader Impacts:

Currently, the only legally protected area in the Mentawais is Siberut National
Park. Data from this project may be used to support increased protection of the
park, and, if multiple genetically distinct groups or "conservation units" are
found, to encourage the gazetting of new protected areas. All four Mentawai
primates are threatened or endangered, and any conservation action for the
Kloss's gibbon, the flagship species, will also benefit these primates. The
investigators will work closely with local Mentawai people, as well as
Indonesian students and academics, increasing local conservation education and
international scientific collaboration.