* 0335266
* EIN:  Collaborative Research: Dynamic Resource Allocation for GMPLS Optical Networks (DRAGON)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Donald Riley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2008
* USD 4,043,215.00

The objective of the Dynamic Resource Allocation via GMPLS Optical Networks
(DRAGON) Project is to&lt;br/&gt;create dynamic, deterministic, and manageable
end-to-end network transport services for high-end e-Science applications. This
service capability will build on the success and reach of the IP infrastructure,
and will complement it with deterministic end-to-end multi-protocol services
spanning multiple administrative domains and a variety of conventional campus
network technologies. The DRAGON project will create a Generalized MultiProtocol
Label Switching (GMPLS) capable optical core network. Optical transport and
switching equipment acting as Label Switching Routers (LSRs) will provide
deterministic network resources at the packet, wavelength, and fiber cross
connect levels. The all-optical capabilities proposed for this core network will
be based on connection and resource management mechanisms defined in GMPLS and
will model many of the functions of an inter-regional, national, or even global
wavelength&lt;br/&gt;based Research and Education (R&amp;E) networks. Attached
to the core infrastructure will be experimental campus networks carved out from
collaborating institutional campus infrastructure. The institutional
Experimental Networks (ExNets) will provide the DRAGON Project with both an
overall multi-domain environment and representative heterogeneous network
technologies that must be handled in a real world end-to-end vision. Network
requirements will be driven by tight integration with application team
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical part of the project will be the
development of the necessary software components to address unresolved GMPLS
related issues as well as a host of practical end-to-end issues. The DRAGON
architecture describes a Network Aware Resource Broker (NARB) that will peer
with Interior Gateway Protocol/Exterior Gateway Protocol (IGP/EGP) routing
protocols to advertise inter-domain service capabilities, perform inter-domain
path computation, resource allocation, scheduling, provisioning, proxy signaling
services, and authorization/accounting for the requested network services. The
architecture of the NARB function will integrate emerging advanced services from
the NSF Middleware Initiative (NMI) program and Grid services, particularly for
security and advanced scheduling. The project includes collaboration with
specific e-Science applications support facilities that will be adapted to and
directly benefit from the experimental DRAGON infrastructure. The electronic-
Very Long Baseline Interferometry (e-VLBI) project from MIT Haystack Observatory
will utilize the DRAGON network to acquire and correlate radio-telescope data in
real time as a pilot to demonstrate effective coordination of multiple remote
instruments. USC/ISI East, University of Maryland Visualization and Presentation
Lab, and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center will collaborate to use DRAGON
resources as part of ongoing efforts to integrate streaming HDTV, Access Grid
Nodes, and interactive remote 3D visualizations. This project is a collaboration
of Mid-Atlantic Crossroads, University of Southern California Information
Sciences Institute, George Mason University, University of Maryland, NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Haystack
Observatory. Movaz Networks will be a key partner by providing GMPLS enabled
wavelength selective switches for the core, and will be closely involved with
the inter-domain routing aspects of the NARB development via their software
development team in Northern Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project includes greatly expanding the knowledge and technologies
relating to&lt;br/&gt;intelligent management of dynamic optical transport
networks. This will be necessary in order for the larger R&amp;E community to
realize maximum benefits from its current efforts to procure a national
footprint of lambda and fiber resources. Broader impacts will be realized via
the participation of regional universities that will directly enhance the
research and education infrastructure and provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students as well as involve women and
underrepresented minorities as interns in the activities. The project duration
is expected to be four years. At the end of the first year, DRAGON project will
demonstrate an initial capability set of a) core GMPLS/Optical dynamic
provisioning, b) inter-domain service routing, and c) at least two e-Science
applications able to utilize the end-to-end service provisioning. By year 3,
DRAGON expects to have a stable inter-domain advertising and routing function,
stable provisioning, authorization and accounting, and a simplified
interconnection API. In years 4 a major focus will be on increasing application
usage, integration with other regional advanced networks, and developing plans
for migration to production network status.