* 0336951
* Structure, Thermoelasticity and T race-Element Hosting Properties of High-Pressure Silicate Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Mark Bukowinski, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 203,733.00

The investigators propose to further develop an efficient and reliable atomistic
model of crystals in order to study thermoelastic and geochemical properties of
complex silicate minerals. They have developed a model that relies on density-
functional theory and parametric covalent corrections, which in turn compete
with inter-ionic charge transfer in attaining structural and electronic
equilibrium. In terms of the accuracy of predicted equations of state and
elastic wave velocities, this approach competes successfully with the far more
computer intensive methods based on first principles.&lt;br/&gt;The above model
stands to have a broad impact on deep planetary physics research. The method
effectively bootstraps high quality low-pressure elasticity data into deep Earth
conditions, thus greatly enhancing the data's utility. The investigators will
use the model to examine the effects of temperature, crystal structure and the
presence of relatively low-abundance components like Al, Ca and Fe3+ on the
thermoelastic properties of silicate perovskites, garnets, various SiO2 phases,
and other minerals composed of MgO, SiO2, CaO, Al2O3, and FeO that may be
present in the lower mantle and D'' zones. In previous studies of the
microscopic mechanisms by which Al is incorporated into perovskites, the
investigators found that Al-bearing perovskites might be good hosts for rare
gases and other "incompatible" elements. They will therefore also examine the
effects of pressure on the compatibility of rare gases in some of these
minerals, as well as their diffusivities within them. Adding non-equilibrium
thermodynamic considerations, they hope to shed light on the mechanisms by which
these gases might be sequestered deep in the Earth, and thus help account for
the "missing rare gases," one of the outstanding geochemical issues. The model
approach has the intellectual merit of yielding new practical tools for the
study of microscopic geochemical processes, in addition to the physical
processes, that need to be understood in order to reconcile and interpret the
separate inferences drawn form seismology, geochemistry and
geodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;