* 0336541
* U.S. Committee for the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Margaret Collins, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Feller
* 06/30/2006
* USD 483,995.00

0336541&lt;br/&gt;White &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support to
the U.S. National Academy of Sciences to be the National Member Organization
(NMO), i.e. the U.S. member, to the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis (IIASA). It is through the NMO that the United States participates in
the governance of the organization and the development of its programs. IIASA is
an international research institution located near Vienna, Austria, where
multidisciplinary, international teams of researchers conduct research on issues
related to environmental, technological, and economic aspects of global
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. NMO has two primary responsibilities. The
first is to take part in the governance of the Institute through participation
on the IIASA Council and direct interaction with the organization. The Committee
works with interested U.S. Government agencies and researchers in formulating
U.S. views regarding IIASA's research, budget, and administration. It also helps
insure the integrity of the Institute and guides the IIASA research program in
ways that will maintain its quality and its relevance to U.S. research and
policy concerns. The second responsibility is to serve as a liaison to the U.S.
science, technology, and policy communities, with the goal of increasing
participation in and awareness of IIASA by Americans in academia, government,
business, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This includes recruiting
for and funding IIASA's Young Scientists Summer Program for advanced graduate
students; helping to find suitable candidates for IIASA's job vacancies; serving
as the hub of a national network of interested scholars and policymakers; and
helping IIASA to find opportunities to participate in national policy
debates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out its functions as the U.S. NMO, the
National Academies will establish a new national committee for IIASA, operating
under the auspices of the National Research Council and residing within the
Board on International Scientific Organizations, in the Policy and Global
Affairs division. The chairman of the U.S. Committee represents the U.S. NMO at
IIASA's Council meetings and will work with the Director of IIASA to guide and
strengthen the IIASA research program. The national committee will prepare a
review of IIASA's annual research plan, soliciting comments from academic,
government, and other experts in the U.S. scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;