* 0336343
* The Consortium of the Americas for Interdisciplinary Science
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2009
* V. Kenkre, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,406,780.00

0336343&lt;br/&gt;Kenkre&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One successful strategy in
pursuing the goal of a globally trained workforce relies on students' exposure
to collaborative research between individual U.S. scientists and their
counterparts in foreign countries. This often involves considerable efforts in
faculty and student recruitment but is quite successful in providing students
with an international experience, particularly with the more developed
countries. This Americas Program award supports a novel approach to the creation
of a globally diverse workforce, that may be more applicable to developing
countries, by relying on the experience of the Consortium of the Americas for
Interdisciplinary Science of the University of New Mexico to bring about
enhanced and productive collaborations between scientists in the U.S. and
scientists from Latin America. Through a strong interdisciplinary orientation
and explicit linkages to education, the Consortium will provide a coordinated
framework for international cooperation and student exchanges by encouraging
short-term visits by outstanding Latin American researchers and their students
to New Mexico, organizing international workshops in the US and in Latin
America, and supporting collaborative research visits by US students and faculty
to Latin America. Interdisciplinary networks and partnerships are expected to
develop, abetted by the intellectual and cultural resources of the university
and the national laboratories nearby, that will lead to more mature
collaborations and exchanges of US students and faculty, supported under this
grant, to centers and laboratories in Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
research themes will be pursued: biologically relevant complex systems, novel
materials, and nanoscale and mesoscale science. The proposed work will focus on
bringing together physicists, biologists, chemists, mathematicians and engineers
and their students from the Americas. The purpose is to gain insights into
difficult and challenging problems that would not be solved without such a
multidisciplinary approach. Research efforts will address the current explosion
of interest in fundamental and applied aspects of biotechnology, and public
health, including a basic and practical understanding of the spread of
infectious diseases, of the formation and properties of biofilms, and of the
dynamics of bacterial colonies. Investigators from the Americas with a variety
of backgrounds will carry out research on processes at drastically different
length scales, from the atomistic to the macroscopic. Novel materials such as
self-assembled entities and granular compacts will be investigated. Problems
that are important both because of their technological or human importance, and
because of the inherent scientific challenges they pose, will be tackled.
Interdisciplinary approaches to a fundamental understanding form the key element
of the proposed collaborations and will guide student exchanges and their
involvement in international activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;