* 0336697
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Interaction of eddies with mixed layers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kevin Speer, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 201,100.00

Parameterizations for the interaction of mesoscale eddies with turbulent mixing
in the upper ocean will be derived and tested in climate models. Mesoscale
parameterizations used in ocean general circulation models typically represent
only the adiabatic release of available potential energy by eddies, as suggested
by Gent and McWilliams. In the upper ocean, eddy fluxes develop a diabatic
component because density is maintained vertically homogeneous by strong mixing
while geostrophic motions are constrained to be horizontal near the boundary.
Furthermore mesoscale strain interacts and modifies turbulent mixing at small
scales. The dynamics of these diabatic surface eddy fluxes and their
interactions with small-scale turbulence are not fully understood, and are not
currently parameterized in the surface mixed layers of ocean models. Instead,
tapering schemes are used to turn of the adiabatic eddy flux schemes at the
surface. Coupled climate models are very sensitive to the choice of this
tapering scheme. Here a new approach to eddy parameterizations, based on the
Transformed Eulerian Mean is proposed. The new approach provides a unified
framework for the treatment of eddy fluxes in the adiabatic interior and in the
diabatic surface boundary layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves 1)
analysis of observational data sets with key information on eddy transport in
the upper ocean, 2) high resolution process models that explicitly resolve the
full range of motions in the mixed layer, and 3) the derivation of new
parameterization schemes based on a compromise between numerical efficiency and
the theoretical information learned from observations and simulations. The main
focus of the Team will be to implement and test the new parameterization schemes
in the coupled climate models currently used in the modeling centers at GFDL,
NCAR, and GSFC. This research is aimed at improving state of the art models of
the atmosphere and ocean for study of the climate of the Earth and how it might
change in the future. Thus it is of great societal impact. The project will also
contribute to the education of a number of post-doctoral and graduate students
bridging between observations, theory, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;