* 0336939
* The Third United States - Japan Natural Resources (UJNR) Workshop on Soil-Structure Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Maria Todorovska, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 46,720.00

This action is to support the Third U.S.-Japan Workshop on Soil-Structure
Interaction, to be held in California early in 2004. This workshop is organized
under the auspices of the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Program in Natural Resources
(UJNR) Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects. The UJNR was created in 1964 with the
objective of exchanging information on research, as well as scientists and
engineers, in the area of natural resources, for the benefit of both countries.
The Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects was established in 1969. The purpose of
these workshops has been to provide a platform to gather the experts in the
field from both countries, to present their work, exchange ideas, identify
future research needs, and discuss collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will focus on soil-structure interaction, and will benefit from two
significant developments: The initiation of NSF George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES), and the initiation of the Advanced
National Seismic Systems (ANSS) by United States Geological Survey (USGS). The
ANSS will advance and modernize the national, regional and urban earthquake
monitoring and rapid post-earthquake information delivery process. Both of these
complementary national initiatives explicitly address the problem of soil-
structure interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil-structure interaction is a
complex problem at the intersection of three disciplines: structural
engineering, geotechnical engineering, and engineering seismology. Observations
have shown that soil-structure interaction can affect significantly the
performance of structures during strong earthquake shaking. Progress in the
understanding and modeling of this phenomenon will lead to improvements in
building design practices, and to safer construction and the reduction of loss
of life and of economic losses from earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;