* 0336952
* Model Structure Reduction and Robust Experimental Design for Constructing Reliable and Cost-Effective Groundwater Models
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Ne-Zheng Sun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2008
* USD 306,000.00

0336952 Yeh

Mathematical models have become indispensable tools for basin water resources
planning, water quality management, pollution source detection and remediation
design. After more than 30 years of study, however, the model calibration
problem still is not resolved completely. Hydrogeologists may not have
sufficient confidence in using their calibrated models for prediction and
decision-making purposes. There are two major difficulties in groundwater
modeling: (1) the geological structure of a real aquifer usually is very complex
and unknown, and (2) the data that can be used for model calibration usually are
very limited, in both quantity and quality. These two difficulties are closely
interconnected during the model calibration process. A simple model structure
may not be able to both fit the observed data and produce reliable predictions.
On the other hand, a complex model structure may cause over-parameterization
when data are limited, thus rendering a model that contains a large amount of
uncertainties. It is well understood that a model that can fit the existing data
well may not necessarily be a good model for prediction when it contains
significant model error. The following challenging problems thus are presented:
can a model be identified that satisfies the accuracy requirement of specified
model applications (for example, for use as a decision-making tool) when the
data are limited and the model error is significant? Furthermore, can a robust
data collection design be found that can provide sufficient information for
identifying a reliable model when model structure is highly complex and unknown?
This study attempts to address these problems.

The overriding objective of this proposal is to perform theoretical analyses to
find the quantitative relationships among the reducibility of a model structure,
identifiability of a model parameter, reliability of a model application and the
robustness of an experimental design. Based on these theoretical results, we
will present a new algorithm for calculating the structure error of model
reduction. We also will present a new algorithm for robust design when the real
structure of the aquifer system is highly complex and unknown.

Impact statement: The proposed research attempts to resolve a long-standing
problem of model structure identification and experimental design in groundwater
modeling. The expected results include the development of a cost-effective and
feasible approach for identifying a least complex model that is useful for
prediction and decision-making. The developed methodologies can be applied to a
variety of simulation models, including groundwater flow, contaminant transport,
seawater intrusion and biodegradation. To maximize the immediate applicability
of the research results, we have made arrangements with the USGS office in San
Diego for collaboration.