* 0336085
* Dynamic Analysis Procedures for Performance-based Seismic Engineering of Unsymmetric-plan Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Anil Chopra, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 08/31/2004
* USD 49,769.00

While nonlinear response history analysis (RHA) is the most rigorous procedure
to estimate seismic demands for buildings, it remains impractical for widespread
use by the profession. This is especially true for unsymmetric-plan buildings,
which require three-dimensional analysis to account for coupling between lateral
and torsional motions. Before nonlinear RHA can become a standard tool in
structural engineering practice, commercial software must become more robust,
reliable, and convenient for structural modeling, input data preparation, and
interpretation of response results.

The overall objective of this research proposal is to explore the possibility of
developing an analytical procedure to estimate seismic demands for unsymmetric-
plan buildings. This method must be sufficiently accurate and reliable for
performance-based seismic engineering, but at the same time, it should not be so
complicated that it is impractical for use by the profession. The challenge then
is to develop a simplified method based on structural dynamics theory for
nonlinear seismic demand analysis of buildings.

A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) would provide an opportunity to
explore the several conceptual issues that must be resolved before meeting this
challenge. These issues include: coupling of x-lateral, y-lateral, and torsional
motions of unsymmetric-plan buildings, and simultaneous action of two horizontal
components of ground motion. The proposed research program will provide an
opportunity to explore the feasibility of developing dynamic analysis procedures
for performance-based seismic engineering of unsymmetric-plan buildings,
considering various types of ground motions, including near-fault ground
motions. The challenge is to develop a simplified method simpler than rigorous
nonlinear RHA, rooted in structural dynamics theory for nonlinear seismic demand
analysis of buildings. The method should be designed to work directly with the
earthquake design spectrum, which is the standard approach to defining seismic
hazard. If this exploratory research leads to promising results, it will provide
the foundation for developing a novel procedure that is expected to be much
superior than existing methods.

Intellectual Merit: Based on structural dynamics theory, the MPA procedure has
the potential to be a major improvement over other existing simplified methods
for estimating seismic demands on buildings and other structures. It could
provide a unified analytical formulation for tackling two- or .three-
dimensional analysis of buildings for any type of excitation, near-fault or far-
fault. Concepts underlying the MPA may be applicable to other classes of
structures, e.g., bridges, intake-outlet towers, etc. The MPA procedure thus may
open the door for research aimed at systematically developing approximate but
rational methods for estimating the seismic demands for different classes of
structures, recognizing their vibration properties.

Broader Impact: This collaborative research program between Anil K. Chopra at
the University of California, Berkeley, a major research institution, and Rakesh
K. Goel at the California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, a
primarily undergraduate university, could also lead to significant broader
impacts, including integration of research into graduate and undergraduate
education; increased participation of under-represented groups; broad
dissemination of results to educators, researchers, engineers, and code-writing
professionals; as well as integration of diversity into the NSF-sponsored
research.