* 0336950
* Direct Computation and Systematic Interpretation of Plate Driving Forces Worldwide
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* G. Peter Bird, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 128,961.00

The dynamic balance of forces that drive the Earth's plates is poorly understood
for several reasons: undefined terms, oversimplified models, and the intrinsic
difficulty of determining the forces exerted on plates by basal shear tractions
and attached subducting slabs. This project uses simple explicit definitions
that divide the balanced torques into 4 components: (1) lithostatic pressure
torque; (2) side-strength torque; (3) basal drag torque; and (4) net slab pull
torque . It applies sophisticated thin-shell modeling tools that incorporate
real topography, variable heat-flow, variable crust and lithosphere thickness,
realistic nonlinear rheologies, and faults. The balance of torques on each plate
are being computed in steps: (1) construct a high-resolution model of the global
lithosphere with 52 plates and 13 orogens; (2) impose the correct velocity on
each plate, either at edges connected to subducting slabs (if any), or at points
in the strong plate interior; (3) compute the reaction forces, and sum them, to
find the total torque on each plate that must be supplied by basal shear
tractions and net slab pull; (4) redistribute these torques as basal shear
tractions on the bases of plates with no slabs. The global dynamic balance is
recomputed to obtain more realistic stress and strain rate distributions within
the plates and orogens without significant changes in plate velocities. To
account for dependence on the effective friction of plate boundary faults (which
many previous studies have shown to be low) computations are being carried out
for a one-parameter suite of models with different effective fault friction
coefficients. Predictions are being scored against (a) azimuths of seismic
anisotropy under certain slab-free plates; (b) geodetic velocities, (c) seafloor
spreading rates; (d) geologic slip rates on faults; and (e) intraplate stress
directions. The sum of basal shear traction and net slab pull torques is being
decomposed into its two components for each of the plates with attached slab(s).
Basal tractions on plates with no attached slabs indicate the general level of
basal tractions. Seismic anisotropy of the upper mantle, where known, gives two
possible directions for basal shear traction. These constraints permit a global
(52 plates x 3 torque components) inversion study to determine how net slab pull
depends on known factors of relative plate velocity, absolute trench velocity,
slab age, and/or trench depth. Determining the direction and sense of basal
shear traction on (many) plates will constrain global convection models,
allowing others to determine the viscosity and density-anomaly structures in the
rest of Earth's mantle. Understanding how net slab pull depends on the factors
listed above will help understand why plate velocities have changed in geologic
history. The final best model of dynamic stress balance in the plates will give
global predictions of anelastic strain rates in plate interiors, which will be
used in seismic hazard estimation.