* 0336681
* Group Actions on Manifolds with Positive Sectional Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Krishnan Shankar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 54,089.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0103993&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A general problem in
Riemannian geometry is to find and describe manifolds&lt;br/&gt;that admit a
complete Riemannian metric of positive sectional curvature.&lt;br/&gt;If there
is no positive lower bound on the curvature, then the manifold
is&lt;br/&gt;known to be diffeomorphic to Euclidean space, by the Cheeger-
Gromoll-Meyer&lt;br/&gt;Soul theorem. In the class of closed, positively curved
manifolds, there&lt;br/&gt;are few restrictions, most of which are classical,
such as the&lt;br/&gt;Bonnet-Myers and Synge theorems. For closed, simply
connected manifolds,&lt;br/&gt;there is essentially just Gromov's theorem
bounding the total Betti number&lt;br/&gt;in a given dimension. Given that there
are few known obstructions, it is&lt;br/&gt;frustrating that the set of known
examples, although infinite, is&lt;br/&gt;relatively small. My research is
concerned with understanding the geometry&lt;br/&gt;and topology of the known
examples. More specifically, the goals are: 1)&lt;br/&gt;to attempt to find new
examples of positively curved manifolds by studying&lt;br/&gt;more general
metrics on biquotients (in collaboration with J.-H.&lt;br/&gt;Eschenburg), 2) to
compute the isometry groups for the known cohomogeneity&lt;br/&gt;one manifolds
of positive curvature and 3) to see whether the&lt;br/&gt;7-dimensional Berger
space is diffeomorphic to a 3-sphere bundle over the&lt;br/&gt;4-sphere (in
collaboration with N. Kitchloo).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry arose
from trying to understand curvature. &lt;br/&gt;Intuitively, we know that
tabletops are flat while basketballs and saddles&lt;br/&gt;are curved. Geometers
are able to quantify curvature precisely and it&lt;br/&gt;provides a numerical
invariant that helps distinguish objects. For&lt;br/&gt;instance, the surface of
a doughnut and the surface of a coffee cup have&lt;br/&gt;the same nature i.e.,
they are both surfaces with one hole, but they are&lt;br/&gt;shaped differently.
On the other hand, the surface of a ball (usually&lt;br/&gt;called a sphere) is
different in shape and nature from the surface of a&lt;br/&gt;doughnut (usually
called a torus). How can we be sure that this is always&lt;br/&gt;the case? One
may wonder if it is possible to deform the sphere suitably&lt;br/&gt;so that we
might end up with the torus. A sphere has positive
curvature&lt;br/&gt;everywhere while it can be shown that no matter what shape a
torus takes,&lt;br/&gt;it will always have zero curvature somewhere. This tells
us that the two&lt;br/&gt;objects are somehow fundamentally different from each
other. Differential&lt;br/&gt;geometry is also the language used to express the
general theory of&lt;br/&gt;relativity, our best theoretical description of
gravity and its effects on&lt;br/&gt;the universe. In general relativity, a
vacuous space-time universe would&lt;br/&gt;be inherently flat. This idealized
state is warped by the presence of&lt;br/&gt;masses or energy, Thus, gravity is
the curvature in space-time, and by&lt;br/&gt;understanding the geometry of
Lorentzian space-time, one may some day&lt;br/&gt;understand the shape of the
universe. My work involves the study of&lt;br/&gt;positively curved objects in
higher dimensions. This is part of trying to&lt;br/&gt;understand how the
structure imposed by curvature (geometry) is essential&lt;br/&gt;to
understanding the nature (topology) of an object and vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;