* 0336810
* SGER: Proof of Concept Experiments for Novel Tribological Systems:  Superelastic Response in Sputtered Tinix Film Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* David Grummon, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 59,500.00

Proof of Concept Experiments for Novel Tribological Systems: Superelastic
Response in sputtered TiNiX Film Coatings &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract --
&lt;br/&gt;Shape-memory, and especially superelastic alloys, are of interest as
tribological materials because they express large and reversible strain
excursions without accumulating lattice damage from dislocation-mediated slip.
Recent experiments at General Motors Research Laboratories and at Michigan State
University have established the robust operation of both shape-memory and
superelastic effects during localized microscale deformation. In this project we
will explore the potential for functional vapor-deposited thin films of nickel-
titanium shape-memory and superelastic alloys to enhance compliance and limit
damage accumulation in wear processes. If successful, the project could have
very substantial impact in many tribological applications for sleeve bearings,
etc. &lt;br/&gt; By deploying a sputtered thin film coating of superelastic
NiTi, either as a functionally graded surface film, or as an interlayer between
a metallic substrate and a conventional hard-coating, we will attempt to confer
the beneficial tribological effects of superelasticity to base-metal substrates.
The principal objective of the project will be to demonstrate that sputtered
TiNi films, integrated with tailored hard coatings, will show significantly
better wear resistance than conventional coatings alone. The technique will also
be evaluated for its ability to improve hard-coating adhesion by ameliorating
severe thermal expansion and elastic constant mismatches between the coating and
base materials, particularly for aluminum alloy substrates. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;