* 0336630
* Texas A&amp;M/San Antonio College Success Profile Comparison Study
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Jeffrey Froyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Each year thousands of under-represented minority (URM) students enroll in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs and to a large
percentage fail to graduate with a STEM degree. In order to increase the
percentage that earn a STEM degree, it would be helpful to have more complete
information about the characteristics of those students who have achieved
baccalaureate success, and the attributes of the program(s) in which they
succeeded. Through the Texas A&amp;M system Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (TX LSAMP) and the Foundation Coalition, investigators have been
directly involved, for several years, in the development, management, study and
evaluation of educational strategies to increase participation, learning
experiences, and graduation rates of URM students in STEM majors. Extensive
databases on student characteristics and program attributes, accumulated through
these efforts, represent a rich source, which can be mined for a greater
understanding of relationships between program attributes and the
characteristics of students who earned STEM degrees. To begin extracting
knowledge from the extensive accumulated data, a partnership of educators and
educational research and evaluation professionals at Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) and San Antonio College (SAC) are undertaking the TAMU/SAC Success
Profile Comparison Study (TAMU/SAC SPCS). The project team brings to this study
longitudinal data, institutional insights, and systemic perspectives acquired in
connection with the active community college and university partnerships of the
TX LSAMP, to which both SAC and TAMU belong. The entire research project is
being conducted in two phases. A Preliminary Study focuses on students that
started in one of the five universities or nine community colleges that were
partners in TX LSAMP. The outcome variables have seven possible values: (i)
earned BS STEM degree and continued onto graduate school, (ii) earned BS STEM
degree, (iii) still enrolled in BS STEM baccalaureate degree program, (iv)
earned non-STEM baccalaureate degree and continued on to graduate school, (v)
earned non-STEM baccalaureate degree, (vi) still enrolled in non-STEM
baccalaureate degree program, and (vii) left public higher education in the
state of Texas. Independent, input variables include (1) student demographics,
(2) enrollment behaviors, (3) general characteristics of the starting
institutions, and (4) the types (i.e. Carnegie classification) of baccalaureate
institution from which students graduated or are currently enrolled. Because it
would not be possible to obtain, from all those institutions, the deep, detailed
data about students and about programs, pedagogical strategies and fine-grained
institutional characteristics, the second phase research, the Principal Study,
focuses only on TAMU and SAC. The Principal Study enriches and refines the
aforementioned independent variable categories, and also adds (5) student pre-
college preparation and (6) pedagogical strategies experienced, as well as (7)
early collegiate academic performance to the sets of independent variables
studied. Both studies utilize Generalized Linear Models (e.g., binary logistic
regression, polychotomous and ordinal logistic regression), and Multivariate
Analyses along with exploratory and descriptive techniques. Both studies develop
Profile Models (PMs) for each sub-population defined by each baccalaureate
outcome (dependent variable) category, as well as for other sub-populations
defined by grouping variables. &lt;br/&gt;