* 0336867
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Utilitarian Plainware Ceramic Production and Exchange and the Evolution of Market Systems in the Basin of Mexico, A.D. 1200-1650
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Barbara Stark, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Drs. George Cowgill and Barbara Stark, Christopher
Garraty will analyze Aztec period and Early Colonial ceramic data from
archaeological sites located throughout the Basin of Mexico, focusing
specifically on non-decorated plainware pottery. Mr. Garraty's research will
address the structure and evolution of the Aztec market economy in the Basin-the
heartland of Aztec civilization, in the vicinity of modern-day Mexico City-from
ca. A.D. 1200-1650. This span encompasses the period prior to and during the
Aztec empire and the subsequent Early Colonial period following the Spanish
conquest in 1519. Archaeologists have studied Aztec decorated pottery to
reconstruct pottery production and market exchange, but far less research has
concentrated on the more-abundant plainwares. Decorated pottery was in effect
the "fine China" of Aztec society, proudly displayed at feasts and communal
ceremonies. In contrast, plainwares were mainly used for everyday household
tasks such as cooking and storage and were probably perceived as distinct market
commodities from decorated pottery. Plainwares provide an independent line of
archaeological evidence for reconstructing patterns of pottery exchange,
allowing for a more comprehensive empirical basis for interpreting the structure
of the Aztec market economy and how it changed through time. A notable strength
of this study is the time span it encompasses, which will afford new insights
into the impact of Aztec and Spanish imperialism on local and regional economies
and on household-level economic decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Garraty's methodology includes standardization analyses and clay source
ascriptions. Standardization analyses measure the degree of variability of
ceramic vessel attributes, such as vessel form, paste, and surface-treatment.
High levels of standardization, for example, suggest a small number of large-
scale manufacturers serving a large number of consumers. Standardization
analyses of several thousand ceramic rim sherds will help illuminate the scale
and organization of Aztec pottery production through comparisons of the better-
known decorated data against the plainware data. Mr. Garraty will also draw on
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) data from ca. 500 plainware
ceramic specimens. INAA extracts the chemical composition of ceramic clay pastes
and can be used to ascribe approximate locations of the clay sources used to
manufacture the ceramic specimens. INAA data can thus be used to track ancient
patterns of pottery exchange and roughly demarcate spheres of commodity
circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to these scientific research
questions, this project will contribute broadly to the public understanding of
archaeology and history. The models and methods used for this research will be
disseminated broadly through publications, presentations at scholarly
conferences, and other public forums, including webpage development. This
project will provide hands-on training in a variety of scientific analyses that
will assist Mr. Garraty in his graduate student training. In pursuing this
project, Mr. Garraty has established close professional relationships with
Mexican and U.S. archaeologists and with officials of the National Institute of
Anthropology and History in Mexico. The project will also stand as a foundation
for future graduate and undergraduate student research, and the data will be
made available for future researchers. The methods used for this study, if
successful, can stand as a model for similar research on utilitarian commodity
exchange and market economies.&lt;br/&gt;