* 0337049
* Theoretical Studies of Frustrated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Allan Peter Young, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This grant supports theoretical and computational research on systems with
frustration, i.e., competition, in their interactions. The work will focus on a
particular set of systems that is convenient to study, the spin glass. However,
the results of this research will have wide applicability.

The dynamics of spin glasses at low temperatures is very slow because the system
gets trapped in local minima. A range of surprising non-equilibrium effects have
been observed experimentally, but these have been hard to see in simulations on
Ising systems, i.e., systems with discrete spins. In previous work the need to
investigate vector spin glass systems has been emphasized, and indeed the non-
equilibrium effects are seen more strongly in experiments on vector spin glasses
than Ising spin glasses. Thus, non-equilibrium and equilibrium behavior of
vector spin glasses will be studied with the intent of explaining experimental
results in detail.

Also, studies will be made to find algorithms that are more efficient than those
currently available. For finite-temperature simulations, the best current
techniques for speeding up equilibration is parallel tempering, in which the
temperature of the system wanders up and down, so it can easily overcome
barriers when at high temperature. We will investigate if using quantum, rather
than thermal, fluctuations will be more efficient. Already there is evidence
that the quantum analogue of "simulated annealing," which is used to find the
ground states but does not give equilibrium behavior at finite temperature, is
more efficient than the original thermal version. We will also investigate a
quite different algorithm, based on a calculation of the density of states, from
which one can, in principle, get information about any temperature. On a longer
time frame, we will investigate whether an algorithm used with great success for
a problem in combinatorial optimization, but rooted in ideas from spin glasses,
can be used to find spin glass ground states more efficiently.

Since numerical studies of spin glasses are inevitably restricted to rather
small sizes, even with the best available algorithms, it is useful to find
models which approach the asymptotic critical behavior as fast as possible on
increasing the size. Thus, we will study a family of spin glass models to try to
find a subspace in which the leading correction to finite-size scaling vanishes,
which would enable reliable results to be obtained from smaller lattice sizes.
The results of these studies on spin glasses will have wide applicability to
other fields of study. In addition, this research provides excellent training
for students. %%% This grant supports theoretical and computational research on
systems with frustration, i.e., competition, in their interactions. The work
will focus on a particular set of systems that is convenient to study, the spin
glass. The results of these studies on spin glasses will have wide applicability
to other fields of study. In addition, this research provides excellent training
for students. ***

