* 0337677
* Rhenium-Osmium Isotope and Platinum Group Element Systematics of Lower Oceanic Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 299,725.00

Kelemen&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0337677&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formation, alteration and
subduction of oceanic crust are fundamental processes of Earth's ongoing
chemical differentiation. The chemical transformations of oceanic crust from
igneous accretion to subduction are of fundamental importance to constraining
the chemical evolution of the Earth. While the chemical composition of upper
oceanic crust has been studied using multiple shallow drill holes, our knowledge
of middle and lower oceanic crust is limited to ophiolite sections and few drill
holes into deeper oceanic crust. This project is aimed at investigating
refractory cumulate gabbros and complementary lavas from well studied sections
in the southernmost massifs in the Oman ophiolite, that overlap compositionally
with the depleted end of the mid-ocean-ridge compositional spectrum. Two
important hypothesis will be tested: 1) The lower oceanic crust is the main
reservoir of platinum group elements (PGE) in the oceanic crust, and 2) The
average rhenium/osmium in lavas is higher than that in corresponding cumulates.
The project also aims at identifying important PGE carrier phases to better
understand magmatic fractionation of these elements, and investigating the
effects of hydrothermal alteration on the PGE budget of the oceanic crust.
Complementary isotope, major and trace element, as well as petrographic and
mineral analyses will be carried out to place the Re/Os/PGE data in a broader
geochemical context. Results from this study will significantly improve our
understanding of chemical interaction between the oceans, crust and
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;