* 0337527
* Partitioning of Noble Gases Between Crustal Minerals: Implications for Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Ethan Baxter, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/29/2008
* USD 155,102.00

Noble gas based thermochronometers (notably 40Ar/39Ar and U-Th/He) represent an
important method of constraining rate and time in geologic processes -
particularly regarding the thermal and tectonic evolution of the crust and
surface of the Earth. Quantitative models have recently been developed which can
predict and quantify "excess Ar" - a common yet poorly understood problem in
standard thermochronology. In order for the models to be fully implemented and
tested in natural systems, Ar (and He) partitioning data among crustal phases is
needed. While broad constraints exist for mineral/fluid partitioning, equally
important mineral/mineral partitioning data is scant and/or controversial. The
proposed research is designed to: 1) Measure the relative partitioning of Ar
(and other noble gases, He and Ne) between common crustal minerals, and in so
doing, 2) test the hypothesis that certain minerals, such as quartz, may act as
important sinks for Ar within the crust, thus playing a key role in limiting
excess Ar in other surrounding minerals. Piston-cylinder experiments will be
conducted to measure the equilibrium partitioning of Ar between common crustal
phases including quartz, micas, and feldspars. The experiments will employ
reactor-produced 37Ar to monitor noble gas partitioning among minerals. Analysis
of equilibrated mineral surfaces will be performed using UV-laser and/or
Rutherford Backscattering. Future field-based applications of this research are
anticipated. The broader impacts of the proposed activities include the
education and training of a graduate student as well as the development of the
PI's collaborative research program involving colleagues at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and at the Open University, England.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;