* 0337111
* Lower Crustal Deformation and Vertical Coupling and Decoupling in the Continental Lithosphere During Late Orogenic Extension
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Keith Klepeis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 238,953.00

A deeply eroded mountain range in western New Zealand provides the highly
unusual opportunity for direct examination of a full 50 km thick column of
continental crust as it evolved over a 35 million year period. This discovery is
especially significant because field observations and numerical models have led
geoscientists to emphasize the role of the lower crust in controlling the
behavior of deforming continental lithosphere. However, the large number of
unconstrained variables in most experiments and in most exposures creates a high
degree of uncertainty about the characteristics and consequences of flow in the
lower continental crust. This project is determining how strain was partitioned
vertically within an ancient orogen as it underwent a transition from crustal
thickening and contraction to crustal thinning and extension. The direct
observational approach used in this project is possible because the pre-Cenozoic
configuration of western New Zealand places crust that formed at unusually deep
levels of a Cretaceous orogen (25-50 km depth) next to rocks that represent the
middle and upper crustal levels of this same orogen (8-27 km depth). The
research involves using the original Mesozoic architecture of the belt to test
the contrasting ways in which extensional deformation may be transferred
vertically through a rheologically evolving crustal column. Specifically, the
project involves measurement of three-dimensional characteristics and kinematics
of middle, upper and lower crustal structures that formed during extension
between 108 and 190 million years ago, determination if there was kinematic
compatibility between simultaneously evolving extensional structures at
different crustal depths, establishment of absolute and relative timing of
deformation and magmatism at lower, upper and middle crustal levels using
uranium-lead zircon geochronology, and detremination of pressure and temperature
conditions of high-P granulite and upper amphibolite facies assemblages formed
during extension. The initial results suggest that rheological transitions
linked to magmatism and the partial melting of thick lower crust and their
effects on the mechanical behavior of continental lithosphere are much more
heterogeneous and short-lived than previously believed.