* 0337263
* Collaborative Research: Testing Tectonic Geodesy from Fault Slip Rates Across the Eastern California Shear Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Oskin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 149,737.00

The Eastern California Shear zone is an intriguing example of a plate boundary
fault system where the known rates of faulting may not add up to the geodetic
rate of strain accumulation. This research tests the hypothesis that geologic
and geodetic strain rates must somehow agree across the Eastern California Shear
zone by gathering new long-term slip rate data from a well-defined, well-
exposed, and tectonically simple transect of active faulting across the central
Mojave Desert. Field geomorphic and geologic mapping, augmented by targeted
acquisition of high-resolution airborne laser swath mapping altimetry data, will
document offset Plio-Quaternary lava flows and alluvial fans across each of six
right-lateral strike-slip faults. Selected offset markers will be dated with
40Ar/39Ar, cosmogenic 10Be or cosmogenic 3He to measure crustal deformation
rates at 10^5 to 10^6 year time scales that average several earthquake cycles.
If the geology does account for the geodetic strain rate through significant
slip rates on one or more faults, the predictive capability of tectonic geodesy
is demonstrated. Alternatively, if the long-term geologic strain rate is
significantly slower than the geodetic rate, as seems to be supported by
existing paleoseismic data, then a system-wide transient loading process must be
responsible for the high present-day strain accumulation across the Eastern
California Shear zone.