* 0337795
* A Longitudinal Study of the Development of Rational Number Knowledge in the Middle Grades
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jae-Meen Baek, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,740,195.00

This is a proposal for a 3-year longitudinal study of developmental trajectories
in middle school students' learning about rational numbers. The goals of the
proposed work include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Uncovering patterns and mechanisms of
development in students' understanding of rational numbers and proportional
reasoning;&lt;br/&gt;2. Integrating the current piecemeal body of research on
rational number into a coherent developmental model by examining how
understanding of rational number sub-constructs evolve concurrently and
interactively;&lt;br/&gt;3. Developing insight into the ways in which classroom
instruction, especially teacher questioning techniques and tasks, impact
students' ability to think about, represent, and communicate their understanding
of rational number concepts and operations as it develops over time;
and&lt;br/&gt;4. Generating transportable models of rational number development
that can be factored into teacher pre- and in-service staff development to
promote quality instructional practices in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The conduct of the work
will affect the lives of 160 middle grade students of diverse backgrounds
throughout the life of the project. The results of the project will influence
pre-service and in-service teaching nationally. Finally, the study will reframe
math education issues longitudinally and deliver high quality software products
I support of student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Panel
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal
for a 3-year longitudinal study of developmental trajectories in middle school
students' learning about rational numbers. The panel believes the aims of the
project to be very worthwhile, with the longitudinal focus on this age group
making a unique contribution to existing research on the understanding of
rational numbers. Reviewers were also enthusiastic about detailed modeling of
individual students' knowledge and understanding being combined with detailed,
rich, contextual examination of learning opportunities, discourse, and
inscriptions in classrooms, especially in multiple classrooms over several
years. The research team is strong and presents an organized plan for
accomplishing the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;