* 0337220
* AToL: Collaborative Research: Large-scale Phylogeny of Hymenoptera
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2009
* Michael Sharkey, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 11/30/2009
* USD 1,398,225.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michael J. Sharkey of the University of Kentucky
for a large-scale study of the evolutionary history of the Hymenoptera - the
order of insects containing the ants, bees and wasps. With more than 115,000
described species, this order includes as much as 10% of the species diversity
of the planet, with estimates ranging between 0.3 and 2.5 million species.
Students and postgraduate researchers will be involved in a collaborative effort
with a large array of international scientists. We will trace the history of
this group using both anatomical and molecular data, to produce a well supported
evolutionary hypothesis at the taxonomic level of family. The final analyses
will have up to 2,000 species, representing all hymenopteran families and
subfamilies. Because most anatomical features we will study will not vary at the
taxonomic level of genus, we will implicitly be including all species that have
adequate descriptions and share the anatomical traits used in the analysis.
Published products will include a series of monographs and two books on the
phylogeny of Hymenoptera, an interactive electronic key to Hymenoptera families,
access to detailed morphological images through World Wide Web, and access to
all the anatomical and molecular data for all
Hymenoptera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economically and ecologically, Hymenoptera are
one of the most important groups of organisms. Some are severe economic pests
threatening both the forest industry and wheat farming (sawflies), medical and
noxious pests of urban landscapes (social wasps and ants), pollinators (bees),
and defenders of our agricultural crops through their ability to parasitize and
control pest insects (most parasitic wasps). Knowledge of the evolution of the
entire order is extremely important for placing taxa within a correct context
for more limited studies of behavior, host associations and ability to discover
novel pest control agents.&lt;br/&gt;