* 0337534
* High-Pressure Crystal Chemistry and Compressibility of Hydrous Mantle Phases
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* George Lager, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 243,911.00

Neutron and X-ray diffraction methods will be used to investigate the high-
pressure crystal chemistry, hydrogen bonding and compressibility of hydrous
phases stable at temperatures and pressures within the upper mantle and
transition zone. Experiments will focus on both synthetic and natural systems,
including dense hydrous magnesium silicates (wadsleyite, phase E and OH-
clinohumite), epidotes, OH-topaz and hydrogarnet. The results of this work will
show how structurally incorporated water (hydrogen) affects the behavior of
hydrous phases at mantle pressures. Intellectual Merit: Understanding the
location and behavior of hydrogen at high pressure of hydrous phases is
particularly important because even at very small concentrations hydrogen has
such a dramatic affect on both the stability and physical properties of earth
materials. At the macroscopic level, the pressure dependence of the volume
(equation of state) is used in the calculation of density and thermodynamic
parameters, and to extrapolate semi- empirical hydrogen-bonding models to high
pressures. Broader Impacts: Mitigation strategies for earthquake hazards are
based on geological models developed, in part, from experimental data on the
stability and properties of hydrous phases in subducted slabs. Three
undergraduates and one graduate student will participate either directly in the
experiments, or learn how to analyze crystallographic data and formulate models
to interpret measurements. To the extent possible, the results of this work will
also be disseminated to students in undergraduate courses designed for both
science and non- science majors, and to grades 9-12 students through community
outreach programs sponsored by the university. The Ph.D. student funded by this
project will be enrolled in an interdisciplinary degree program in chemical
physics and geosciences. Interactions of the P.I. and graduate student with the
condensed matter and inorganic chemistry will serve to enhance research across
scientific disciplines within the university and, possibly, the region.