* 0337462
* Seismo-Acoustic Dynamics of Silicic Dome Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jonathan Lees, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 148,169.00

The investigators propose a study of two Andean volcanoes, Guagua Pichincha and
Tungurahua, Ecuador, because they exhibit relatively frequent explosive events
(both pyroclastic and phreato-magmatic) and offer unparalleled access for field
study. Activity at Pichincha is an analogue for active volcanism at: Unzen,
Merapi, Bezmianny, and Monserrat. Tungurahua is extremely hazardous due to its
steep elevation and danger posed to the city of Banos. The project is aimed at
field observations and developing new models for silicic volcanism in general
and these two volcanoes specifically.&lt;br/&gt;To understand the controlling
features of volcanic degassing at silicic domes new instrumentation, including
broadband seismic and infrasonic acoustic sensors will be installed to monitor
the Strombolian-type explosion activity. The technology required to accomplish
high fidelity observations, including hardware and software, will be transferred
to Ecuadorian Colleagues at the Instituto Geofisica in Quito. Elastic and
acoustic energy radiation recorded with arrays of infrasonic microphones and
broad-band seismometers will be used to assess the explosive energy release,
relative energy partitioning into the ground and atmosphere, and explosion
source location. Digitized video records will be used to calibrate infrasound
generation with gas plume ejection velocities and verify source time origin and
locations. Physical models of explosive degassing at domes will be developed and
compared to lower-viscosity, open-vent magmatic systems (Stromboli, Karymsky,
Arenal, Erebus), so that infrasonic and seismic tools can be used to remotely
predict degassing behavior for all types of volcanic explosions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major impact of this proposal will be 1) the
development of new volcano explosion models applied to previously unexplored
volcanic activity, 2) new observations of seismo/acoustic signals at hazardous
volcanoes in Ecuador, and 3) establishment of a strong collaboration between
Ecuadorian and U.S. researchers on active volcanic hazard reduction, 4)
assessment of hazard prior to large collapse events on dangerous
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-sponsored by the Americas
Program in the Office Of International Science And Engineering.