* 0337594
* Collisional Response of the Middle to Upper-lower Crust: A Himalayan Analogue in West Greenland
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* James Connelly, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2006
* USD 105,494.00

The collision of two continental plates causes a wide range of spectacular
geological phenomena including mountain building, earthquakes and magmatism.
Much of the understanding of continent-continent collisional tectonics stems
from the on-going Himalayan-Tibetan orogenic system, the best known example of
this fundamental process. &lt;br/&gt;The 4-D dynamics and architecture of
mountains and high plateaus are the consequence of a complex interplay between
the upper and middle/lower crust, which deform primarily by brittle and ductile
mechanisms, respectively. However, the role of crust below the brittle-ductile
transition in the Himalayan-Tibetan system necessarily relies mainly on
observations collected in the upper part of the brittle realm. Despite these
limitations, models invoking large-scale ductile flow in a restricted channel of
melt-weakened material in the mid-crust and its control on mountain building,
are based heavily on this region. A complete, well-exposed, deeply-eroded
ancient mountain belt that exposes middle/deep crust would permit direct
observation of rocks that experienced the processes speculated about from
studies of higher level orogens and numerical models. &lt;br/&gt;An
international research team composed of geologists from the University of Texas
and the Danish Lithosphere Centre, believe that such an area exists in West
Greenland and we are testing a hypothesis that that two Precambrian (ca. 1.8
billion years) orogens identified in West Greenland (Rinkian Belt and
Nagssugtoqidian Orogen) represent a single, +1100 km wide, asymmetric
collisional orogen. Due to the appropriate levels of post-collisional
exhumation, this region (with 100% exposure in an alpine setting) will serve as
a unique site to directly observe the response of the middle and shallow-lower
crust to continent-continent collision. As such, this accessible region will
serve as a deep analogue to the Himalayan-Tibean orogenic system.
&lt;br/&gt;These process-oriented objectives require that the style(s), timing,
duration and diachroneity of deformation and metamorphism be characterized
across this +1100 km orogen. Over the past three summers, field work in West
Greenland by our research group (funded by Carlsberg and NERC) builds upon
previous mapping and research programs to characterize the structural evolution
of the region. This NSF grant supports an extensive U-Pb geochronology program
that will place critical absolute time constrains on the evolution of this belt.
&lt;br/&gt;Just as the Himalayas serves as our best example of continent-
continent collision today, the West Greenland is envisioned as being a world-
class, benchmark site for studying processes occurring at depth in collisional
tectonic settings. A better understanding of deformation style(s) and feed back
of these crustal levels will improve our understanding of topography,
earthquakes, ground motion and deformation in this tectonic setting.
Additionally, formulation of an integrated tectonic model for the
Paleoproterozoic of West Greenland will provide the last major piece of the
puzzle to better understand the growth and stabilization of Paleoproterozoic NE
Laurentia. This will represent the culmination of over a decade of international
research that has included groups in the USA, Canada and Europe.&lt;br/&gt;