* 0337204
* The Health Education Centers' Interactive Videoconferencing Programming Collaborative
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Timothy Barshinger, Interactive Digital Solutions, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,589,981.00

IDSolutions, in partnership with the National Association of Health Education
Centers (NAHEC) and eight NAHEC member organizations will develop an original
project to provide informal science education experiences to children, families
and the local community via visual communications' technology. This initiative
includes building a technical infrastructure that will connect participating
Health Education Centers. It will expand beyond the installation of a network
and will focus the bulk of its energy on the technology's application --
generating inquiry-based science experiences through active engagement with
content that originates from remote locations. Through the creation of an
Interactive Videoconferencing Programming Collaborative (IVPC), IDSolutions,
NAHEC, and NAHEC Members will produce and disseminate to our target audience of
school-age children, families, community groups and teachers, a high volume of
science-related programming. The core content of the initial set of programs
will be extracted from one of the nation's most popular life science traveling
exhibits called "Grossology." These distance-learning programs will originate
from a central "studio" location and will be available during the day, after
school, on weekends, during summer breaks and holidays. Supporting this effort
will be Advanced Animations (designers of "Grossology" and "Experience
Science!"), a science education consulting company.