* 0337667
* A New Generation of Timescales for Arc Magmatic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2007
* USD 427,036.00

This project aims to provide a temporal link between processes occurring within
magma reservoirs and their surficial expression as eruptive events, viewed in
context of the long-term evolution of arc volcanoes. The problem is
fundamentally one of geochronology, since a foundation for identifying processes
such as fractional crystallization, magma mixing, and crustal assimilation has
already been established through decades of work. Quantifying timescales of
magmatic processes is a critical to understanding how potentially dangerous arc
volcanoes are built, how fast they grow, and how they eventually fail through
catastrophic eruption or sector collapses. Progress is hampered by incomplete
knowledge of the long-term variability of eruptive fluxes from arc volcanoes,
associated timescales of magma differentiation, relationship between
differentiation and magma input vs. output events, and the role that crustal
thickness plays in determining how long a particular magma takes to transit the
crust and erupt. These gaps will be bridged through detailed study of three
volcanoes (Seguam, Puyehue, and Parinacota) each situated in a classic arc
setting (Aleutian Islands, Southern Andes, and Central Andes). The focus is on
four objectives: (1) Measuring eruptive rates as a function of time for the last
200 thousand years at each volcano, (2) Resolving whether the rate-limiting step
in magma ascent is deep differentiation or shallow storage, (3) Tying major
events in the evolution of a magmatic system to significant events that shape
the accompanying volcanic edifice, and (4) Quantifying the effect of crustal
thickness and composition on the above issues. Campaigns of mapping and
stratigraphy, petrography, geochemistry, and experimental phase equilibria,
alongside U-Th geochronology to identify processes and timescales of magmatic
events and precise 40Ar/39Ar dating of many key eruptions, will address these
goals. Benefits that will extend beyond the tenure of this project include: (1)
Professional training of three PhD students, (2) Public outreach concerning
volcanic hazards in Chile, and (3) International collaboration with Chilean and
German volcanologists. We will take advantage of the new Center for the
Integration of Research Teaching and Learning (CIRTL), an NSF-sponsored program
to train the next generation of college science professors based at UW-Madison.
CIRTL courses and workshops will foster development and testing of Dynamic
Digital Maps of the volcanoes that can be used as tools for education and
outreach at different levels. Collaborative synergy is vital and will involve
exchanges of data, ideas and students between institutions in Chile, Germany,
and the US.