* 0337684
* A Geomagnetic Instability Timescale for the Pleistocene
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Bradley Singer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 302,596.00

Sediments and lava flows have begun to reveal that the Earth's magnetic field
becomes unstable, exhibiting large excursions in direction and intensity away
from what is presently observed, with a frequency greater than previously
imagined. To the extent that these numerous short-lived geomagnetic events can
be temporally quantified, they are useful in at least two major endeavors.
First, the marine sediment record of paleointensity holds great potential for
global stratigraphic correlation of climate changes during the past several
hundred thousand years. Second, recent theoretical and numerical models of the
geodynamo in the molten outer core make explicit predictions as to the timing,
frequency, and geometry of reversals and excursions in attempting to explain the
role of the solid inner core or deep mantle in controlling the field. These
models are only meaningful insofar as they can explain the observed paleofield
behavior. A principal goal of this project is to develop a Geomagnetic
Instability Time Scale (GITS) based on extensive 40Ar/39Ar dating of well-known
lava flows which record transitional directions or low paleointensity. Through
collaborations with paleomagnetists from several countries, it is planned to
determine the ages of as many as seven geomagnetic events that occurred during
the Brunhes Chron between ca. 700 and 25 thousand years ago and which are
recorded in basaltic lava flows at 10 different localities around the globe.
Corollaries include linking this record of geomagnetic events to that already
developed for the late Matuyama Chron (790 thousand to 2.3 million years ago),
and providing an unprecedented number of radioisotopic tie points with which to
calibrate and test orbital chronologies for the next generation of paleomagnetic
records acquired from marine sediment around the world. Some of the broader
impacts include nurturing established international collaborations and fostering
new ones that will disseminate technology and ideas far beyond the Rare Gas
Geochronology Laboratory at Wisconsin. Graduate students will be exposed to
multi-disciplinary (geophysics-geochemistry) field and laboratory-based
research, and the international scientific community. Moreover, it is also
planned to create an interactive exhibit on geologic time that integrates modern
radioisotopic dating with more traditional aspects of the geologic record for
the new expansion of the UW-Madison Geology museum. --