* 0337793
* The CATAALYST - Planning a Rigorous Study
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Jeremy Roschelle, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 231,607.00

Prior research on a group of similar technologies that the investigators call
"CATAALYST" (Classroom Aggregation Technology for Activating and Assessing
Learning and Your Students' Thinking) suggests that these rapid response
learning and instructional technologies can produce sustained improvements in
achievement and participation when coupled with an appropriate pedagogy of
questioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet research on CATAALYST-like technologies
is limited in quality and quantity. As a result, the investigators propose,
through planning activities and a workshop, to devise a methodologically
rigorous study of CATAALYST effects in K-12 math and science education. The
proposed work seeks to resolve issues of experimental design, recruitment,
instrumentation, and analysis so that a well-designed study subsequently can be
proposed. The central research question is: Does a CATAALYST intervention that
combines an appropriate pedagogy and teacher professional development with the
enabling technology increase participation among diverse students in K-12 math
and science classrooms and increase student
achievement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together, for the
first time, researchers who have investigated CATAALYST (and closely-related
approaches) at different educational levels and for the teaching of different
subject matters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The controlled, experimental study that the
investigators intend to develop will be appropriate for evaluating the inference
that CATAALYST enables these outcomes. It may additionally differentiate among
possible factors contributing to the outcomes and explanations of the mechanisms
involved. Further, it will enable the researchers to evaluate whether prior
outcomes reported in undergraduate education can be replicated in K-12 settings.
Given decreasing costs and increasing capabilities of the technology, adoption
is increasingly within reach for K-12 and university educators in STEM, but
decisions to adopt should be based on evidence. Further, implementations should
be based on understanding of the factors and mechanisms
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will hold a workshop to bring
together researchers from different disciplinary communities who have not yet
cross-pollinated their work. We intend this workshop to elicit comprehensive
research summaries of what is known, to interrelate practice-based and theory-
based accounts, and to encourage other researchers to form teams to plan
additional rigorous studies. A report will be disseminated, documenting both the
knowledge base and how interdisciplinary teams of scientists could proceed in
greater alignment.&lt;br/&gt;