* 0337579
* Investigations of the Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Jeremy Bloxham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 290,533.00

Understanding the origin of the Earth's magnetic field and predicting its future
evolution is one of the key problems in the Earth sciences. While it is nowadays
almost universally accepted that the magnetic field is maintained by
hydromagnetic dynamo action in the Earth's fluid, predominantly iron, outer
core, the details of that process remain very poorly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following specific
aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigation of the basic underlying mechanisms
of magnetic field generation in recent&lt;br/&gt;numerical models of the
geodynamo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigation of the parameter regime of
numerical dynamo models, seeking in particular&lt;br/&gt;to further our
understanding of the role of inertial and viscous effects on the
dynamo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigation of thermal core-mantle
interactions and their role in controlling the morphology of the main field and
its secular variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Investigation of the effect of
inner core gravitational coupling on the geodynamo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5.
Analysis of features observed in maps of the magnetic field at the core-mantle
boundary&lt;br/&gt;using a numerical dynamo model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6.
Analysis of the frozen flux approximation, the assumption under which on
sufficiently short timescales the magnetic field can be considered to be frozen
into the fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;7. Dynamo code development, including
development of a distributed memory version of the code suitable for running on
a network of commodity-hardware based machines in order to take advantage of the
performance-cost ratio of such hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work will be disseminated not only through traditional channels of
scientific publication but additionally through non-traditional channels
television documentaries to ensure dissemination beyond the research community.
Additionally, the results will be incorporated into the Principal Investigator's
teaching materials.&lt;br/&gt;