* 0337780
* Participant Support for 2004 International SEDI Meeting
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 23,252.00

We request funds that will be used to contribute to participant costs for the
8th symposium on Study of Earth's Deep Interior (SEDI). The meeting will be held
in Garmisch Partenkirchen, Germany from July 4-9, 2004. Intellectual Merit SEDI
is an international scientific organization dedicated to the Study of the
Earth's Deep Interior. The ultimate goal of SEDI is an enhanced understanding of
the past evolution and current thermal, dynamical, and chemical state of the
Earth's deep interior and of the effect that the interior has on the structures
and processes observed at the surface of the Earth. The 'deep interior' is
generally considered to be the core and lower mantle, but interest may extend to
the surface, for example, in the study of mantle plumes or dynamics of
descending lithospheric slabs. The scientific questions and problems of interest
to SEDI include the geomagnetic dynamo and secular variation, paleomagnetism and
the evolution of the Earth's deep interior, composition, structure and dynamics
of the outer core, dynamo energetics, structure of the inner core, core cooling
and the core-mantle boundary region, core-mantle boundary shape, coupling and
the rotation of the Earth, lower mantle: structure, convection and plumes,
nature and location of&lt;br/&gt;deep geochemical reservoirs, etc. Broader
Impact This proposal will contribute to interdisciplinary education of US
graduate students and young researchers by fostering dialog with researchers at
all levels at a relatively small workshop style meeting. The structure of SEDI
is intrinsically interdisciplinary, providing many opportunities for intra- and
international collaborations on a range of topics that contribute to our
understanding of the deep earth.&lt;br/&gt;