* 0337497
* Present-day Kinematics and Dynamics of the Eastern Mediterranean and Caucasus
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Robert Reilinger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 639,126.00

Present-day Kinematics and Dynamics of the Eastern Mediterranean and Caucasus

We are using continuous and survey-mode GPS and other relevant geological and
geophysical information to clarify active deformation and the forces driving
this deformation in the E. Mediterranean/Caucasus/Middle East zone where the
African, Arabian, and Eurasian plates interact. Our previous studies now provide
an accurate (~ 1mm/yr) description of regional deformation that is helping to
define the basic principles that control continental deformation in this region.
We have modeled regional deformation using a relatively small number of elastic
plates and blocks that interact along their boundaries. These models provide
constraints on the underlying forces driving deformation, and the mechanical
behavior (i.e., rheology) of the lithospheric. The regional deformation patterns
provide the framework for the more detailed studies we are now pursuing. This
includes (1) characterizing deformation (strain accumulation) along a number of
the major faults that control the large majority of deformation in this region
(i.e., block boundaries), (2) constraining better deformation in the S.E. Aegean
(Greece and Turkey) that has thus far alluded simple block-like descriptions and
may be better characterized by distributed deformation, and (3) quantifying
deformation around unstable, continental triple junctions. More specifically,
this includes developing a clearer picture of the character of present-day
strain accumulation on a number of segments of the North Anatolian, East
Anatolian, and Greater Caucasus thrust faults, and the Hellenic subduction zone.
For the North Anatolian fault we are determining the spatial character of strain
accumulation as a function of the time in the earthquake. The new GPS
measurements around the East Anatolian fault are helping to characterize
present-day deformation around the Dead Sea fault - East Anatolian fault -
Cyprus arc triple junction and the influence of Arabia plate interaction with
Anatolia. For the Greater Caucasus thrust fault and the Hellenic subduction
zone, we are constraining fault locking depths and evaluating the implications
for continental dynamics and earthquake hazards. In summary, the GPS results are
being integrated with new seismic, paleoseismic, neotectonic, geologic, and
other relevant geophysical information to constrain kinematic and dynamic models
for regional deformation and the earthquake cycle in this continental collision
zone.