* 0337846
* Tropical Atlantic Variability and Its Predictability Using the Community Climate System Model
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2009
* Ping Chang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2009
* USD 618,516.00

This project will explore atmosphere-ocean variability in the tropical Atlantic
by performing a series of simulations and ensemble forecast experiments using
version two of the community climate system model, coupled to ocean models
ranging from simple mixed-layer to ocean global climate model complexity. The
aim of this approach is to determine the roles of various (upper) ocean
processes that are currently not well understood or well represented in climate
modeling and prediction systems: Two processes in particular are the
contributions to tropical Atlantic variability by the wind-evaporation-sea
surface temperature feedback and equatorial air-sea interactions, and
predictability of the meridional and zonal sea surface temperature modes, with
emphasis on the oceanic dynamics and meridional heat transport. An anomaly
coupling approach is being adopted to compensate for the effects of any
systematic bias in the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research are expected to provide useful
information on the potential cause of the large systematic biases in version two
of the community climate system model, and other coupled models in the tropical
Atlantic, helping to guide future model improvements. One graduate student will
be supported by this project.