* 0338165
* Ecologists, Educators, and Schools (ECOS) -  Partners in GK-12 Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Carol Brewer, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2009
* USD 2,031,123.00

&lt;br/&gt;Title: Ecologists, Educators, and Schools (ECOS) - Partners in GK-12
Education&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Montana&lt;br/&gt;PI/ CoPI: Carol
Brewer, Associate Professor, Biology; Lisa Blank, Associate Professor, Science
Education; Paul Alaback, Associate Professor, Forestry; David Oberbillig,
Science Teacher, Big Sky High School; Michael Plautz, Science Teacher, Hellgate
Middle School&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per Year: 10 graduate students, 5
undergraduate life science majors&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Missoula
Curriculum Consortium of 14 W. Montana districts (Bonner, Clinton, DeSmet,
Florence-Carlton, Frenchtown, Hellgate Elementary, Lolo, Missoula County Public
Schools, Potomac, Seeley Lake, Sunset, Swan Valley, Target Range,
Woodman)&lt;br/&gt;Targeted Audience: K-12 &lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Rural&lt;br/&gt;NSF Disciplines: Biological Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Ecologists, Educators and Schools (ECOS) - Partners in GK-12 Education Program
brings together teachers and administrators in the Missoula Curriculum
Consortium and University of Montana faculty from the Division of Biological
Sciences and the College of Forestry and Conservation to create a national model
of how authentic research experiences at the K-12 level can improve the teaching
and learning of science. Using schoolyards and nearby open areas as outdoor
research laboratories, ECOS Teams are developing science demonstration projects
related to local ecology and conservation biology. Throughout the academic year,
K-12 students and their teachers interact with University of Montana faculty,
postdoctoral scholars, and graduate and undergraduate students conducting
related research in ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The ECOS
Program: 1) introduces all participating faculty, graduate students, and
undergraduates to teaching and learning research and national science education
standards; 2) provides content-rich, multi-layered professional development in
science for K-12 teachers; 3) develops school-based, content-rich laboratories
and research projects for K-12 students; 4) supports a co-mentoring network of
science faculty, in-service teachers, and graduate and undergraduate students;
and 5) encourages the development of a writing community to disseminate results
of the project in peer-reviewed journals and at national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Scientific ways of thinking and
understanding are being fostered in K-12 students and teaching practices focused
on "learning by doing" and inquiry instruction are being introduced to a number
of school districts, many of which include rural and/or impoverished schools,
traditionally underserved schools. The Fellows represent future science faculty
who will be effective linkages between scientists, mathematicians, engineers and
technologists and educators in the K-16 continuum. Specific project indicators
are being collected in order to determine effective mechanisms to promote
program sustainability and to facilitate transfer to other sites in Montana and
around the country. Ultimately, ECOS will contribute to a national model of how
research projects can be introduced into the K-16 curriculum to enhance the
teaching and learning of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;