* 0338244
* Collaborative Research: Age, Origin and Climatic Significance of Buried Ice in the Western Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Joerg Schaefer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 111,246.00

This project will determine the age, origin, and climatic significance of buried
ice found in the western Dry Valleys of Antarctica. Previous studies indicate
that this ice may be over a million years in age, making it by far the oldest
ice yet discovered on Earth. An alternative view is that this ice is represents
recently frozen groundwater. To distinguish between these hypotheses and
characterize the ice, we are undertaking an interdisciplinary research program
focused on: 1) understanding the surface processes that permit ice preservation;
and 2) testing the efficacy of cosmogenic nuclides and 40Ar/39Ar analyses in
dating both tills and volcanic ash associated with the ice. Our plan calls for
the analysis of a minimum of six cosmogenic depth profiles to determine if and
how cryoturbation reworks sublimation tills and assess the average rate of ice
sublimation for three debris-covered glaciers. We will model through finite-
element analyses at least three buried glaciers and compare flow rates with
those based on radiometric dating of surface deposits. Ten ice cores will also
be collected for measurement of d18O, dD, ice fabric, ice texture, total gas
content/composition. Better understanding of surface processes above buried ice
will permit researchers to gain access to a record of atmospheric and climate
change that could well cover intervals that predate Quaternary time. The work
may also add valuable insight into Martian history. In terms of broader impacts,
we have recruited three female PhD students and developed interdisciplinary
collaborations among geochemists at Columbia University, planetary geologists at
Brown University, geomorphologists at Boston University, and numerical modelers
at the University of Maine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;