* 0338310
* Track 1, GK-12:  Fellows Integrate Science/Math in Rural Middle Schools
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Larry Johnson, The Texas A&M University System  HSC Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,590,000.00

Project Title: Fellows Integrate Science/Math in Rural Middle
Schools&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas A&amp;M University System Health Science
Center, College Station, TX&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Larry Johnson, (PI); James
Kracht; W.R. Klemm; Vincent Cassone; Rajesh Miranda; James
Lindner&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts: Bryan, College Station, Hearne,
Iola, Mumford, Navasota, North Zulch, Snook, and Somerville, plus 75 other rural
schools in a distant learning community&lt;br/&gt;Funding: $1,500,000 (total for
3 years)&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows/year: 12 graduate and 5 advanced
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Middle school (grades
6-8)&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Rural&lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines Involved:
Science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative: This project is designed to: 1)
develop and implement a mechanism to enrich graduate education; 2) enhance
knowledge and skills of Fellows for educational outreach; 3) heighten Fellows
appreciation of the needs and opportunities of rural, geographically-isolated
students; and 4) improve teachers' knowledge and understanding in STEM. After an
orientation workshop Fellows, in partnership with teachers, serve as role models
and stimulate students' interest in STEM by conveying the excitement of research
and discovery both in local rural schools and, through distance education web-
based resources and regional professional development workshops, in more distant
schools. Basically, university faculty and Fellows in combination with middle
school teachers are developing and implementing day to day classroom activities
in STEM using materials, such as the Peer Integrative Curriculum
(http://peer.tamu.edu), already developed by existing federally-funded outreach
projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Fellows in specific STEM
disciplines are: improving their communication and teaching skills, enhancing
their interest in K-12 education, and gaining an increased appreciation of the
collaborative opportunities that exist between public and higher education.
Teachers are gaining STEM knowledge and skills through professional development
workshops and their work with the Fellows. In addition a set of teachers who are
normally somewhat isolated from university resources due to their rural setting
are discovering the mechanisms available to access university STEM faculty and
programs. Middle grade rural public school students are experiencing enriched
experiential learning in STEM through the curriculum resources and engaging
activities introduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Rural schools,
because of their isolation, are traditionally underserved by university outreach
programs. In addition the schools targeted have a high percentage of under-
represented minorities. A detailed study of project outcomes coupled with broad
dissemination through presentation at meetings and a web site will inform others
of the potential for this project as a model for others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by funds from the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;