* 0338005
* Polar Magnetic Properties and Mass Dynamics from 0rsted and Champ Satellite Geopotential Observations
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Patrick Taylor, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2007
* USD 228,436.00

The Arctic and Antarctic are the most poorly known regions of the Earth due to
their remoteness and harsh environments. Understanding their origin and
connection with the global tectonic framework is a fundamental problem of modern
earth science. Airborne and satellite magnetic and gravity surveys are principal
tools for resolving the polar geology hidden beneath the vast covers of snow,
ice and seawater. In the past several years, new satellite geopotential missions
are providing opportunities to improve our understanding of the crustal and
subcrustal features of polar regions. This work will isolate and model the
external, lithospheric, and core magnetic field components in the Orsted and
CHAMP satellite mission observations over the Antarctic. Spatially and
temporally dynamic components of the external fields will be separated from the
static lithospheric and core field components using advanced spectral
correlation theory. The lithospheric and core magnetic field components will be
further separated using the CHAMP gravity observations. The enhanced
lithospheric components will yield new insights on the tectonic properties and
evolution of the polar crust. Integrating these satellite components with near-
surface geopotential field anomalies will also help reduce ambiguities in
geologically interpreting and modeling the anomalies. The enhanced core field
components will result in improved models of the polar core field and its
secular variations for better definition of crustal anomalies in magnetic survey
data. We will also model the CHAMP gravity observations for subcrustal
variations in density layers related to thermal plumes and other regions of mass
flow that drive polar plate tectonics. Our results will greatly enhance on-going
efforts to understand the geological significance of airborne, marine, and
terrestrial magnetic surveys by providing crustal and subcrustal interpretations
of polar gravity, heat flow, and seismic surveys. The spatial and temporal
variations in the extracted polar external field components will also be
compared to disturbances in the surface geomagnetic observatory data and
electron density distributions of the ionosphere from the GPS data of the
Orsted, CHAMP, Ionosonde, and other satellite missions. The analysis will result
in improved understanding of the effects of external field variations at the
Earth's surface to altitudes of roughly 800 km, the structures and dynamics of
magnetospheric-ionospheric coupling, and ionospheric irregularities of the
auroral oval that can affect navigation, communications and polar space weather
modeling.

This project will also support postdoctoral and graduate student education;
foster partnerships with the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia in
Rome, Italy, VNIIOkeangeologia in St. Petersburg, Russia, and other
international institutions; and lead to the development of new computer codes
for modeling regional gravity, magnetic, and thermal effects.