* 0338546
* Special Project:     All in the Family:     A Unified Representation of the Computing and Information Related Disciplines
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Lillian Cassel, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2007
* USD 71,000.00

0338546 &lt;br/&gt;Lillian Cassel&lt;br/&gt;Association Computing Machinery
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "All in the Family: A Unified Representation of the
Computing and Information Related Disciplines" &lt;br/&gt;$71,000
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project, sponsored by the Association
for Computing Machinery, that involves developing a computing-topics
classification and visualization scheme that is both comprehensive and dynamic.
Because the field of computing (and computing related topics) expands rapidly,
new topics and application domains are introduced continuously. Educators,
practitioners, governments, students, employers, publishers, and others have
difficult times trying to distinguish areas of expertise, curricular domains,
career paths, related disciplines, and intellectual paths in the field of
computing. There have been several efforts to codify the field that have been
durable and widely used (e.g., ACM Computing Classification System). However, a
more current and comprehensive representation will lend itself to dynamic
viewing and continuous change. The PI, along with leaders from both USA and
international institutions, proposes to produce such a representation of
computing knowledge classifications and derivable connection maps of topics and
hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;