* 0338502
* SBIR Phase I:     Non Destructive Evaluation of Hard Alpha Inclusions in Titanium Alloys and Damage Effects Due to Fatigue Using Photon Induced Positron Annihilation (PIPA)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Jagoda Urban-Klaehn, Positron Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,295.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will perform
research aimed at improved detection levels and characterization of inclusions
in critical titanium alloy components. Labeled as either low-density or high-
density inclusions, these titanium defects can significantly impact fracture-
critical airframe structures and jet engine components, resulting in
catastrophic failures. The non-destructive detection of hard alpha inclusions in
titanium alloys is currently limited to relatively large inclusions that are on
or near the component surface, resulting in high potential for missed defects.
Photon Induced Positron Annihilation (PIPA) analysis will be developed to detect
these inclusions early in the manufacturing process at any location in the
casting, and evaluated as a field use NDI technology that can be used to assess
damage buildup in operational aircraft components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and development in the area of hard alpha
inclusion detection using Photon Induced Positron Annihilation has broad impacts
in the aerospace industry, in addition to other industries where titanium is
used. Development of this technology has primary implications relative to
improved aircraft safety and in the maintenance, surveillance, and replacement
of highly expensive aerospace components. With improved knowledge of titanium
inclusion damage effects, many current costs in the areas of inspection and
component replacement can be substantially reduced. With the increasing usage of
titanium in many multi-billion dollar industries, PIPA detection of inclusion
damage will become increasingly important to the overall titanium and related
industries.