* 0338837
* SP: Collaborative Research:  Rapid Evolution of Transport Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2007
* David Wetherall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 03/31/2007
* USD 408,594.00

The Internet is a tremendous engineering success. It has sustained a heady rate
of growth and change&lt;br/&gt;over at least the past decade and has found broad
application that has made it part of the fabric of society.&lt;br/&gt;Driven by
changes in the underlying technology and by new applications, it is certain to
continue evolving.&lt;br/&gt;Such evolution is supported by a large and diverse
body of research that often anticipates future needs.&lt;br/&gt;In the case of
transport protocols, our focus, the future holds protocols for a new generation
of streaming&lt;br/&gt;media, stable congestion control at very high rates,
mobile, multi-homed and aggregate connections, and&lt;br/&gt;information
dissemination via peer-to-peer networks and application-level multicast-at
least.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, it is very difficult to move from the
results of such research to use in the global Internet,&lt;br/&gt;no matter how
promising the research. Today, operating system vendors, not researchers nor
even product&lt;br/&gt;developers, must typically provide new transport
protocols. To be suitable for deployment, these protocols&lt;br/&gt;must be able
to successfully interoperate with the installed base of transports during the
long period of&lt;br/&gt;gradual adoption. This process is costly and time-
consuming. More insidiously, it has an incentive structure&lt;br/&gt;that
discourages experimentation and early adopters. The bottom line is that current
upgrade mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;are arguably the limiting factor in realizing the
benefits of many ongoing research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcherss
propose to investigate a new approach to the evolution of transport protocols
that will allow experimenters to quickly and easily upgrade transport protocols.
It will do so in a realistic Internet setting and with less concern for the
installed base. This would allow, for example, the GRID community to
deploy&lt;br/&gt;a TCP carefully tuned for high-rate transfers, or researchers
studying the Congestion Manager to readily&lt;br/&gt;experiment with it at a
large scale and across the wide-area. The system envisioned will
fundamentally&lt;br/&gt;differ from today's independent end-system upgrades by
allowing one end of a connection to upgrade the&lt;br/&gt;other by using
untrusted mobile code. This "dual-end" upgrade model will encourage the
deployment of&lt;br/&gt;useful protocols by tipping the balance of the incentive
structure in favor of early adopters. It will
encourage&lt;br/&gt;experimentation by allowing researchers and developers to
upgrade transport protocols directly, rather than&lt;br/&gt;indirectly via
operating system vendors. The proposers believe it has the potential to multiply
the benefits of research that is currently being undertaken by
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The key challenge is to
determine how it is possible to realize the straightforward&lt;br/&gt;vision of
rapid evolution via dual-end upgrades without negating its practical benefits.
This is a difficult&lt;br/&gt;task, as the use of untrusted mobile code has been
previously explored in the much more general domain of&lt;br/&gt;active
networks, with limited success. However, they argue in the body of this proposal
that now is the time&lt;br/&gt;for a concerted research effort on transport
protocol deployment. Recent advances in the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;network
protocols (specifically TCP friendliness and robust congestion signaling with
ECN nonces), understanding of the sharing and termination issues in safe-
language runtimes, and maturing language technology (in the form of Cyclone, a
safe yet C-like language)-plus a well-defined problem domain that simplifies
protection issues-have made the effective use of untrusted mobile code a real,
though challenging, possi-bility. The PIs have expertise in all of these areas,
along with an established research collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The proposed research has the potential to achieve a broad impact by a
true multiplier&lt;br/&gt;effect: it directly helps to realize the benefits of
research that is undertaken by others, encouraging&lt;br/&gt;rather than
discouraging upgrades by virtue of its incentive structure. The ease of
experimenting with new&lt;br/&gt;transport protocols in a realistic setting will
lower the research barrier, helping a larger pool of researchers (and
particularly minority institutions) to compete more on the basis of their ideas
and less on the level of deployment resources they are able to muster. The
researchers expect there to be a strong educational component of this work,
since students as well as researchers can safely experiment without concern for
adversely impacting the network, even on generic, shared machines. Real
deployment, perhaps solving real problems, can occur among fellow students, and
is ultimately limited only by a protocol's value and the students' ability to
publicize it. Thus will students, and researchers, be empowered and motivated.