* 0338737
* SP:  Development of an Interference Temperature Monitor
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Joseph Salah, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) monitoring is an
important tool in the assignment of frequency bands and in the reduction of
harmful interference between users. In the past, a major source of man-made
interference was from automobile ignition. Now a major source of man-made
interference is from electronic devices, digital answering machines, computers
etc. Communication devices like cellular phones, and wireless computer networks
are relative new comers and are making efficient use of the spectrum using Code
Division Multiple Access (CDMA) with power control to maximize capacity with the
minimum transmitter power. These devices generate a spread spectrum which cannot
be easily distinguished from Gaussian noise without knowledge of the code to de-
spread the signal. Another source of noise-like signals comes from the new
digital television transmitters. In order to avoid harmful interference and
minimize the elevation of the noise level in the environment, it is important to
monitor the level of this noise. The natural environmental noise for frequencies
between 500 MHz and 20 GHz consists mainly of about 300 K from the ground, 3K
from the cosmic background, and about 5 to 30 K from the atmosphere. In the
radio astronomy bands and other itreceive onlyle bands, it is important to
prevent any increase in the noise temperature while measurement of the noise
temperature in other bands can be useful information needed to optimize the
efficient use of the spectrum for various applications including radio astronomy
and wireless communications. MIT Haystack Observatory proposes to develop a
monitor to measure the interference levels in the frequency range 30 to 1500
MHz, calibrated to provide the output metric in units of degrees Kelvin, and
with sufficient sensitivity to be able to quantify, to a level of a few degrees
Kelvin, the unwanted noise in the protected receive-only bands like those for
radio astronomy, remote sensing, and deep space bands. This supports the joint
initiative between the NSF and the FCC. In phase 1, the proposers plan to study
receiver and calibration designs needed to provide the sensitivity and accuracy
without significant internal inter-modulation, spurious responses and spurious
signals. In this phase they will also set specifications for the design based
upon preliminary measurements, using currently available equipment, of the RFI
environment at the MIT Haystack Observatory, in Westford, MA. In phase 2 we
propose to prototype the interference temperature monitor and test the design at
Haystack. In phase 3 we propose to conduct tests of the system at a few
locations in the Massachusetts and Southern New Hampshire area. In the future,
depending on the results, such a monitoring system could be replicated elsewhere
to gather a data set to characterize the RFI environment at other locations.
Broader Impact: Through this project, the proposers aim to enhance the awareness
of the properties of radio wave technology and its various applications such as
radio astronomy and wireless communications, as well as the radio frequency
interference environment. Thus, a simple RFI monitoring system will be developed
for use in pre-college educational settings to acquaint students and teachers
with the measurement techniques of radio wave signals and the environment around
their schools and towns. Such data could be inter-compared using the Internet,
and Haystack Observatory will develop web-based educational materials to
introduce the study of radio waves and their various applications. In
particular, the proposers will arrange for the deployment of simple radio
receivers and antennas, available commercially, to local area schools around the
Observatory to engage students in RFI measurements. A collaboration with
students and teachers in Australia, as part of the Australian SEARFE project
will be promoted to enhance international networking on this topic. A project
with local area teachers as part of NSF's program 'Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET)' at Haystack Observatory is starting in summer 2003 to initiate
this activity.