* 0338832
* EITM: Collaborative Research on Equilibrium Models of Competition in the Market for Higher Education: Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Holger Sieg, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2008
* USD 126,607.00

This project studies how colleges and universities use their admission and
financial aid policies to compete for students. The research will yield better
information about how colleges vary in instructional expenditures. It will also
give new information about variation within and across colleges in family
incomes, standardized test scores, and the racial composition of their student
bodies. The&lt;br/&gt;research will also characterize how financial aid varies
with standardized test scores, family incomes,&lt;br/&gt;race/ethnicity, and
other characteristics of students. The researchers will also evaluate how
colleges, students of color, and white students value ethnic/racial diversity in
choosing a college or making admissions decisions. The research approach entails
theoretical analysis and parallel computational and empirical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research methods will be adopted to allow for
informational asymmetries between colleges and their prospective students,
asymmetries that have potentially important implications for admission and
financial aid policies. This creates a challenging statistical problem that will
require new techniques. Standard approaches used by other researchers to study
other markets are not a good choice for analyzing the market for higher
education for two reasons. First, product characteristics are endogenous because
colleges choose how much to spend on teaching and also influence the composition
of their student bodies. Second, because of financial aid prices for a given
student type will differ across colleges but are only observed at the college
attended. The research team will develop new statistical techniques to deal with
these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will develops and estimates a
general equilibrium model of higher education and uses the model to study public
policy issues. The general equilibrium framework is particularly important for
study of policy issues that may change the equilibrium financial aid and
admission policies of all institutions of higher education. Among the key
contributions of the research is endogenizing college qualities in a general
equilibrium framework with asymmetric information. Because the college objective
function that is modeled and tested differs from profit maximization, this
research adds to the theoretical and empirical literatures on nonprofit
institutions. The research also contributes to understanding of peer effects by
elucidating the way in which peer effects affect college qualities, admissions
decisions, and financial aid policies, and by developing empirical evidence
about the extent to which observed admission and financial aid policies are
consistent with the model's predictions. A further, related innovation in the
research is study of the effects of diversity in a general equilibrium
framework. Finally, this project is on the frontier of integrating theory,
computation, and estimation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key public policy elements of
this research are study of the effects of federal financial aid policies and
study of the role of publicly funded state universities. The research considers
the effect of affirmative action policies on student body composition. The
research also investigates the effect of federal financial aid policies on
college access, taking account of the way in which federal aid policies and
college competition lead to changes in aid provided from colleges' own
resources. The research will contribute to understanding how state funding
policies and admissions policies of public &lt;br/&gt;universities affect access
and costs of college. The research thus has the promise to provide a significant
advance in understanding and quantifying the effects of public policy on college
access and college costs for different racial and socio-economic groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;