* 0338374
* SBIR Phase I: Advanced Unified Oceanographic Data Logger
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Thomas VanZandt, GEOSense, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,765.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide the
foundation for the technical development of a commercially viable, universal,
data logging system for ultra-long duration, unattended, oceanographic
measurements. The project will demonstrate a new electronic architecture for
oceanographic data loggers. This advanced data logger will unify a highly
fragmented commercial marketplace by offering best-of-class performance in
nearly all oceanographic applications. The proposed technology employs a modular
approach in which individual recording units utilize low-voltage, embedded,
digital processors which are optimized specifically for their power performance.
The complete recording system promises to have a power consumption that is an
order of magnitude lower than existing systems, over a wide range of data rates.
The logger will provide large volume mass storage and a non-volatile real-time
clock. The system will implement both advanced power conversion and a high-speed
communications interface, which will provide compatibility with both stand-alone
and cabled applications in future seafloor observatories. Among the activities
in Phase I, the project will develop and demonstrate the design for a critical
component in the overall system, a 24 bit, ultra-low-power digitizer for seismic
recording. A complete data logger built around this module will require less
than 5 mW/channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this
logger will be in oceanographic research and exploration. The endemic model in
oceanography is to customize off-the-shelf hardware for each specific
application. This is a costly process. Many types of highly custom systems are
developed and produced in small numbers, at great cost. This approach also
presents a major schedule risk for the scientists involved. Not surprisingly,
the operational performance of the resulting systems is suboptimal. Often, the
diversion of resources for the development of instrumentation affects the scope
and quality of the field research. By addressing a wide range of applications
using a single, unified system, production volumes would be made large enough to
reduce hardware costs significantly. Fundamental improvements to the logger's
software will reduce the operational costs typically associated with
customization of the system for each experiment. Reduction of both the equipment
and operating costs will provide lower cost solutions for unattended
oceanographic data acquisition. Reduction of the total cost of instrumentation
is a critical step toward enhancing research efforts in many of the world's
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;