* 0338464
* International Travel: The Social Cognition Network of Europe, Padova, Italy, Fall 2003
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Galen Bodenhausen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 09/30/2004
* USD 4,170.00

The principal investigator will attend the fifth meeting of the European Social
Cognition Network in Padova, Italy, September 4-7, 2003. The meeting is
sponsored by the European Science Foundation, and a special invitation was
extended to this U.S.-based researcher. The primary objective of the trip will
be to foster greater international interaction in the development and
promulgation of social cognition research and to facilitate integration of the
rapid progress being made by American and European scholars who study social-
cognitive processes. The PI will make a featured presentation at the meeting and
will interact in formal and informal ways with many of the approximately 80
attendees at the meeting. A special goal will be to offer constructive feedback
and encouragement to young scientists in attendance at the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives have clear intellectual merit, as
they pertain to the integration, consolidation, and stimulation of high-quality
research on a wide variety of issues in social cognition, a field that is
central to social psychology more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed activity will likely be considerable and will surely
extend beyond the meeting itself. Particularly with respect to the goals of
enhancing international contact and interaction and encouraging the development
of young scholars, conferences such as this one can have a major impact on
scientific progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;