* 0338135
* GK-12:  The Pittsburgh Partnership for ENERGIZing Science in Urban Schools
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Joseph Grabowski, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2008
* USD 2,030,009.00

Title: The Pittsburgh Partnership for ENERGizing Science in Urban
Schools&lt;br/&gt;Institution: The University of Pittsburgh &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-
PIs: Joseph Grabowski (PI), Jennifer L. Cartier (co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;Fellows
perYear: 11 Graduate Fellows and 7 Undergraduate Fellows&lt;br/&gt;School
Partner: Pittsburgh Public School District (PPSD)&lt;br/&gt;Target: 3rd through
8th grades &lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban &lt;br/&gt;Disciplines: Chemistry,
Biological Sciences, Physics &amp; Astronomy, Geology &amp; Planetary Sciences,
Mathematics, Neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative: Well-documented
barriers to good science teaching exist at the elementary and middle school
level, most notable of which, there is little time in an overstuffed curriculum
for sustained exploration of significant science concepts. One response has been
the development of hands-on kits such as the Full Option Science System (FOSS)
curriculum in use in the PPSD. While FOSS materials are a step in the right
direction in terms of increasing the emphasis on exploratory experiences for
students and decreasing the sheer number of "facts" and "topics" to be covered,
they are not, in and of themselves, a solution to the problem of inadequate
science instruction. The fact remains that too many teachers lack the necessary
content knowledge to engage their students in rich discussions around the
concepts underlying empirical experiences within the FOSS curriculum. We have
selected the "big idea" of energy as a theme, as it fits with many of the FOSS
units in use in PPSD. The adoption of a conceptual theme will provide better
articulation between teams as well as providing students with a "conceptual
consistency". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To increase content
support for teachers, we will form partnerships between grade 3-8 teachers in
PPSD and STEM students at the University of Pittsburgh (selected to represent
the diversity of STEM personnel). Funding will support 12 teams of
elementary/middle school teachers, STEM graduate students and undergraduate
students, as well as math and reading specialists from selected schools. Given
time demands on elementary curricula, it is important to have interdisciplinary
support in order to establish the time within the school day to teach innovative
and rigorous science. An important activity of each team will be to study and
implement grade-level appropriate FOSS units and to design and deliver related
professional development workshops to other PPSD teachers, in order to
disseminate validated approaches. A project coordinator, with assistance from
School of Education faculty, will provide support related to inquiry pedagogy
and instructional approaches (emphasis on modeling and argumentation) consistent
with those described in the National Science Teaching Standards. An external
evaluator will oversee assessment instrument design and data planning, will
conduct site visits, and will collect, analyze, and report on data on progress
toward project goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Increasing teacher
content knowledge is an important goal of our project, but it is by no means the
only one. We also anticipate that GK-12 Fellows will gain valuable insights into
the complexities of urban school teaching and effective pedagogical strategies,
both through the training activities, the mentoring they receive and deliver,
discussions with other participants, and their interactions with school
students. During the preparation course each summer and follow-up endeavors,
particular emphasis will be placed on the nature of science as a "sense-making"
endeavor supported by social discourse. This view of science, although
consistent with current reform movements in science education, is still new and
quite foreign to most STEM students (and many K-12 teachers). Thus, our work
with teams will include explicit discussion of the nature of scientific inquiry,
examples of strategies to engage elementary/middle school students in
argumentation and explanation related to empirical phenomena, and reflective
analysis of instruction provided by team members. All of the GK-12 activities
will serve to establish links (currently completely lacking) between the PPSD
teachers and the STEM faculty and students at Pitt while specific activities,
such as the Family Science Night and monthly newsletter, will connect project
personnel with school student's families. This project is receiving partial
support from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;