* 0338386
* 2004 Gordon Research Conference on Colloidal, Macromolecular, and Polyelectric Solutions to be held in Ventura, California February 1-6, 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Benjamin Chu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2004
* USD 23,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0338386&lt;br/&gt;B. Chu, Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference on Colloidal,
Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte Solutions (CMPS) aims to bring together
scientists and engineers from diverse backgrounds in Chemistry, Materials
Research, Chemical &amp;Transport Systems, Physics, and Biotechnology to explore
forefront fundamental and applied research involving the many complexities of
soft condensed matter in solution. New interests in such diverse areas of
research that rely on fundamental understanding of these complex systems have
emerged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program highlights the exciting impact of
colloidal, macromolecular and polyelectrolyte solutions on nano-
science/engineering. Some of the exciting aspects of this emerging field are the
new analytical techniques allowing measurements of properties and processing of
materials on a molecular/nano-scale with great ingenuity and precision. These
experimental advances are complemented by theory and simulation to model even
more complex systems with mathematical and computational tools. We have combined
a number of leading investigators (including two Nobel laureates: P. G. de
Gennes and S. Chu), who bring broad &lt;br/&gt;experience and vision to the
program, with younger scientists and engineers who will present &lt;br/&gt;some
of the most recent innovations in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
key educational elements of this conference is to encourage and to financially
support young scientists/engineers at the beginning of their careers, especially
senior graduate students and postdoctoral students, to actively participate in
the discussions and poster sessions. The program also plans to seek and to
invite a number of new speakers (e.g., S. Chu from Stanford and D. Branton from
Harvard, and G. Wegner from MPI, Mainz, to name a few), who have never attended
this conference but have made recent breakthroughs, to present their new
findings. We anticipate new collaborative efforts, student exchanges and visits
shall result from such a conference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;