* 0338008
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Studies of Isotopic Exchange in Snow and Firn
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Beverley Wemple, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/2009
* USD 248,702.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to develop a quantitative understanding
of the processes active in isotopic exchange between snow/firn and water vapor,
which is of paramount importance to ice core interpretation. Carefully
controlled laboratory studies will be conducted at a variety of temperatures to
empirically measure the mass transfer coefficient (the rate at which water moves
from the solid to the vapor phase) for sublimating snow and to determine the
time scale for isotopic equilibration between water vapor and ice. In addition
the isotopic fractionation coefficient for vapor derived from sublimating ice
will be determined and the results will be used to update existing models of
mass transfer and isotopic evolution in firn. It is well known that water vapor
moves through firn due to diffusion, free convection and forced convection.
Although vapor movement through variably-saturated firn due to these processes
has been modeled, because of a lack of laboratory data the mass transfer
coefficient had to be estimated. Field studies have documented the magnitudes of
post-depositional changes, but field studies do not permit rigorous analysis of
the relative importance of the many processes which are likely to act in natural
snow packs. The results of these laboratory investigations will be broadly
applicable to a number of studies and will allow for improvement of existing
physically-based models of post-depositional isotopic change, isotopic diffusion
in firn, and vapor motion in firn. A major component of this project will be the
design and fabrication of the necessary, novel experimental apparatus, which
will be facilitated by existing technical expertise, cold room facilities, and
laboratory equipment at CRREL. This project is a necessary step toward a
quantitative understanding of the isotopic effects of water vapor movement in
firn. The proposed work has broader impacts in several different areas. The
modeling results will be applicable to a wide range of studies of water in the
polar environment, including studies of wind-blown or drifting snow. The
proposed collaborative study will partially support a Dartmouth graduate student
for three years. This project will also provide support for a young first-time
NSF investigator at the University of Vermont. Undergraduate students from
Dartmouth will be involved in the research through the Women in Science Project
and undergraduate students at the University of Vermont will be supported
through the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program. The principal
investigators and graduate student will continue their tradition of k-12 school
outreach by giving science lessons and talks in local schools each year.
Research results will be disseminated through scientific conferences, journal
publications, and institutional seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;