* 0338643
* NSF/USDOT:     Modeling Matched Traffic and Accident Datasets to Significantly Improve Safety
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Amelia Regan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/28/2006
* USD 149,980.00

Advances in information technologies for transportation systems have led to the
accumulation of large quantities of raw data on transportation system status. To
fully leverage such data, new tools must be developed to combine and effectively
analyze large databases. The proposed research involves the application of
nonlinear multivariate analysis methods to analyze combined truck traffic,
detailed traffic flow, accident, and environmental data in order to identify the
influences of mixes of truck traffic on the likelihood of accidents by type
under different traffic conditions and on different types of network links.
Understanding the complex factors surrounding truck accidents, can provide
opportunities for intervention to enhance safety. The main analysis method is
nonlinear canonical correlation analysis with multiple sets of mixed
categorical, ordinal, and numerical variables. This eigenvalue method,
implemented through alternating least squares algorithms, is characterized by
the optimal scaling of the nonlinear variables and graphical interpretation of
results. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has four distinct phases: (1)
establishing a comprehensive database of traffic flow and crash information that
is appropriate for identifying truck safety issues on urban freeways (2)
identifying, through a specific type of multivariate nonlinear model, freeway
locations and time periods where the mix of truck traffic within particular
traffic flow conditions has the most adverse safety effects, (3) identifying
ways to improve safety in problematic time-space situations. (4) identifying
ways to apply our research to data available in other
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the work will develop tools to help
identify unsafe traffic conditions so that accidents can be avoided. We focus on
truck involved accidents because these tend to be more severe than those
involving only passengers and because trucks are increasingly equipped with
communication devices and their drivers can be easily warned that they are
entering unsafe conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
proposed research include improvements in traffic safety, the technical training
of graduate student researchers and outreach to local high schools with
significant under-represented populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;