* 0338219
* RICE - Radio Ice Cerenkov Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* David Andrews, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2008
* USD 466,114.00

The approval of ice-hole drilling for the IceCube project (to begin in
2004-2005) presents a singe (and not-to-be-repeated) scientific opportunity. The
greatest intellectual merit of constructing a neutrino detector lies in the
mysteries yet-to-be-discovered with a new technology operating in a new energy
regime. RICE (Radio Ice Cherenkov Experiment) has primary goals similar to the
larger AMANDA experiment - both seek to measure high-energy neutrinos by
detection of Cherenkov radiation produced their interaction with the matter.
Whereas AMANDA is optimized for detection of penetrating TeV muons, RICE is
designed to detect compact electromagnetic cascades initiated by higher energy
(PeV-scale) electrons, which produce broadband Cherenkov radiation.
Fortuitously, the field attenuation length at such radio wavelengths exceeds 1
km. For 1 PeV, radio detection of cascades becomes more efficient than optical-
based techniques; at such high energies, the sum of backgrounds from all other
sources are expected to be smaller than signals by 10-100. This proposal is to
co-deploy RICE radio receivers in the IceCube holes, thereby scaling up the
sensitivity to neutrinos by at least two orders of magnitude, at minimal cost.
Encouraged by support from the IceCube collaboration, the project will
instrument the radio array for coincident (RICE + IceCube) electromagnetic
cascade detection. Fast hardware (to be installed in 2003-2004) will allow
microsecond time-scale elimination of the surface anthropogenic background,
which has dominated triggers in the past. RICE data from the last four years
have allowed the most detailed study of in situ radio detection systematics thus
far, as presented in two recent publications on the electrodynamics of the
expected radio frequency pulse, and two publications on RICE simulation and
calibration and limits on the neutrino flux. By deploying three radio receivers
per hole, it will also be possible to conduct world-class, in situ radio-
glaciology measurements, in addition to astrophysics. The results on the first
in situ measurements of the polar ice dielectric constant are currently being
prepared for journal submission. Maximizing economy has required that much of
the workload falls on students. Currently, half of the current RICE authors are
undergrads; three RICE undergrads have been recipients of prestigious Goldwater
Scholarships, five RICE undergrads have traveled to the South Pole since the
first deployments in 1999-2000. In recognition of the broader impact of the RICE
experiment on the "non-professional" community, prestigious teaching and
lecturing opportunities have been extended to RICE faculty, offering more
opportunities for recruiting and publicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;