* 0338328
* Scientists, Kids, and Teachers (SKIT): A GK-12 Partnership with the Chicago Public Schools
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Stacy Wenzel, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2009
* USD 2,027,287.00

Title of Project: Scientists, Kids, and Teachers (SKIT): A GK-12 Partnership
with the Chicago Public Schools&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;PI: Donald Wink. Co-PIs: Maria Varelas, Tom Moher, Stacy
Wenzel, Jeff Lewis&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per year (graduate vs.
undergraduate): 10 graduate, 1 undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;School District Partner:
Chicago Public Schools&lt;br/&gt;Target audience of the project (K-12 grade-
band): K-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines
involved: Chemistry, Biology, Computer Science, Earth and Environmental
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous Project: The SKIT project evolved out of
our Track I project, UIC Graduate Fellows in K-12 Education (NSF DUE-9979537).
The prior project was organized around four different interventions in schools
in Chicago and two nearby suburbs. Findings show Fellows influenced K-12
education through multiple roles, including that of teacher, curriculum
developer, professional developer, student mentor, educational researcher,
university representative, and resource gatherer. Teachers reported Fellows
helped them plan in advance for lessons and labs; offer one-to-one attention to
more students; address topics in deeper and more engaging ways; and offer more
hands-on experiences, along with alternative explanations. As Fellows
contributed to changes in urban K-12 classrooms, they also gained valuable
understandings about the complexities of teaching, learning, and assessing STEM
knowledge in diverse settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current Plans: The new SKIT
project focuses on and supports the new (2003) Chicago Math and Science
Initiative (CMSI) of the Chicago Public Schools (CPS). CMSI includes focused
staff development, instructional support for teachers through a cadre of
mathematics and science support personnel, increase in instructional time,
adoption of standards-based curricula, standardization of assessments, and
capital improvements. SKIT Fellows work in three different areas within the CMSI
structure: K-8 mathematics and K-8 science, for which CMSI has identified
particular curricula that schools may implement; and high school science and
mathematics, where Fellows work in department-wide projects and district-wide
networks. All Fellows attend CPS professional development activities and assist
classroom teachers and specialists in delivery of instruction, assessment of
student work, design of classroom-based research, and enhancement and
development of curriculum. At UIC, Fellows attend GK-12 summer workshops and
academic-year courses to gain an understanding of teaching and learning in urban
school settings and to share their CPS experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's intellectual merit centers on facilitating change through Fellows'
participation in several overlapping learning communities. The anticipated
broader impact is to support and sustain reformed STEM education in the nation's
third largest school system, and allow CPS to benefit much more directly from
STEM expertise at UIC as UIC also learns from CPS. The project plan includes a
phased transition from an NSF-supported program infrastructure to a sustainable
UIC/CPS infrastructure over the course of the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation is organized around a set of 11
specific objectives addressing impact on Fellows, teachers, students, as well as
institutional impact on UIC and CPS. Evaluation is based on a broad set of
quantitative and qualitative data obtained through participant activity logs and
journals, student performance in various assessments, questionnaires, and
interviews. Evaluation guides ongoing program development and assess its
effectiveness with respect to both particular project objectives and the
transition to a self-sustaining program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
partially supported by funds from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;