* 0338944
* Support for an Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the Consortium on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Thomas Rosswall, International Science Council
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Recent years have seen the emergence of new lines of inquiry associated with the
environment and other global processes. Often characterized as "sustainability
science," these lines of inquiry seek to better understand the dynamics through
which different human and natural systems interact with each other in order to
better establish how human activity might be organized and conducted so as to
maximize the likelihood that environmental quality and human well-being can be
sustained. This award will provide support to enable an ad hoc advisory group to
assist in the development of a Consortium for Science and Technology for
Sustainable Development. This consortium has been established through the
coordinated activities of the International Council for Science (ICSU), the
Initiative on Science and Technology for Sustainability (ISTS), and the Third
World Academy of Sciences (TWAS). The goal of the consortium is to promote and
strengthen efforts around the world to enhance the contribution of science and
technology to sustainable development. The ad hoc advisory group has been
charged make recommendations regarding four major points to the consortium
partners: (1) A process for bringing into the consortium perspectives from a
broad range of local, sectoral, regional, and international efforts now underway
to enhance the contribution of science and technology to sustainable
development; (2) A research and development agenda and a program of activities
for the consortium that will promote problem-driven research and development,
the capacity building necessary to carry out such work; and plans for linking
research and development with actions in ways that will facilitate sustainable
development; (3) Strategies and mechanisms that would more fully enable the
consortium members jointly and individually to address the challenges and
opportunities in harnessing science and technology for sustainable development;
and (4) A "draft plan of implementation" for the programmatic and operational
activities, including funding aspects, of the
consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With respect to intellectual merit, this
project should advance efforts to link basic science and engineering research
efforts with the development of approaches to encourage individuals, groups, and
organizations at all scales to adopt policies and undertake actions that will
sustain the environment, society, and the economy. Through broadly based
planning activities like this, new plans for coordinated research efforts can be
developed and disseminated among researchers and others engaged in the science-
society interface. With respect to broader impacts, the project will provide
guidance regarding future research directions and plans for scientific
communities across a broad range of disciplines and in nations around the world.
It will further the development of scientific capacity in developing nations by
encouraging greater interaction among scientists in all nations. If successful,
the project also could have considerable long-term benefits for society as a
whole by identifying ways in which basic scientific research can help lead to
more sustainable activities in the future.&lt;br/&gt;