* 0338261
* Track 2 GK-12:  STEP Up!
* EHR,DGE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Marion Usselman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 02/28/2011
* USD 2,136,570.00

Title of Project: STEP Up! Institution: Georgia Institute of Technology PI/Co-
PI: Donna C. Llewellyn/Marion C. Usselman Number of Fellows/year: 12 Graduate
and 6-12 Undergraduate School District Partners: DeKalb County School System,
Fulton County Schools, Marietta City Schools, Rockdale County Public Schools
Target Audience: High School Setting: Urban and Suburban NSF Supported
Disciplines: Science, Math, Technology, Pre-engineering, Social Sciences

Narrative Summary: The Georgia Tech Student and Teacher Enhancement Partnership
(STEP) GK-12 program was initiated in 2001 and will be continued through the
next five years as the STEP Up! program. STEP Up! partners Georgia Tech graduate
and undergraduate students with teams of teachers at six metro-Atlanta high
schools per year with three primary goals: To use the unique talents and
energies of the Georgia Tech students to help address the pressing needs at the
schools; to promote long-term, mutually beneficial, and multi-faceted
partnerships at these schools; and to provide the Georgia Tech students with a
teaching internship experience that will benefit their professional growth and
subsequent career, whether in academia, industry, or education. STEP Up! begins
the year with a summer training program during which the Fellows are provided
with instruction on pedagogy, classroom management strategies, inquiry learning,
and other educational theory and tools, and during which Fellows and teachers
jointly create action plans that detail the types of activities that best fit
the needs of the school and the talents and professional and personal desires of
the Fellows.

Intellectual Merit-STEP Up! strives to build successful models of university-
school partnerships that can transcend the initial personnel, that can be
sustained over time, and that recognize that the needs of each school and the
talents of each university student and faculty member are unique. These STEP Up!
partnerships are between Georgia Tech, a Research 1 technical institution, and
high schools that are mostly overwhelmingly African American. The project aims
to form true partnerships where the work is mutually beneficial, therefore there
are no preset curricular or content directives from the university. The project
evaluation, conducted by members of the faculty in the School of Public Policy
as a series of case studies, will map the development, or demise, of the
partnering activities, the effectiveness of the Fellow interactions with
students and teachers, the effectiveness of the project institutionalization,
and the long-term impact of the program on the multiple participants.

Broader Impact-STEP Up! addresses workforce development in multiple ways. 1) It
provides STEM and social science graduate and undergraduate students Teaching
Internship opportunities, with the anticipated outcome of improving their
pedagogical, leadership, and communication skills while encouraging a life-long
career goal of educational outreach. 2) It provides high school students, from
primarily under-represented minority groups, with mentors, role models, content
experts, and access to the university. 3) It provides teachers with energetic
classroom assistance in whatever realm is most important to that classroom, and
a unique connection with the university community and the resources that it can
provide.

Outcomes from Track 1- The initial project was set up to provide benefits to the
graduate students, the partnering high schools and teachers, and the university.
Overall, 57% of our graduate fellows have been minority students, far surpassing
their percentage among all STEM graduate students at Georgia Tech. This project
has provided a mechanism for civic leadership with official sanction. So far,
three of the fellows from the first two years have taken jobs as assistant
professors, three are in research positions in industry, and one has become a
high school mathematics teacher. All have stated their commitment to continuing
with K-12 outreach in their professional careers. The project assessment effort
has determined positive outcomes for the fellows in the areas of academic
content mastery, teaching interests, academic efficiency, professional skills,
and presentations and publications. The partnering teachers and administrators
have mentioned benefits such as the injection of fresh energy into the
classroom, the value of exposure to cutting edge research and the end-purpose of
the content, the introduction of educational enrichment opportunities, the
access to materials, supplies, equipment, and research experiences at Georgia
Tech, the ability of the fellows to transform the students' understanding of
science from a bunch of facts to a process, the additional time that the fellows
provide for teachers to do other necessary things, and the roles of the fellows
as role models, mentors, and cheerleaders. The university has gained in the
journey towards institutionalizing two very positive programs: mutually
beneficial partnerships with area high schools and teaching internship
opportunities for upper level undergraduate and graduate students.