* 0338619
* EHP:  Market Culture, Performance, and the Timing of Transactions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* Alvin Roth, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2010
* USD 323,338.00

This project will investigate matching processes in centralized and
decentralized labor markets, and other matching markets, such as college
admissions. The goal is to better understand labor markets, and how efficiently
they match people with positions (and incidentally how much incentive they give
students to prepare themselves for positions). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
empirical part of the investigation will include entry level labor markets for
physicians in the U.S. (including both first positions, and specialties, such as
gastroenterology) and in Britain, as well as entry level labor markets for
lawyers (with particular attention to clerkships in Federal appellate courts in
the U.S., and for "articling" positions in Canada), dentists, clinical
psychologists, and new graduates of elite Japanese universities. Past work has
shown that each of these markets had a period in its history which exhibited the
phenomenon of unraveling of transaction times ("jumping the gun"), in which
market transactions became earlier and earlier in response to competition,
resulting in various types of market failure. The present institutional
structure of each of these diverse markets, whose organizations range from
almost completely centralized to almost completely decentralized, is in
substantial part a response to this history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will analyze the informal rules by which markets are organized, and how these
interact with supply and demand to affect the timing of transactions. Even
decentralized markets may have elaborate, sometimes explicit rules and norms
about how and when offers will be made, accepted and rejected. For example, in
some labor markets, it is conventional for employers to make exploding offers,
to which candidates must reply before receiving other offers, while in other
markets it is customary for all offers to remain open long enough to allow
candidates to compare multiple offers. Similarly, norms differ concerning the
circumstances under which a candidate may honorably change his mind about an
offer he has accepted. These differences can influence who makes offers to whom,
at what time, and what outcome is produced. This investigation proposes to
explore these issues and how they impact particular markets) using field
observation, laboratory experiments, and game theoretic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the present study should help
illuminate recent developments in markets that have experienced timing problems,
such as the market for clerks for appellate judges, college and graduate
admissions, and entry into medical specialties and subspecialties. Loosely
speaking, these markets serve their participants best when they allow efficient
matching, e.g. when the best applicants are matched to the best positions, and
the results will have implications for how market performance in this respect
can be improved.&lt;br/&gt;