* 0338240
* Track 2, GK-12: Graduate Research and Education in Advanced Transportation Technology (GREATT)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Thomas Dana, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2008
* USD 2,146,642.00

This Track 2, GK-12 project builds upon existing relationships and
infrastructure developed in the previous GK-12 project and is a collaboration
among several colleges and institutes at The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, The Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Indiana, PA, The
Pennsylvania College of Technology, Williamsport, PA and four central
Pennsylvania school districts. Each Graduate Fellow is paired with one or two
K-12 teachers in one school district for the duration of his/her tenure on the
project. There are eight principal project activity areas: Fellow training,
module development, K-12 classroom activities, field trips, Web-based projects,
summer workshops, outreach and public relations and longitudinal studies of
project participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the
project centers around using the theme of advanced transportation technology as
a proven "hook" that will capture the interest of upper middle school and high
school students and provide a natural springboard for introducing broader issues
in the relationship between technology and human society including environmental
issues, sustainability, ethics and safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impact of the project is that it will provide novel STEM resources for K-12
teachers and schools and will institutionalize ties between higher education and
K-12 schools. This project represents an effective approach to address an issue
of local and national concern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant Outcomes of
Track 1 Project: In each year of the Track 1 project, several hundred K-12
students were exposed to STEM concepts and practitioners in a positive and
meaningful context; and approximately 10 graduate and undergraduate engineering
students were provided with a unique opportunity to convey STEM concepts to K-12
teachers and students. Several new manipulative kits and associated lesson plans
have been made available for K-12 science teachers. Two novel web-based tools
for teaching STEM concepts (HEV Interactive Game) and for facilitating
interactions among universities and K-12 schools (Question of the Week) have
been developed and tangible links have been established between Penn State and
central-PA school districts, in keeping with Penn State's goal to ". . .create
new partnerships with K-12 education and make the concept of lifelong learning a
reality." [Kellogg Commission, 2000]&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Track 2, GK-12: Graduate Research and Education in Advanced
Transportation Technology (GREATT)&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State
University &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Daniel Haworth (PI), Leanne Avery, Thomas Dana,
Michael Lanagan and Paul Sokol (co-PIs)&lt;br/&gt;Partner School Districts:
Bellefonte Area, State College Area, Steelton-Highspire, Susquehanna Township
(all in Central PA)&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per Year: 12 graduate students,
3 undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Late middle school and high
school&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Primarily rural; also suburban/urban
districts&lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines: Engineering and physical sciences
&lt;br/&gt;