* 0338667
* EITM: Empirical and Econometric Research on Exchange Rates and Present Value Models
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Kenneth West, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 05/31/2008
* USD 223,289.00

The proposal consists of two sections of roughly equal magnitude. Both sections
consider linear models, focusing on present value models, and with special
reference to exchange rates. It is well known that if a series y is the expected
present discounted value of a series x, then y is a random walk if x is a random
walk. Much of the research develops empirical and econometric implications of a
new result: if the discount factor used in discounting future x's is very near
1, then in a precise sense y will behave very much like a random walk as long as
x follows any I(1) process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first section describes
empirical research on exchange rates. One aim of this research is to evaluate
whether the generally accepted random walk in exchange rates is substantially
attributable to a discount factor that is near 1. This will be accomplished in
part by studying a wide range of linear exchange rate models, in part by
specifically comparing the "large discount factor" explanation with one that
looks instead to a random walk in observable or unobservable fundamentals. The
research will also study the economic determinants of exchange rates, under
assumptions that do not necessarily entail a discount factor near 1, and in
environments in which the exchange rate is not expressed as a present
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second section concerns theoretical econometric
and empirical work. Generalizations and extensions of the implications of the
large discount factor will be considered. An alternative asymptotic
approximation that turns on the discount factor being near 1 will be developed.
This theory has promise to deliver insight into the behavior of asset prices.
The theory will be used in development, evaluation and application of tests for
random walks, including autocorrelations and long-horizon cross-correlations. It
will be applied as well to tests of forward rate unbiasedness. The econometric
research will also develop asymptotically chi-squared statistics for testing the
random walk hypothesis, under assumptions that do not necessarily entail a
discount factor near 1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the
research&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the behavior of exchange rates, and, more
generally, asset prices, is central to our understanding of the economy. The
research has direct bearing on the answers to questions such as: Should we look
to asset prices as forecasters of the real economy? What are the sources of
movements in exchange rates and other asset prices? How do exchange rates and
other asset prices respond to policy-induced movements in interest rates? What
constitutes a good policy response to fluctuations in exchange rates and other
asset prices?&lt;br/&gt;