* 0338997
* Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business Cycle Model without Commitment
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/2007
* USD 223,910.00

The broad impact of the proposal is to inform public policy, both in the U.S.
and in other countries. How to set the fiscal policy over the business cycle is
arguably one of the most important questions in macroeconomics. Absent in most
discussions is a clear understanding of the time inconsistency problems
involved. This situation is unfortunate. For example work on how monetary policy
is conducted in environments without commitment has had a tremendous impact on
the Federal Reserve System or on the design of new institutions as the European
Central Bank and it has been regarded as a significant factor behind the
apparent higher quality of monetary policy over the last two decades. If similar
questions could be incorporated in the discussion of fiscal policy important
welfare improvements could be obtained.

To achieve this goal, the proposal mixes standard macroeconomic tools, game
theory and recent advances in computational science. It improves our
understanding of the dynamics of how society reacts to changing government
policies, helps the government to anticipate the consequences of its decisions
and integrates formal modeling with empirical data in a transparent and clear
way. Also the project, through its methodological contributions, improves the
tools to analyze complex interactions, with application along all the human
behavior sciences, including not only economics but also political science,
sociology and others where the problems of lack of commitment and repeated
interaction are pervasive. Finally, because of its use of mathematics and
computer science tools, the current research strengthens the links between the
political and economic context of human behavior with other academic communities
in mathematics and information technologies.