* 0338215
* TRACK 2, GK-12:  EdGrid Graduate Teaching Fellows Program
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Bertram Bruce, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2010
* USD 1,901,231.00

Title: GK-12: EdGrid Graduate Teaching Fellows Program (Track 2) Institution:
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Principal Investigator/Co-Principal
Investigators: Deanna Raineri (PI)/Bertram Bruce, Eric Jakobsson, Richard
Braatz, Vernon Burton (Co-PIs) Number of Fellows per Year: 8 to 10 Graduate; 6
Undergraduate School District Partners: Champaign Centennial High School;
Danville High School; Hinsdale, District 86; Technology Center of DuPage; Urbana
High School, Home Hi (all girls) High School, Okaw Valley High School,
Jefferson, Brownstown and Cerro Gordo Elementary Target Audience: Middle and
High School Setting: Rural, Urban and Suburban NSF-Supported Disciplines
Involved: Animal Science, Anthropology, Atmospheric Sciences, Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Geography, Mathematics, Physics, Social Sciences

Narrative: The Fellows collaborate with campus faculty and participating K-12
teachers to integrate computer-based modeling, scientific visualization and
informatics in K-12 science and mathematics education. Modeling and
visualization tools are developed that engage students and help them to "learn
how to do science, learn the nature of science and learn science content". The
GK-12 EdGrid project provides professional development opportunities for K-12
science and mathematics teachers to improve K-12 science teaching and learning.

Intellectual Merit. The GK-12 EdGrid Program draws on significant higher
education institutional resources (both human and technology-related) in the
STEM disciplines to create a framework for sustainable K-12 education outreach.
These efforts contribute to advancing knowledge and understanding of the role
of: a) higher education STEM discipline faculty and students in the professional
development of K-12 teachers; b) STEM discipline faculty and students in
improving learning of K-12 students through the engagement of innovative
technologies that foster integration of research and education; c) educational
collaboratories in K-12 settings; c) graduate students in building sustainable
university-school partnerships; d) graduate students in promoting K-12 student
interest in higher education STEM disciplines (by acting as role models); e)
university-school partnerships in improving pedagogical practices in university
education through the engagement of higher education faculty and graduate
students with experienced K-12 teachers.

Broader Impacts. The GK-12 project utilizes EdGrid's web portal, the Inquiry
Page (http://www.inquiry.uiuc.edu), national conferences and various
publications to disseminate the GK-12 experiences, modeling and visualization
tools and curriculum materials to support teachers nation-wide. By partnering
with other on-campus programs serving primarily underrepresented student groups,
the GK-12 EdGrid program actively seeks and recruits graduates and advanced
undergraduates from underrepresented populations. The GK-12 EdGrid program also
broadens its already interdisciplinary focus by actively recruiting graduate
students from the social sciences. The addition of social science disciplines
allows for more coverage of the K-12 curriculum and adds yet another varied
vision that contributes to the richness of the UIUC GK-12 program. The GK-12
EdGrid program leaders are working with institutional and school administrators
to make GK-12 activities an integral and sustainable part of the UIUC graduate
training experience.

Outcomes from Track 1. This project is receiving partial support from the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.