* 0338441
* Proposal for an International Workshop on the Uncertainties in Nonlinear Soil Properties and their Impact on Modeling Dynamic Soil Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Ellen Rathje, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 63,625.00

This action is to support an international workshop to discuss the uncertainties
and biases associated with nonlinear soil properties and the effects of
uncertainty and bias on modeling dynamic soil response. The workshop will be
held during or before the Spring of 2004 at the Pacific Earthquake Engineering
Research (PEER) center in Richmond, CA.
(peer.berkeley.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for this workshop is
the current uncertainties and biases in nonlinear soil-property measurements,
and the potential impact of these issues on modeling dynamic soil response
during seismic studies. Conclusions reached by workshop participants will be
used to identify whether a need exists for reducing current levels of
uncertainty and bias associated with nonlinear soil-property testing, and if the
need exists, the types of testing or modeling that will best achieve this
reduction. Approximately 40 geotechnical engineers will participate in the
workshop, encompassing representatives from academia, public agencies and
private practice. Notification of the workshop will be via email lists and a
workshop website. After the workshop, the workshop website will contain the
presentations and discussion summaries from the workshop. The website will be
maintained by the PEER Lifeline program for a 5-year period to allow quarterly
posting of updates to the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;