* 0338295
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Is Kamb Ice Stream Restarting? Glaciological Investigations of the Bulge-Trunk Transition on Kamb Ice Stream, West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 04/30/2008
* USD 240,375.00

This award supports a project to test whether Kamb Ice Stream (formerly Ice
Stream C (ISC)), an ice stream that is thought to have stopped ~150 years ago,
may be already in the process of restarting. If yes, it will help establish what
is the rate of ice stream reactivation and what mechanisms are controlling this
rate. If there is no evidence for ongoing ice stream reactivation, the physical
controls that are preventing it will be examined and alternative scenarios for
near-future evolution of this ice stream will be explored. One such scenario is
an increase in ice diversion toward the neighboring Whillans Ice Stream. Such
diversion may help prevent a complete stoppage of Whillans Ice Stream,which has
been slowing down for at least the last 24 years. This project will consist of
two components: (1) field observations of bed properties,geometry of internal
radar reflectors, as well as surface strain rates and velocity/topography
changes using Ice-Penetrating Radar and differential Global Positioning System,
(2) numerical modeling study of near future(~100-1000 years) evolution of Kamb
Ice Stream. The field component will be focused on the bulge-to-trunk
transition, which is located at the present time just downstream of the so-
called camp UpC. Reactivation of Kamb Ice Stream should be reflected in a
downstream migration of the bulge-trunk transition at possibly high rates (bulge
migration rates of ~km/yr occur on surging mountain glaciers). The modeling
component will be used to generate predictions regarding the near-future
behavior of Kamb Ice Stream. This project will provide training opportunities
for at least two undergraduate students (per year) at St. Olaf College and for
one undergraduate student (per year) at UCSC. This collaboration will bring
together scientists from three different types of US institutions: (1) a liberal
arts college (St.Olaf College), (2) a public research university (UCSC) and (3)
a NASA research laboratory (JPL). The project will also help build a new
glaciological research program at UCSC. Project results will be incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate courses at UCSC and will be made available to
the general public and educators through downloadable graphics and animations
posted on the research website of the UCSC PI. Field data resulting from the
project will be posted in the Antarctic Glaciological Data Center for use by
other investigators.