* 0338699
* Agaric Diversity in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Karen Hughes, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Susan L. Perkins
* 09/30/2010
* USD 463,601.00

NSF Award Abstract Proposal No. 0338699 Agaric Diversity in the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park NSF Program: Biodiversity Surveys and Inventories PIs:
Karen Hughes, Ron Petersen, University of Tennessee, Knoxville

Comprising more than half a million acres, the Great Smoky Mountains National
Park (GSMNP) is a region of exceptional biodiversity, a consequence of the age
of the mountains, varied terrain and ice-age history. The Park is a refuge for
disjunct elements of northern forests, relicts of glacial refugia, and for flora
now found in Central America and Mexico. Many life forms in the Park are poorly
known, poorly documented, or entirely undiscovered. The Great Smoky Mountains
National Park is the site of an ambitious project to document its biodiversity,
the All Taxon Biodiversity Inventory (ATBI). Among the most important but least
understood elements of biodiversity are the fungi, which play essential roles in
forest health including degradation of dead materials and essential symbioses
with plants.

This award is for coordination of an effort to document a portion of the fungal
diversity in the Park. Twenty researchers from the United States, Europe and
Mexico will collect and document agaric fungi (mushrooms and their relatives) in
the GSMNP over the next four years. Collections data will be recorded in a
database which will be available to the public and to other researchers, and
which will serve as a model for future studies. On-line species pages will be
created, providing information and a photograph for each species identified.
Accurate location data for each collection will allow evaluation of the
relationship of fungal species, forest types, and pollution patterns in the form
of acid rain. Assemblages of species associated with specific locales will be
evaluated and compared with collections from the same locale 40 years ago
(collections maintained in the University of Tennessee herbarium -TENN).
Finally, the project will continue to database TENN in order to make all TENN
collections from the GSMNP available on line.

The grant also provides for hosting a 3-day "mycoblitz" in conjunction with the
Mycological Society of America meetings in Asheville, North Carolina. The
mycoblitz is a cooperative activity among mycologists at the University of
Tennessee, Duke University and the Mycological Society of America and will
include fungal researchers from all fungal groups including chytrids,
ascomycetes, zygomycetes and other basidiomycetes to get a "snapshot" of overall
fungal biodiversity.