* 0338277
* Partnership for Research Opportunities to Benefit Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Barrett Rock, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,994,030.00

Project Title: Partnerships for Research Opportunities to Benefit Education
(PROBE) &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of New Hampshire &lt;br/&gt;PI/CO-PI:
Karen Graham (PI), Barbara Hopkins (Co-PI), Dawn Meredith (Co-PI),
&lt;br/&gt;Barrett Rock (Co-PI), Charles Warren (Co-PI) &lt;br/&gt;Number of
Fellows Per Year: 10 graduate students and 4 undergraduates &lt;br/&gt;School
District Partners: Belmont, Durham/Lee/Madbury, Enfield/New Canaan,
&lt;br/&gt;Franklin, Goffstown, Milford, Nashua, Portsmouth, Raymond, Rochester,
&lt;br/&gt;Salem, Somersworth &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: High School, grades
9-12 &lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban, suburban, and rural. &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported
disciplines involved: Biochemistry, Chemistry, Mathematics,
&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering, Natural Resources, Physics, and Plant
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of New Hampshire in collaboration
with twelve school districts in New Hampshire form graduate/undergraduate
student Fellows and lead teacher partnership teams that are creating inquiry-
based instructional practices in high school mathematics and science teaching.
Each team consists of a lead teacher from one of the partnership school
districts and a UNH graduate or pair of undergraduate students in science,
mathematics, and engineering [STEM]. UNH discipline-based faculty mentors
counsel and facilitate the marshalling of resources on behalf of the Fellows and
PROBE teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PROBE project begins with Fellows and
teachers participating in established UNH-based summer inquiry programs designed
for pre-college students and teachers. This summer activity culminates in a
weeklong summer PROBE institute with a structure based on the National Research
Council's Enquiry in the Classroom Continuum. The institute is designed to give
the Fellows and lead teachers tools for the analyzing different modes of enquiry
that they have experienced in the summer inquiry programs and then articulate
through the targeted high school programs. During the academic year each PROBE
team works with the lead teacher's partner school to implement instructional
habits that nurture inquiry behaviors by teachers and students. This begins with
the use of inquiry-based lessons and authentic science and mathematics problem
solving experiences and develops to include student-centered research projects
as a part of each student's science learning experience. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the development of inclusive
curriculum models for inquiry and authentic research in mathematics and science.
This is further supported with onsite research on student learning conducted by
the graduate student Fellows and teacher-leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact is that as a result of the PROBE project teachers and Fellows can
equate instructional changes in teaching practice with student learning. Fellows
gain a repertoire of strategies to use in communicating and teaching science..
Teachers and schools have sustained access to strong curriculum programs and
resources and develop strong ties to the University community. This project is
receiving partial support from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;