* 0338398
* SBIR Phase I:      Low Cost Sensitive Magnetometer for Remote Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Saeid Ghamaty, MS TECHNOLOGY
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
new type of low cost, low power, fast and small magnetometer that could attain a
sensitivity of approximately 1 femto Tesla (10-15 T) per root hertz.
Magnetometers with such sensitivity could easily be used for remote sensing by
measuring and locating the source of magnetic fields. These fields are typically
one billion times smaller than the earth's magnetic field. This new magnetometer
could be in a small (SO8, ~5x4x2mm3), low power instrument package operating at
ambient temperature. Such sensitivity currently requires costly superconducting
quantum interference device (SQUID) that needs expensive and cumbersome
cryogenics to operate. In Phase I, MST hopes to quantify the performance gains
possible from this new magnetometer and its measurement of magnetic field and
noise in operational contexts for remote sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of low cost, high performance,
modular, miniature magnetometer delivery&lt;br/&gt;systems will expand the
commercial markets for home and industrial security
systems,&lt;br/&gt;industrial process monitoring systems, and environmental
monitoring systems. The&lt;br/&gt;magnetometer would also augment the capability
to detect submarines by using an array&lt;br/&gt;seeded around narrow traffic
lanes. It could find use in detecting land and naval mines,&lt;br/&gt;and in
making sensitive proximity fuses. Commercial uses include prospecting for
mineral&lt;br/&gt;deposits, nondestructive testing, and research in geomagnetic
and biomagnetic studies.&lt;br/&gt;