* 0338184
* Track 1 GK-12:  Enhancing Science Literacy in Southeast Idaho with Community-based Projects and University/K-12 Partnerships
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Richard Wabrek, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2008
* USD 1,975,834.00

Title: Track 1 GK-12: Enhancing Science Literacy in Southeast Idaho with
Community-based Projects and University/K-12 Partnerships.
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Idaho State University &lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Rosemary J.
Smith (PI), co-PI's: Mikle Ellis, Richard Wabrek, Richard Inouye
&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per Year: 10 Graduate, 5 advanced undergraduate
&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Idaho School Districts #25, 91, 93, and
512. &lt;br/&gt;Target Audience of the Project: Grades 5-12. &lt;br/&gt;Setting:
urban and rural &lt;br/&gt;NSF Supported Disciplines Involved: Biological
Sciences, Engineering, Technology, Geosciences, Chemistry, and Physical Sciences
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narrative Summary: This Track 1 project, based in
southeastern Idaho, is a partnership between Idaho State University (ISU),
school districts in the region's two major cities (Pocatello and Idaho Falls),
and two non-profit organizations (a zoo and museum). Two major employers in the
area are also participating in the project, with both technical and monetary
assistance. The project has a theme of using relevant, local topics in science,
engineering and technology to enhance student interest and performance in the
target disciplines. The project is designed to enhance: 1) the ability of
scientists and engineers to teach and communicate scientific topics to the
public, 2) science and engineering instruction in Idaho schools, and 3)
partnerships between ISU, local school districts, informal education venues such
as the museum and zoo, and local industry. Project activities include an
intensive week-long summer workshop to build strong teacher- scientist
partnerships, provide professional development for K-12 teachers, and give
Fellows the pedagogical training and the opportunity to work with teachers to
develop specific problem- or inquiry-based lessons in keeping with
state/national standards. Fellows are selected from: Engineering, Technology,
Biology, Chemistry, and Geology. University faculty mentor Fellows with required
monthly faculty/fellow/ teacher meetings. An extensive evaluation process
measures project outcomes, from impacts on K-12 students, to assessments of
Fellow's enhanced communication skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project explores the effects of implementing a model scientist-
teacher-student partnership in a community transitioning from a traditionally
agricultural economy towards a high-tech economy. Activities of Fellows are
hypothesized to increase student engagement and performance in STEM, and to
improve scientific communication. The theme-based approach, stressing topics of
local relevance, was conceived by K-12 teachers and the PIs. This approach
incorporates the national science standards for inquiry-based learning, and
addresses self-identified needs of the schools, and industries, by incorporating
scientists into classroom activities. Fellows and teachers are supported and
mentored by ISU faculty, and scientists and engineers in local industries and
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will produce
more scientifically literate K-12 students who will be attracted to STEM
disciplines and careers. The project will increase the participation of Native
American students in STEM (because of the population of the partner schools),
provide K-12 teachers with science teaching resources, improve the communication
of scientific research results and methods, and strengthen ISU's partnerships
with the schools. This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;