* 0338377
* Responsive Tethered Polymer Layers:    Protein Adsorption, Phase Transition and Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Igal Szleifer, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Igal G. Szleifer&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;"Responsive
Tethered Polymer Layers: Protein Adsorption, Phase Transition and
Interactions"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is the theoretical
study of the behavior of tethered polymer layers that can reversibly or
irreversibly switch their properties upon change in an experimentally controlled
variable, such as temperature, pH or salt concentration. The understanding of
the behavior of these layers is a fundamental step towards the molecular design
of non-fouling surfaces, biocompatible materials, drug delivery systems and
sensors among many others. The work will concentrate on the structural and
thermodynamic changes in the polymer layers and how these changes affect: (i)
The ability of the layer to adsorb or reject protein (or nanoparticle)
adsorption and (ii) The interactions of the polymer layer with other surfaces.
The theoretical studies will be based on a molecular theory, developed by the
PI, that has been successfully applied to study the thermodynamics and kinetic
of protein adsorption, as well as the structural and thermodynamic properties of
tethered polymer layers. Further, atomistic molecular dynamics simulations will
be used to study pH sensitive peptides. The research will be carried out in
close collaboration with two experimental groups. The specific polymeric systems
to be studied include: 1) thermo-responsive polymer layers, 2) poly-ethylene
oxide (PEO) functionalized with charged moieties and with bioactive ligands and
3) block copolymers of PEO with pH sensitive peptides. The first two systems are
aimed at controlling protein adsorption and the ability to reversibly switch
from adsorbing to non-adsorbing surfaces. The pH sensitive peptides are aimed at
controlling the adhesion of the polymer modified layers with lipid bilayers or
other hydrophobic surfaces/interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;This research activity is at the intersection
of engineering, physics, chemistry and biology. It combines: 1) The fundamental
understanding of complex systems where the relevant length scale is nanometers
with time scales that range from milliseconds to hours, with 2) The practical
application in the design of biomaterials, drug carriers and nanosensors among
others. Thus, this research would combine atomistic computer simulations to
understand detailed interactions and solvation with molecular theory that uses
more coarse-grained models than the simulations. Furthermore, the molecular
approach enables the systematic study of the kinetics, structural and
thermodynamic properties of large systems. The ongoing collaborations with the
experimental groups of Profs. Thompson (Purdue) and Genzer (NCSA), with its
already proven track record, provides the necessary framework to maintain the
theoretical work in a practical and applied environment at all
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact from the proposed
activity&lt;br/&gt;The research program will involve the participation of
graduate and undergraduate students. In particular, the PI plans to attract
undergraduate research students from underrepresented minorities by
participating in the successful MARC/AIM program and by linking the research
projects with the "Summer Institute for Diversity in Biomedical Science", both
administered by the Minority Program of the Graduate School at Purdue
University. The research work will be further integrated into undergraduate
education, and at a later stage even high school education, by collaboration
with Prof. Weaver (Chemical Education, Purdue). This integration will result in
the development of multimedia and interactive DVD's that incorporate research
data to apply the concepts learned in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research findings will be available in a popular version in the web page of the
PI. There will be tutorials for the application of the molecular theory and
computer simulations for the non-experts, as well as a simple description of the
research outcomes and their relevance to many fields in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;