* 0338624
* SGER: Robust Gain Scheduled Control Design in Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Vijay Vittal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 12/31/2004
* USD 78,270.00

The electric power system in North America has undergone unprecedented changes
with the advent of a competitive market place and deregulation. These changes in
the system have resulted in higher levels of loading on the system, and have
further increased its stress. At the same time, the transmission grid has seen
very little expansion due to the prevailing economic conditions and the lack of
incentives in the market. As a result, available transmission and generation
facilities are highly utilized with large amount of power interchanges among
companies and geographical regions. It is envisioned that this trend will
continue to grow and result in more stringent requirements to maintain
reliability and adequate system dynamic performance. To a large extent, critical
controls like excitation systems, power system stabilizers (PSS), static VAR
compensators (SVC), and a new breed of control devices driven by modern power
electronics and referred to as flexible ac transmission systems or FACTS play a
key role in maintaining adequate system dynamic performance. Proper design of
these controls resulting in robust system-wide stability and performance is
essential. With the increased emphasis on reliability and system dynamic
performance there is a greater need to analyze and design controls in an
integrated fashion, taking into effect the interaction between the various kinds
of controls. We propose to apply gain-scheduling techniques to enable the use of
a family of robust controllers. More specifically, we propose to explore the use
of linear parameter varying (LPV) approach to gain scheduling. This is a
relatively recent approach that has not been seriously explored for large power
systems. On the other hand, LPV gain scheduling methods are gaining acceptance
in aerospace applications following their successful use in flight control
systems. In these applications, one observes wide changes in the operating
conditions (e.g. altitude, airspeed) similar to those seen in power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we will address the following
topics: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and application of linear parameter
varying (LPV) gain scheduling methods of control design to large power systems
accounting for large changes in operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
novel decentralized control design for large-scale power
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses a critical need for the reliability of the national electric grid
dealing with the efficient design of controllers. The project also propose a
novel decentralized approach to controller design for power systems that will
significantly reduce the computational burden for large power systems but still
take into account the uncertainty associated with changing operating conditions.
This will provide initial testing of the approach and provide insight into the
development of more elaborate techniques for designing controls. The analytical
basis for the approach will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will support 1 PhD student for a year. This will contribute to the nation's
scientific work force and produce an engineer with advanced capabilities to
tackle the important issues related to the reliability of national electric
grid.&lt;br/&gt;