* 0338267
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Controls over Biogeochemistry and Microbial Community Structure and Function across Terrestrial/Aquatic Interfaces in a Polar Desert
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Michael Gooseff, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2005
* USD 161,321.00

Aquatic-terrestrial transition zones are crucial environments in understanding
the biogeochemistry of landscapes. In temperate watersheds, these areas are
generally dominated by riparian zones, which have been identified as regions of
special interest for biogeochemistry because of the increased microbial activity
in these locations, and because of the importance of these hydrological margins
in facilitating and buffering hydrologic and biogeochemical exchanges between
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. In the Antarctic Dry Valleys, terrestrial-
aquatic transition zones are intriguing landscape features because of the vast
importance of water in this polar desert, and because the material and energy
budgets of dry valley ecosystems are linked by hydrology. Hydrological margins
in aquatic-terrestrial transition zones will be studied in the Dry Valleys of
Antarctica to answer two overarching questions: (1) what are the major controls
over hydrologic and biogeochemical exchange across aquaticterrestrial transition
zones and (2) to what extent do trends in nutrient cycling (e.g. nitrogen
cycling) across these transition zones reflect differences in microbial
communities or function vs. differences in the physical and chemical environment
(e.g., redox potential)? The hydrologic gradients that define these interfaces
provide the opportunity to assess the relative influence of physical conditions
and microbial biodiversity and functioning upon biogeochemical cycling.
Coordinated hydrologic, biogeochemical, and molecular microbial studies will be
executed within hydrologic margins with the following research objectives: to
determine the role of sediment characteristics, permafrost and active layer
dynamics, and topography on sub-surface water content and distribution in
hydrologic margins, to determine the extent to which transformations of nitrogen
in hydrological margins are influenced by physical conditions (i.e., moisture,
redox potential and pH) or by the presence of specific microbial communities
(e.g., denitrifiers), and to characterize the microbial community structure and
function of saturated zones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will
provide an improved understanding of the interaction of liquid water, soils,
microbial communities, and biogeochemistry within the important hydrologic
margin landscape units of the dry valleys. Dry valleys streams and lakes are
unique because there is no influence of higher vegetation on the movement of
water and may therefore provide a model system for understanding physical and
hydrological influences on microbial ecology and biogeochemistry. Hence the
findings will contribute to Antarctic science as well as the broader study of
riparian zones and hydrologic margins worldwide. Graduate students and
undergraduate students will be involved with fieldwork and research projects.
Information will be disseminated through a project web site, and outreach
activities will include science education in local elementary, middle and high
schools near the three universities involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;