* 0338193
* Graduate and Undergraduate Students Enhancing Science and Technology in k-12 schools (II)
* EHR,DGE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Juan Lopez-Garriga, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,193,320.00

A. Project Summary

Title of the Project: Graduate and Undergraduate Students Enhancing Science and
Technology in K-12 Schools (II): GUEST K-12 (II) Institution: University of
Puerto Rico Mayaguez Campus PI/Co-PI: Juan Lopez-Garriga, Luisa Guillemard,
Hernan Santos, Dalas Alston, Jose Cortes-Figueroa Number of Fellows per year: 12
Fellows/year (10 graduates/2 undergraduates). Number of teachers (classes)
served per year: 40 teachers per year in summer workshops and 100 classes
visits/year. School District Partners: Puerto Rico Department of Education (10
Educational Districts) Target audience of the project (k-12 grade-band):
Elementary, Intermediate and high schools (ca. 33% each). Setting: Urban,
suburban and rural NSF supported disciplines involved: Chemistry, Biology,
Geosciences, Mathematics, Physics, Social Sciences, and Engineering

The near, mid, and long-term future of our society depends on the development of
the curiosity, imagination, diversity, efficiency, and learning of our societies
members. Mathematics, science, and engineering, tied to the understanding of
global perception and communication skills, are essential elements that our
students must develop and transfer to further strength our society. Track II of
Graduate and Undergraduate Students Enhancing Science and Technology in K-12
Schools (II): GUEST K-12 (II) continues to integrate GLOBE (Global Learning and
Observation to Benefit the Environment) program and CBL (Calculator Based
Laboratory) technology with scientific measurements as a means of enhancing
science knowledge and communication skills of fellows, K-12 teachers and
students. Typically fellows train 40 teachers during five, 8-hour days, each
summer, in GLOBE protocols and CBL. These workshops link fellows with teachers
so they work together more efficiently and develop a positive professional
relationship. After the training, fellow; 1) make follow-up visits each week to
schools, 2) lead Saturday follow-up workshops for teachers, 3) organize and
attend visits of teachers to the UPRM facilities. This Track II initiative, by
the third year, will institutionalize the GK-12 strategy by creating a permanent
GLOBE and CBL Practicum course as an integrated element of the university
graduate program. The GUEST K-12 (II) program will strongly interact with other
GK-12 initiatives creating a significant interchange in STEM activities among
diverse fellows, schools, teachers, and students. The intellectual merit of the
project resides in: (1) the creation of an integrative model that helps graduate
students adapt current curriculum strategies in science, technology, and
communication skills as part of their graduate education; (2) new generations of
graduate students using and transferring science inquiry as teaching tools to
K-12 teachers and students; and (3) fellows acquiring additional communication
skills to attain their careers, social achievement, and success in less time.
The broader impacts of the proposed project include: (1) the
institutionalization of the program; (2) synergistic teaching/learning process
effect of the interaction with graduate fellows, K-12 teachers, students, and
other GK-12 initiatives; and (3) an expository model, based on GLOBE and CBL
technology, transferable to the K-12 schools of the Nation by the interchange of
fellows, and the use of teleconferencing, and other interactive technologies.
This project is partially supported by funds from the Directorate for
Mathematics and the Physical Sciences.