* 0339067
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Computer Science and Decision Theory Applications of Notions of Consensus
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 39,000.00

0339067&lt;br/&gt;Roberts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project, the Center for Discrete Mathematics and
Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) directed by Fred S. Roberts at Rutgers
University and Laboratoire d'Analyse et Modelisation de Systemes pour l'Aide ala
Decision (LAMADE), directed by Alexis Tsoukias at the University of Paris IX
propose to investigate modern computer science applications of methods developed
by decision theorists, in particular, methods involving consensus and associated
order relations. The goals are to explore connections between computer science
and decision theory, develop new decision-theory based methodologies, and
investigate applications&lt;br/&gt;to computer science and to the social
sciences. Exchange visits of graduate students and junior researchers and
several workshops will introduce a broader community to the topics of the
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance understanding of
computer science problems that arise in the following areas: (1) metasearches
(combining the outputs of several search engines); (2) collaborative filtering
(learning algorithms for books, movie recommendations); (3) locating centrally
placed items in large databases (biological databases and others with homeland
security applications); (4) finding efficient ways to compute
consensus&lt;br/&gt;functions; and (5) learning about individuals' preferences
revealed gradually in economic cooperation and competition using the Internet.
Computer science applications to improve the methods of decision theory and
apply new ideas to decision making in the social sciences will also be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly supported by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS). NSF provides support for visits to France by the U.S.
investigators and students. The CNRS covers the cost of travel to the United
States by the French investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;