* 0339803
* SBIR Phase I:     Scalable and Reliable Storage Infrastructure for Web Server Farms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Shaofeng Yang, Data Reliability Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to study
the feasibility of building a scalable and reliable storage system for Web
server farms. This system is called WebTank. WebTank is a revolutionary system
that employs a combination of unique ideas to address the main challenges
encountered in Web server farm environments, namely: scalability, availability,
and manageability. With the rapid growth of the Internet and data driven Web
services, traditional storage solutions are not able to keep pace with the
rapidly expanding storage requirements of Web server farms. This solution allows
for independent and practically unlimited scalability of capacity, file access
performance, and namespace access performance. It will offer the opportunity of
applying a more effective block-level edge caching technique, which enhances the
performance and achieves better utilization of the valuable cache memory.
WebTank utilizes a unique, very fast coding technique called PND to ensure fast,
reliable, and highly available access to data.

Many applications will exploit the competitive advantages of the proposed
solution including multimedia Web-based services, content management, document
storage and delivery, digital imaging, file transfer services, and video on
demand. These ideas can also be expanded to build general-purpose file servers
that are not subject to performance bottlenecks and capacity limitations.
Therefore having an important impact on building next generation NAS devices.