* 0339703
* SBIR Phase I:    Sketchpad for Young Learners of Mathematics:    Dynamic Visualization Software in Grades 3-8
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Nicholas Jackiw, KCP Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,783.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project aims to identify and
overcome barriers to the effective integration of The Geometer's Sketchpad
software in elementary and middle school math classes. This research-based
educational software is already well known at the secondary level for its
ability to foster dynamic mathematics visualization and exploration and to
enhance student learning. This project responds to clear calls for the
software's application and adaptation to younger grades coming from teachers,
curriculum development and research communities, and from standards bodies such
as the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. The proposed research, led
by the team that created and maintains Sketchpad, will identify aspects of the
present software and its model of curriculum integration that act as obstacles
to effective use in grades 3-8, and investigate, test, and evaluate a series of
software design modifications, implementations, and activity scenarios to
overcome these obstacles. KCP Technologies will additionally research the
potential for deep connection to the most widely-adopted National Science
Foundation middle school reform curriculum, the Connected Mathematics Project,
to determine how the modified Sketchpad for Young Learners that emerges from
this work can best enhance student learning and support effective curricula in
today's real-world classrooms. The broader impact of this project reaching its
objectives (and pursuing them through Phase II/III) will be the creation and
eventual wide availability, in primary and middle grades, of age-appropriate
Dynamic Geometry mathematics education technologies (and supporting curriculum)
similar to those which define Sketchpad at the secondary level, where the
software is considered the most valuable software for students (Becker, 1999) by
mathematics teachers across the country.