* 0339546
* Third International Symposium on Advanced Fluid Information 2003 (AFI-2003) to be held in New York City, November 21-23, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Hiroshi Higuchi, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,900.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0339546&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR
INITIATED&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: HIROSHI HIGUCHI, SYRACUSE
UNIVERSITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THIRD INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED FLUID
INFORMATION 2003 (AFI-2003) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syracuse University will co-
host the Third International Symposium on Advanced Fluid Information with Tohoku
University, Japan in New York City on November 21-22, 2003. The symposium will
focus on fluid informatics as applicable to biomedical and environmental quality
issues. It will be attended by a group of world experts in the field as well as
students in an intimate setting to enhance in-depth
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the banner of Advanced Fluid Information,
new paradigms of fluid mechanics research and applications will be explored.
Emphasis will be on integration of information technology, vast real-time and
post data processing capability and increasingly sophisticated numerical
simulations that incorporate fundamental theories. In particular, the emerging
integration of mainstream fluid mechanics and biomedical research and
applications is expected to drive the fundamental research as well as directly
impact human health care. The transport phenomena in indoor and outdoor
environments have impact on human health, but the engineering and medical
research fields are just beginning to integrate their research efforts and
knowledge. The intellectual merit of this mini-symposium lies in bringing
international expertise in biofluids and environmental transport phenomena, and
promoting new synergy in both basic and applied fluid mechanics research. The
members of the advisory committee have advocated the concept of advanced fluid
information and they will also bring in broader perspectives to this year's
focal area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students from US and Japan are
encouraged to attend and present their research at a special poster session.
Participants are expected to disseminate their experiences among their students
and colleagues. Proceedings of the symposium will be published and will be made
widely available.&lt;br/&gt;