* 0339022
* SBIR Phase I: Microdisplays Based on III-Nitride Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Zhaoyang Fan, III-N TECHNOLOGY, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project's goal is to optimize
III-nitride wide bandgap semiconductor materials, layer structures, device
design for micro-displays, and to develop concepts for III-nitride full color
micro-displays for wearable and head-up display applications. Semiconductor
micro-displays, which require the integration of a dense array of micro-size
light emitting diodes (LEDs) on a single semiconductor chip, have yet to be
developed. Also, color conversion for full color displays cannot be achieved in
conventional III-V or Si semiconductors, which makes semiconductor micro-
displays based on conventional semiconductors unviable.&lt;br/&gt;However, due
to the unique properties of III-nitrides, III-nitride micro-displays can
potentially provide performance superior to those based on liquid crystal and
organic LED displays including: self-luminescent, high
brightness/resolution/contrast, high temperature/high power operation, high
shock resistance, wide field-of-view, full color spectrum capability, long life,
high speed, and low power consumption. By inserting them into any existing
visual system, III-nitride micro-displays would provide weight reduction, space
and power saving and allow viewing from any angle without color shift and
degradation in contrast and resolution. The research here is built on the recent
successful fabrication of III-nitride micro-size blue LED arrays and micro-
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro-displays are small displays that
are of such high resolution that they are only practically viewed or projected
with lenses or mirrors. Micro-displays are typically magnified by optics to
enlarge the image viewed by the user. When viewed through a lens, a high-
resolution 1-inch diagonal micro-display could provide images comparable to
viewing a 21-inch diagonal TV/computer screen. Micro-displays can be used in a
variety of devices such as head-wearing displays, camcorders, viewfinders, etc
and have many military and commercial applications. Micro-size LED arrays
developed here are not only useful as wearable and head-up displays, but also
useful as full color mini-displays, emitters for remote free space functions,
short distance optical communication, optical interconnects and chip-scale
biomedical sensors for early diagnosis of disease. III-nitride blue micro-size
LED arrays are very attractive for inexpensive high resolution and high-speed
optical links.&lt;br/&gt;