* 0339399
* SBIR Phase I:  HW-Accelerated Verification with TestBench Caching and Reduced Design Compilation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Maciej Ciesielski, LogicMill Technology
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

0339399&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project addresses issues related
to verication and debugging of application&lt;br/&gt;specic integrated circuits
(ASICs) and systems on chip (SOCs) and proposes a novel solution
to&lt;br/&gt;drastically improve efficiency and performance of design
verication. The design verication&lt;br/&gt;already dominates the overall design
development time and negatively impacts the designer pro-&lt;br/&gt;ductivity
and product's time to market. The proposed method is based on a novel
technology, called &lt;br/&gt;testbench caching, which reduces by the several
orders of magnitude the HW/SW communication &lt;br/&gt;overhead. It is combined
with the technique that also reduces the need for frequent and time
&lt;br/&gt;intensive design compilation, and increased signal visibility,
essential for fast hardware &lt;br/&gt;debugging. Over 100 times improvement is
expected w.r.to traditional simulation, and 10-20 &lt;br/&gt;times w.r.to
traditional simulation acceleration. This project will result in the development
of &lt;br/&gt;a prototype system to validate the above
claims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By accelerating the verication and providing
efficient debugging facility the proposed solution&lt;br/&gt;will substantially
shorten time to market for ASIC and SOC designs. Designers productivity
will&lt;br/&gt;increase, lowering product development and labor costs. The
proposed system methodology will&lt;br/&gt;have a signicant, positive commercial
impact and will contribute to the growth of the verication&lt;br/&gt;systems
market.