* 0339971
* SBIR Phase I:      Reflectance Sensitive Image Sensor for Illumination-Invariant Visual Perception
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Vladimir Brajovic, Intrigue Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,692.00

0339971&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project proposes to develop an adaptive &lt;br/&gt;CMOS image sensor that
estimates and largely eliminates illumination variations in sensed
&lt;br/&gt;optical images thus reporting electronic images that are indicative
of the reflectance of the &lt;br/&gt;viewed scene. Most present and future
vision applications including automotive, biometric, &lt;br/&gt;security, and
mobile computing applications operate in unconstrained environments and have to
&lt;br/&gt;cope with unknown and widely varying illumination conditions. The
proposed research has a potential to broadly impact computer vision performance
and reliability. The core innovation is in a signal processing technique for
estimating the illumination field from sensed images. The technique efficiently
implements as a dense on-chip massively parallel analog processor distributed
among the photodetectors to produce a reflectance sensitive image
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image sensors are rapidly finding their way into
cars, cell-phones, personal digital &lt;br/&gt;assistants, medical and
diagnostic equipment, automated drug discovery, cutting edge security,
&lt;br/&gt;surveillance and biometric systems. To fully realize the potential of
electronic imaging in &lt;br/&gt;society, the image sensors will need to adapt
and provide useful images most of the time even &lt;br/&gt;under the harshest of
illumination conditions. The proposed research will make this possible and
&lt;br/&gt;make people.s lives safer, more productive and more enjoyable.