* 0339492
* EITM: Aggregate and Individual Behavior:  Bringing Theory and Empirics Together
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2012
* Russell Cooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 301,713.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is to study the aggregate and
policy implications of non-convexities at the microeconomic level. There is
ample evidence that non-convexities matter at the individual household and firm
levels. The open question is whether there are aggregate implications of these
non-convexities. Answering this question is important for both understanding
aggregate fluctuations and for policy evaluation. The applications proposed here
share a common research methodology: the specification of a model of dynamic
optimization at the individual (firm or household) level combined with
estimation through indirect inference. Thus the empirical work is directly tied
to the formal modeling of individual behavior. Due to non-convexities, these
applications rest upon a dynamic discrete choice framework. The goals of the
research are: (i) to utilize this methodology within a dynamic general
equilibrium setting to evaluate aggregate implications and (ii) to explore
policy applications, such as investment tax
credits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will have three broad impacts. First, the work will advance
our ability to evaluate the impact of tax and subsidy policies on the economy,
both at the micro-level and at the aggregate level. This pertains directly to
policy that might subsidize the purchases of firm and household durables. These
research results will be disseminated through circulating papers and
participation in scientific conferences. Second, part of the proposed work is
intended to create data summaries in the form of moments that will be useful to
the research community. Third, the proposed work will include a sharing of
research techniques to enhance the linking of formal modeling with empirical
studies by other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;