* 0339115
* Socialization in the Family and Child Development: Emotionality, Regulation, and Sleep as Pathways and Moderators of Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jacquelyn Mize, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Forty percent of children in the U.S. live in homes characterized by high
levels of marital conflict. And when parents fight, children suffer. Children
who live in high conflict homes are more likely to experience depression,
behavior problems, ill health, and academic difficulties. The damage is not
uniform, however; some children survive high conflict families nearly unscathed,
whereas other sustain substantial harm. How marital conflict exacts such a
devastating toll on most children and why some children are able to defy the
odds and function well despite stressful home environments are questions for
which there are no answers. Yet, answers to these questions are needed to
develop strategies to protect vulnerable children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
project examines physiological processes as mechanisms that explain the effects
of marital conflict on children, and also as factors that put children at
greater risk, or convey protection, in highly stressful homes, depending on
children's autonomic reactivity. We propose that marital conflict induces
physiological arousal, and that for some children, particularly for highly
reactive children, this arousal is sufficiently intense and long lasting to
disrupt sleep and interfere with emotional, behavioral, and cognitive
development. Less autonomically reactive children, and children who can recover,
or calm their arousal, quickly, may be more immune to the negative effects of
parental conflict. Children's reactivity and recovery in response to staged
family conflict scenes are assessed with several measures of autonomic activity,
including skin conductance and vagal tone. Vagal tone is an index of heart rate
variability that reflects the intensity of physiological reaction and the time
needed calm after arousal. Children's sleep is assessed with actigraph, a watch-
like devise that children wear to bed and that records sleep quantity and
quality. In high conflict homes, highly reactive children are expected to have
more disturbed sleep, more behavior problems, more depression, and poorer
academic performance in high conflict homes than do less reactive children. On
the other hand, high reactivity may confer protection for children living in low
conflict homes. Knowing which children are at risk because of high reactivity
and stressful environments will help educators develop programs that help these
children cope more effectively. &lt;br/&gt;