* 0339097
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Nanoscopic Probing of Amphiphilic Polysaccharide Drug Carriers
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Terri Camesano, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2009
* USD 26,700.00

0339097&lt;br/&gt;Camesano&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent efforts in biotechnology,
proteomics, and bioinformatics have resulted in the synthesis of new, potent
drugs composed of modified peptides and proteins. These new classes of drugs
have shown great promise towards controlling and curing a variety of illnesses
and diseases. However, there are significant problems with in vivo absorption of
these drugs due to their hydrophobicity and sensitivity towards the external
environment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Drug delivery using oil-in-water emulsions
has emerged as a potential route, as recent studies indicate that the use of
emulsions for in vivo drug delivery resulted in dramatically increased
absorption. Furthermore, the rate of in vivo drug release can be easily
controlled by one of several emulsion parameters, while analogous control is
exceedingly difficult with conventional methods. Reliable drug concentration
control can minimize deviations from safe concentration levels, as well as
reduce the frequency at which a dose of the drug is externally introduced into
the body. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France cooperative
research project, Terri A. Camesano at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) and
Alain Durand and Michele Leonard at the Ecole Nationale Superieure des
Industries Chimiques (ENSIC) in Nancy, France, and their respective students
will perform experiments directed at studying properties of natural
polyssacharides in the amphiphilic form. The WPI group will characterize
conformation of polysaccharides and measure nanoscale interaction forces between
biopolymers and surfaces using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and single-molecule
force spectroscopy (SMFS). They will also model interactions between adsorbed
polymer layers and surfaces. At ENSIC researchers have synthesized
hydrophobically modified surfactants - dextran, amylose, and pullulan-derived
polymers. These surfactants create stable emulsions and are used as coatings on
nanoparticles. They will measure nanoscale interaction between the French
synthesized biopolymers and the surfaces. Their combined efforts could lead to
design of improved surfactant polymer vectors for use in drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education at
the international level. Each year, three U.S. undergraduates and a graduate
student will conduct research with the French team over an eight-week period.
Students from chemical engineering, biomedical engineering, biochemistry,
biology and biotechnology are eligible to participate in the program.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS).
NSF will fund the visits to France by the U.S. investigator and students. The
CNRS will cover expenses for visits to the United States. &lt;br/&gt;