* 0339147
* CAREER: Quantum Phase Transitions in Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Thomas Vojta, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research in condensed
matter physics and developing computational physics courses that use computation
to advance understanding of physics. Research will be conducted along three
separate but related lines with a common objective to investigate electronic
systems near quantum phase transitions. In the first line, magnetic and
superconducting transitions of clean and weakly disordered itinerant electrons
will be studied using field-theoretic methods. Emphasis will be on the coupling
of critical and noncritical soft modes which can dramatically change critical
behavior. The PI aims to develop a combined fermionic and bosonic
renormalization group for these transitions that includes all soft modes on
equal footing. This theory will also permit a quantum mechanical description of
transport close to the transition. This work will not only be of fundamental
interest for the quantum phase transition community, it also has direct
experimental relevance for heavy fermion materials, weak ferromagnets, and other
exotic superconductors. The second line of research is devoted to non-
perturbative effects of quenched disorder. The PI recently found that some
quantum phase transitions with Ising symmetry (including the itinerant quantum
antiferromagnetic one) are smeared by disorder. It is proposed to investigate
the properties and consequences of this exciting effect by extremal statistics,
real-space renormalization and percolation ideas as well as Monte-Carlo
simulations. Special sampling techniques will be developed to investigate broad
distributions associated with strongly disordered systems. Separate projects
will be devoted to transitions with continuous symmetry where no smearing is
expected but rather unconventional strong-disorder fixed points. Beyond its
direct relevance for some heavy fermion systems, where indications of a rounded
transition have been observed, this work will be of interest for the statistical
physics of disordered systems and for other areas dealing with rare events and
large fluctuation. The third research line, involving computer simulations of
microscopic models of disordered electrons, complements the work on non-
perturbative disorder effects. A first application will be to investigate the
properties of a single rare region of an itinerant magnetic quantum phase
transition and its relation to a correlation-induced localized magnetic moment
in a dirty metallic system. The PI intends to develop a sequence of
computational physics courses aimed at upper level undergraduate and beginning
graduate students. In these courses, the students will learn how to use
computation and simulation to advance the understanding of physics. This
involves skills that are typically not taught in introductory physics courses
where students often lack the background in programming and that are typically
not taught in computer science and mathematics courses which emphasize technical
aspects of computation. These physics-centered courses are aimed at filling this
gap. Their role for teaching computational physics is similar to that of
traditional laboratory courses for experiment, giving the students hands-on
experience in all aspects of computational work. Students who successfully
finish the courses should acquire highly marketable interdisciplinary skills in
today's job market and should be well prepared to participate in the PI's
research as well as other research projects in the physics department. This will
give incoming graduate students a head start and help to provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students at the forefront of science. In
addition, it is also hoped that these course will help attract new students to
the physics program. There are broader impacts in the area of educating
undergraduates and in attracting new talent to the field of physics. Advances in
understanding strongly correlated electron systems and quantum critical
phenomena contribute concepts that may lay the foundation for future
technologies and may impact other fields, particularly other areas of physics.
%%% This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research in
condensed matter physics and developing computational physics courses that use
computation to advance understanding of physics. The PI will investigate perfect
and disordered electronic systems near quantum phase transitions. Quantum phase
transitions occur at zero temperature. Ordinary phase transitions are driven by
thermal fluctuations. By contrast, quantum phase transitions are driven by
quantum mechanical fluctuations. They can give rise to unusual properties at
finite temperature and may provide insight into exotic properties of strongly
correlated electron materials that have so far resisted explanation. The PI
plans to study ferromagnetic and superconducting quantum phase transitions and
to investigate the effect of disorder. The PI intends to develop a sequence of
computational physics courses aimed at upper level undergraduate and beginning
graduate students. In these courses, the students will learn how to use
computation and simulation to advance the understanding of physics. This
involves skills that are typically not taught in introductory physics courses
where students often lack the background in programming and that are typically
not taught in computer science and mathematics courses which emphasize technical
aspects of computation. These physics-centered courses are aimed at filling this
gap. Their role for teaching computational physics is similar to that of
traditional laboratory courses for experiment, giving the students hands-on
experience in all aspects of computational work. Students who successfully
finish the courses should acquire highly marketable interdisciplinary skills in
today's job market and should be well prepared to participate in the PI's
research as well as other research projects in the physics department. This will
give incoming graduate students a head start and help to provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students at the forefront of science. In
addition, it is also hoped that these course will help attract new students to
the physics program. There are broader impacts in the area of educating
undergraduates and in attracting new talent to the field of physics. Advances in
understanding strongly correlated electron systems and quantum critical
phenomena contribute concepts that may lay the foundation for future
technologies and may impact other fields, particularly other areas of physics.
***

