* 0339360
* SBIR Phase I:Feasibility Study for Cheminformatics Teaching Tools
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Norah MacCuish, Mesa Analytics & Computing, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,786.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
feasibility of designing and building virtual classroom software tools for
cheminformatics training in both academic and business settings. Mesa Analytics
& Computing, LLC has developed a commercial, integrated suite of the leading
edge cheminformatics software tools in the cheminformatics areas mentioned
above. However, these tools, containing new and original research by Mesa, are
for use in large scale research and industrial applications, where the users
already have experience in cheminformatics software. The research goals of this
project are to show that virtual classroom software tools will be effective,
comprehensive, and low cost products for training in both academic and industry
settings. This project will assess the portability and scalability of software
tools for interactive distance learning in chemical information topics, such as
finding structural commonalities in diverse compound sets, generation and use of
structural compound descriptors, similarity searching and clustering, and
compound diversity analysis for compound acquisition. The project will produce a
report outlining the design of the training software tools, including the
graphical user interface and virtual classroom integration, from the underlying
research and commercial tools.

At present there are no specific software tools for chemical information
training in the U.S., though there are several nascent chemometrics and chemical
information university departments and curricula. A number of commercial
software products used in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry are
either too expensive or of limited utility for training in either academic or
business settings. Converting Mesa's tools into training tools for concept
learning will serve the dual purpose in providing cheminformatics training tools
for both academia and industry. By employing distance learning through a web
delivery system, the training software will provide an effective, low cost
solution for academic institutions, whether they are offering a single course to
rural students in a remote setting, or an entire program in cheminformatics and
a major urban university. In addition, such training tools will be very useful
in industry settings with local area networks, where in a multidiscipline
setting individuals need to receive training on the concepts employed by
industrial chemoinformatics software--an integral part of the drug discovery
process for pharmaceutical and biotech industries. Key words: cheminformatics,
chemometrics, clustering, compound diversity analysis for compound acquisition,
distance learning, similarity searching, structural commonalities in diverse
compound sets, structural compound descriptors, virtual classroom. Subtopic: B.
Teaching and Learning PROPOSAL NO.: 0339360 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: MacCuish,
Norah INSTITUTION NAME: Mesa Analytics & Computing, LLC TITLE: SBIR Phase
I:Feasibility Study for Cheminformatics Teaching Tools NSF RECEIVED DATE:
06/11/2003