* 0339345
* SBIR Phase I:    The Visual Database:    Portable, XML-Based Middleware For Media Representation, Interaction and Exchange
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* William Schroeder, KITWARE INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I research project will
create a portable representational and interaction metaphor for digital media
embedded in a 3D viewing environment. Currently it is difficult to organize
heterogeneous digital media such as photographs, video, sound, and 3D graphics
content into a form that is readily understood, intuitive to work with, and easy
to exchange via e-mail or other standard data transmission protocols. The work
described here will define a representational schema based on data context, data
access portals, and ordered space-time paths that can be efficiently represented
using the portable exchange language XML. This metaphor-known as the visual
database or VDB-is generally applicable to information that is best understood
in an interactive 3D visual environment such as electronic medical records and
anatomical training material, maps, digital tours of 3D environments, and
archival of engineering analysis. The project will also create a prototype
viewer and content creation system for the VDB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this project will establish a pervasive new standard for
representing, interacting with, and exchanging digital media. Such a standard
could improve the productivity of individuals and firms that create and
communicate with 3D content. This project defines a novel metaphor for working
with information that extends previous organizational metaphors such as books
and web pages to support visual, 3D information. The representational schema is
simple enough to be supported by small portable devices such as PDA's, and
sophisticated enough to support complex human/computer interaction in a 3D
visualization environment. The technology lends itself to a commercialization
plan based on open XML standard and associated content viewers in conjunction
with commercial content creation applications and licensing
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;