* 0339563
* SBIR Phase I:  A Reconfigurable Collaborative Services Framework
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Vaidy Sunderam, Azomai Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 98,815.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is for an
architectural framework for reconfigurable collaborative services as a
customizable and efficient solution to computer-supported cooperative
activities. The key technical areas in which this project intends to develop
innovative solutions are: customizable collaboration software, robustness, and
heterogeneity sup-port. Based upon the principle of a flexible backplane that
supports core facilities, the project is for an idea of collaboration modules
that may be plugged-in as appropriate to a given cooperative endeavor. This
research addresses the current dichotomy in collaboration software, and aims to
devise new methodologies and systems to bridge the gap between general-purpose
and custom-made tools. The objective of this research is to design such
architecture and develop prototype software to establish its viability. A
framework and a usable system will result from this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the conduct of this work, new techniques for
multiway collaboration across heterogeneous platforms will be explored, and will
likely contribute new and useful scientific findings to the field. Owing to its
strong pragmatic bias, the project will have broad impact, both through the
framework and via the software produced, on network based platforms for
cooperative work in a large number of domain specific situations. This project
will fill the large void between simplistic general purpose collaboration
systems and expensive, custom built tools thereby bringing appropriate and
efficient collaboration technology to numerous cooperative endeavors. Key design
concepts in the proposed framework make it effective and usable without
substantial infrastructure in terms of devices, networks, and administrative
support thereby encouraging adoption in all sorts of communities. In particular,
collaborative systems such as this research have substantial potential for
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups via remote access to
advanced educational, research, and technological facilities using simple, low
end client systems.