* 0339117
* Collaborative Development of Java Laboratories for College Algebra and Trigonometry
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Michael Mays, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2006
* USD 54,997.00

The university has been offering pilot sections of college algebra and
trigonometry in large sections with a laboratory component. A distance education
trigonometry course is also being made available to complement the successful
WvEB Algebra course at the university. The use of WvEB Algebra has grown to 300
students, and WvEB trig is expected to serve 200 students at 7 high schools. The
courses are taught to the same standard as the on-campus courses, with the
active assistance of high school teachers as facilitators, using web based
video, laboratories, and on-line quizzing and testing. The project builds on
prior work for trigonometry laboratories that utilize results from NSF work at
other institutions - Java Sketchpad (NSF awards DMI-9561674 &amp; 9623018) and
the Mathematical Java Toolkit (NSF award DMI-9950714).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is extending and polishing the trigonometry laboratories, and rewriting
the college algebra laboratories using Java to give them the same look and feel
as the trigonometry laboratories, with the input and active cooperation of
facilitators and college faculty at other institutions. The extra structure that
these materials provide makes the on campus courses more engaging and serves as
appropriate teaching laboratory courses for beginning graduate teaching
assistants. The courses are being given for dual credit in high schools and
affecting many students at West Virginia University, including elementary
education majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is that the
project uses existing technology to provide a platform-independent set of
activities grounded in the practical experience of high school teachers, with
common tools integrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact includes
fostering mathematical development of the teachers serving as facilitators, and
encouraging rural Appalachian students to pursue STEM based college
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;