* 0340639
* US-France Cooperative Research: Island Fault Blocks in the Northeastern Caribbean
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Paul Mann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 11,647.00

0340639&lt;br/&gt;Mann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project involves Paul Mann at the University of Texas at
Austin and Jean-Claude Hippolyte at the Universite de Savoie in France. They
will perform fault striation studies applied to problems of active tectonics in
the northeastern Caribbean. Their previous studies of northwestern and southern
Puerto Rico identified fault scarps with earthquake potential in these densely
populated coastal regions. In this proposal, they continue fault striation
studies on the densely populated islands of Puerto Rico and Vieques (U.S.
territory), St. Croix, St. John, St. Thomas, U.S.Virgin Islands, Tortola and
Virgin Gorda (British territories). Except for Puerto Rico, these islands form
emergent fault blocks framing a major extensional or oblique-slip rifted basin
complex underlying the deep-water Anegada Passage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their
specific objectives include: 1) identifying late Cenozoic sedimentary units
affected by faulting (offshore, active faults will be used to target likely
areas where these faults might extend onshore); 2) finding manmade outcrops in
rock quarries and along road cuts that expose striated fault planes; 3)
measuring striated fault surfaces to determine the types and orientations of
faults present; 4) examining faults in different aged stratigraphic units,
establish a fault kinematic history for the opening of the Anegada Passage; and
5) using marine data to better understand the offshore extensions of faults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. investigator brings to the project expertise in
quantitative plate reconstructions, land based geological studies and marine
geophysical studies. This is complemented by French expertise on the tectonics
of highly curved orogenic belts including the Alps, the Carpathians and the
Caribbean. The project will advance understanding of seismicity in this densely
populated Caribbean region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will support the expenses of the U.S.
investigator and the CNRS covers expenses of the French
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;