* 0340605
* SGER: New Approaches for the Measurement of Microphysics in Extratropical Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Timothy Garrett, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 07/31/2004
* USD 19,946.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to support the participation of
Dr. Garrett in the Extratropical Transition of Hurricanes Experiment (ETHEX) in
the fall of 2003. The objective of ETHEX is to observe the characteristics of
Atlantic hurricanes as they move north from the tropics and evolve to take on
the characteristics of midlatitude cyclones. Such storms are often large and
intense, and can cause heavy rain, flooding, property damage, and loss of life.
As part of ETHEX, the Convair 580 research aircraft operated jointly by the
National Research Council of Canada and the Canadian Meteorological Service will
make storm-penetration flights to measure the microphysical properties of
midlatitude storms that originated as hurricanes. The measurements include drop-
size distributions, the amounts of cloud water and ice per unit volume, and ice
crystal sizes and shapes. Dr. Garrett will install on the airplane a Cloud
Integrating Nephelometer (CIN), an instrument built by Gerber Scientific for
measuring certain volume-integrated optical properties of clouds, specifically
the extinction coefficient and the asymmetry parameter, a measure of the
importance of forward scattering compared with the total scattering. This
parameter has a different value for ice clouds than for water clouds. The CIN
contributes to the objectives of ETHEX by providing, through the asymmetry
parameter, a direct measure of the proportion of ice present in mixed-phase
clouds. This is important information, not otherwise obtainable, both for
characterizing the microphysical structure of the clouds and for helping to
interpret the measurements of other instruments, which are not always able to
distinguish between water and ice. The independent measurement of extinction
that the CIN provides also helps to validate the measurements of drop-size
distribution by the other instruments. Broader impacts of the project include
improving the ability to model and forecast extratropical hurricanes and
encouraging the collaboration of American and Canadian cloud physicists.