* 0340851
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Theory and Application of Machine Perception to Understanding Human Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Gwen Littlewort-Ford, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2010
* USD 360,334.00

EIA-0340851&lt;br/&gt;Gwen Littlewort-Ford&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
California San Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Theory and Application of
Machine Perception to Understanding Human Behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
ADVANCE Fellows award provides support to explore facial recognition systems and
their ability to recognize emotion based on facial expression and to apply a
facial recognition system to education and cognitive disorders. The project has
several significant goals including: mathematical analysis of neural and machine
learning systems; engineering computer vision systems that provide information
about human behavior in real world interactions, and furthering the
understanding of human-computer interactions and the nature of tasks solved by
the brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
centered in its strong research basis working with and extending the work of a
leading research team. The proposal mentions several original concepts and
possibilities that may significantly impact machine learning, computer vision,
and HCI. The PI and the group with which she is working have excellent
credentials and expertise to conduct such state-of-the art investigations and to
then demonstrate the practical applications that result from the research. The
project provides the PI with an environment to re-establish herself in her
research field and position herself for a permanent academic position based on
the contributions of the project to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include potential
applications to benefit education and human potential development, among the
many possible avenues for successful results. If successful, the research
results could be applied to a number of everyday tasks, including online
learning and medical diagnostic tools. It could open new learning opportunities
and employment potential to individuals whose learning could be supported by the
new technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;