* 0340437
* US-India Workshop:  Use of High Volume Fly Ash Concrete and the Related Environmental Effects, Chennai, India, January 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Anil Patnaik, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2004
* USD 18,000.00

Description: This award supports the participation of seven US researchers in
the US-India workshop on high volume fly ash (HVFA) concrete, its effect on
greenhouse gas emissions, and the environmental impact of green concrete. US PI
Anil Patnaik, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology and K. Ganesh Babu, Department of Ocean
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras are co-organizers of the
workshop to be held in Chennai, India, January 2004. The objective of the
workshop is to review and disseminate recent advances in HVFA concrete and the
use of fly ash in high performance concrete as a partial replacement for cement.
Scope: The workshop will promote greater awareness of the environmental impacts
of rapid global industrialization/urbanization and the potential beneficial role
of HVFA concrete. US researchers have done pioneering research in the use of
HVFA and demonstrated that it can partially substitute for cement without
compromising performance. Using fly ash in concrete will reduce cement content
in concrete and promote the safe and economical disposal of large quantities of
industrial by-products. Dissemination of the American perspective on the use of
HVFA concrete will be of high interest to participants and contributes to US
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology will publish the workshop proceedings. This activity is also
supported by the Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems