* 0340903
* Estimating Demand with Consumer Heterogeneity: an Application to Wholesale Price Regulation in Retail Gasoline Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Justine Hastings, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2005
* USD 149,774.00

&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research program is two-fold. The first purpose
is to contribute to the current literature on the specification of consumer
preferences in discrete choice models of consumer demand. The research program
develops a random coefficients discrete choice model of demand for retail
gasoline that allows for heterogeneous consumer types with correlated
preferences across product characteristics. This flexibility will allow for
preference patterns such as brand-loyalty in the demand estimation - a
preference pattern that is incompatible with an assumption of independently and
identically distributed idiosyncratic consumer preferences. This research
program will then use discrete changes in the brand identities of retail
stations in Southern California to test which modeling assumptions are able to
more accurately predict actual changes in equilibrium prices resulting from
exogenous changes to brand identities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second purpose
of this study is to provide a framework for analyzing the potential impacts of
wholesale price regulation and competition in the gasoline industry. Policy
makers at the state and federal levels have proposed wholesale price regulation
as a means to restore 'competitive' retail price patterns in retail gasoline
markets. Fair Wholesale Price legislation (FWP) would prevent wholesale gasoline
suppliers from price discriminating between retail stations. Instead of charging
different wholesale prices to different stations, as is currently the practice,
refiners would be required to charge the same price to all retailers. This
research project will use the results from the discrete choice demand estimation
developed above to simulate the impact of FWP legislation. This simulation
exercise will be used to answer the following pressing policy-relevant
questions: Would average retail prices increase or decrease as a result of FWP?
What market factors influence the direction and magnitude of the estimated
effect? Is FWP a regressive or progressive policy - will it lead to higher or
lower prices in disadvantaged socioeconomic communities? Is there an alternative
policy might increase competition in retail gasoline markets, leading to lower
prices and decreased price dispersion? This detailed and rigorous empirical
estimation of the effects of FWP legislation will guide policy makers at the
state and federal level as they consider legislation aimed at increasing
competition in retail gasoline markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;