* 0340550
* SGER:  Sense in Context: Construction of a Selectional Context Dictionary for English Clauses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 98,022.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores a novel framework for
constructing a context dictionary for natural language; that is, a computational
lexical database of selectional contexts for argument-taking predicators in the
language. The goal of this project is to semi-automatically identify, from very
large corpora of the language, the norms of word usage, and then to encode these
norms as selectional contexts using a restricted system of semantic types and
syntactic identifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel methodology, called Corpus
Pattern Analysis (CPA), which is quite different from established methods in LKB
construction, will be used. Rather than building MRD-seeded lexicons, hand-
crafted lexicons (WordNet, EuroWordNet), and corpus-informed lexicons
(FrameNet), this work will employ a methodology for building a "corpus-driven"
lexicon, constrained by specific linguistic modeling principles. Such a
"selectional context dictionary" overcomes many of the shortcomings of previous
LKB approaches by capturing a richer level of selectional context for predicates
in the language. This is possible with the use of shallow parsing of predicate
arguments, and the assignment of types from a shallow semantic type system. The
technique will be evaluated the selectional discriminatory capabilities of the
results, according to established methods; namely, precision and recall
measurements against an annotated test set of unseen text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;