* 0340676
* ADVANCE Fellow: Evaluating the Importance of Lateral Transport on Alkenone Temperature Reconstructions in the late Quaternary
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2008
* USD 219,997.00

This ADVANCE award provides funding for continued research on biomarker and
isotopic (14C, 13C, 18O) analyses for paleoenvironmental and paleoceanographic
applications. The PI will determine the applicability and continued usefulness
of U37 as a paleotemperature estimator over a broad area of the world's oceans
and investigate the 14C ages of alkenones from sedimentary environments
representative of deep-sea locations where most paleooceanographic research has
been conducted. The usefulness of sedimentary alkenones for detailed
paleotemperature estimation and multi-proxy work has been recently brought into
question by 14C evidence that post-deposition lateral transport may cause
alkenones to be up to 7000 years older than foraminifera in the same deposit.
Post-depotional lateral transport of fine-grained material may account for the
differences. The PI will examine cores from two disparate oceanographic
locations to determine if alkenones are suitable for paleotemperature estimation
and multi-proxy work. The research will expand basic understanding of the
interplay between carbon cycling, ocean circulation, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADVANCE awards are intended to promote the careers
of women in science at critical junctures. The PI has recently relocated to the
U.S. and is rebuilding her career as a researcher and educator. &lt;br/&gt;