* 0340351
* SBIR Phase I:     Development of New Pulsing Mechanisms for Local Electrode Atom Probe Analyses of Electronic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Thomas Kelly, Imago Scientific Instruments Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to adapt the
highest spatial resolution analytical technique, atom probe microscopy, to work
on silicon-based electronic materials specifically, and semiconductor and
insulating materials generally. The semiconductor and information storage
industries, large and critical sectors of the US economy, face daunting
development tasks which require analytical techniques that provide quantitative
three-dimensional images at the atomic scale. Atom probe microscopy is the only
known technique that can fill this very large and crucial need but essential
research is needed to make it work. The atom probe uses field evaporation to
extract one atom at a time from a specimen and determine its identity and
location in three dimensions. Our understanding of the basic mechanisms by which
field evaporation of silicon occurs must be improved if this technique is to be
applied to electronic materials. This research program proposes to
systematically explore and document novel methods of achieving the requisite
pulsing.&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this project is in analytical
instrumentation to study, develop, and control semiconductor and insulating
electronic materials. Microscopy is required for science/technology development
in many areas critical to national economy (e.g. advanced materials,
microelectronics, and medicine.) As we embark on the century of nanotechnology,
it will be essential that microscopy techniques provide a complete picture of
materials at the atomic scale. No other existing imaging or analytical
technology can determine the 3-D atomic structure with the resolution and
elemental identification capabilities of the atom probe. Therefore, development
of methods to broaden the types of materials that may be analyzed with the atom
probe, as is the goal of this project, will substantially impact the development
of new microelectronic devices, new nanotechnologies, and new science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;