* 0340577
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Electrophysiological Studies of Dopamine in the Dorsal and Ventral Striatum
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Patricio O'Donnell, Albany Medical College of Union University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 09/30/2006
* USD 9,800.00

0340577&lt;br/&gt;O'Donnell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
U.S.-France cooperative research in neurosciences between Patricio O'Donnell of
Albany Medical College and Francois Gonon of the Universite de Bordeaux II. The
objective of their research is to study, under experimental conditions, the
electrophysiological effects of endogenously released dopamine on striatal
neurons and try to identify those neurons that are dopamine sensitive. The
investigators will utilize electrophysiological recordings on identified
striatal neurons and investigate in vivo the effects of endogenously released
dopamine. The experimental conditions will attempt to mimic the physiological
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance understanding of the
natural processes involved in dopamine release, its impact on processes involved
in physiological behavior. The U.S. and French investigators will share their
complementary expertise in electrophysiological techniques (O'Donnell's group),
electrochemical monitoring of dopamine release (Gonon's group) and
anatomofunctional techniques (Gonon's group).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will cover the costs of visits
to France by the U.S. investigator and his team. The CNRS provides support to
the French team for visits to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;