* 0340287
* SBIR Phase I:     Efficient Electro-Optical Modulators for Microwave-Photonic Links
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Jenyu Fan, Adtech Optics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,927.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
developing a new type of lightwave transmitter based on the frequency modulation
technique. Using the system FM (frequency modulation) gain to overcome the very
high radio frequency (RF) insertion loss of optical fiber links, the transmitter
should be able to achieve very low voltage operations (estimated to be 0.1V).
Furthermore, the laser source and the equivalent modulator could be integrated
in a small lightweight chip with a low production cost. The initial study has
shown that it is possible to achieve &gt;10 dB RF insertion gain at a &lt; 0 dBm
optical power and with a high spur-free dynamic range (SFDR) of &gt; 90 dB-Hz
2/3 and low noise. The result of this work will be the design and development of
an integrated chip. With the successful development of the proposed modulator,
it should be possible to manufacture very high bandwidth, high efficiency, low
voltage?, and low RF insertion loss integrated laser/modulator
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the activity should lead to a
marketable product covering the needs of both the military and commercial
sectors. For military applications, low-loss RF signal transmissions, RF delay
lines, and signal processing units would be the immediate target area of this
application because of the great advantages of optical fibers in transmission
bandwidth, immunity to electro-magnetic (EM) interference, and size as well as
weight. The impact on commercial applications should result in, a low cost, high
link budget analog AM CATV optical transmitter with more program channels (200
channels) based on this modulator technique. It could also serve metropolitan
sized areas with more program channels and with lower operating and equipment
costs. &lt;br/&gt;