* 0340536
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Theory of Grain Boundaries and Surfaces of High Temperature Superconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 37,000.00

0340536&lt;br/&gt;Hirschfeld&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Peter Hirschfeld and
students from the University Florida in a collaboration with Thilo Kopp of the
Department of Physics at the University of Augsburg, Germany and Yuri Barash of
the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology in Russia. The collaboration will
investigate a series of problems related to surface properties of d-wave
superconductors relevant to cuprate and other novel materials displaying
unconventional superconductivity. The scientific problems include the modeling
of grain boundaries in correlated (normal and superconducting) systems to
predict transport properties and extract information regarding unconventional
superconducting and magnetic order parameter symmetry. In recent years it has
become clear that other ordered states besides d-wave superconductivity are
relatively low in energy, and may manifest themselves when the d-wave order is
suppressed, e.g., at surfaces, grain boundaries, or regions of disorder.
Nanoscale inhomogeneity in electronic structure has recently been observed in
the BSCCO-2212 system, and there is some evidence that this disorder may not
only be intrinsic, but may provide an important clue to the origin of high-Tc
superconductivity. Phenomenological studies of surfaces and grains will aid in
understanding the origin of these nanoscale
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the proposal&lt;br/&gt;There
are enormous practical implications for superconducting microwave and power
applications if the grain boundary problem can be solved. At present the effect
limiting the critical current Jc in wires and tapes appears to be the presence
of grain boundaries in all samples. It is not currently understood at a
fundamental level why there is an exponential suppression of Jc with the
misorientation angle between grains, but it is clear that the d-wave symmetry of
the order parameter is a crucial factor. Simple phenomenological pictures are
known to fail, and if the proposed investigations can provide an answer, this
important obstacle to applications will be overcome. The broader impact of the
proposal also includes the educational benefits to the US graduate students, who
will be trained in an international setting in methods pertaining to these
problems. Benefits to a wider community will accrue in the sense that many of
the ideas discussed also pertain to several classes of novel superconductors
under intense scientific scrutiny, including the organic superconductors,
ruthenates, heavy fermions and borocarbides. Results will be disseminated
through publications, the PI's web site, and seminars at the University of
Florida and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;