* 0340149
* SBIR Phase I:     Feasibility of Chiral Fiber Polarizer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Dan Neugroschl, CHIRAL PHOTONICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate
the feasibility of a new class of in-fiber polarizers and polarization
converters based upon chiral optical fibers. Helical birefringence is imparted
to these optical waveguides by twisting fibers with noncircular cores as they
pass through a miniature oven. Thus thesechiral fiber gratings (CFGs) do not
require coherent irradiation of photosensitive glass, which is used to process
fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs), but rather are created in a versatile continuous
process from specially prepared glass preforms. They are true fiber devices and
do not require any substrates, bulk components, or rigid package. Both the
polarizer and polarization converter will be based on CFGs with a pitch of tens
of microns. These CFG-based devices, which will be fabricated at dramatically
reduced cost, will permit the control of the polarization of transmitted light
with high extinction ratio over broad or narrow spectral ranges as dictated by
the application. They will have broad application in telecommunications to
polarization mode dispersion (PMD) compensation, wavelength- division
multiplexing (WDM), and Faraday rotators. Polarizers are also key to sensors
relying on optical interference such as
gyroscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polarization and frequency selective chiral
fibers have applications ranging from telecommunications to sensing. The use of
external modulators for high bandwidth fiber telecommunication requires that the
incident wave be linearly polarized. This necessitates use of a polarizer since
laser sources used in telecommunications generally have random polarization.
Further any use of polarization maintaining fiber requires that polarized light
be launched into the fiber. Polarizers are also key components in PMD
compensation systems. The versatile chiral polarizers may be fabricated from
refractory or radiation resistive glasses so that they may function in harsh
environments with high levels of radiation, high temperature, or corrosive
chemicals.