* 0340566
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Coherent Tevahertz(THz) Emission from Laser-Induced Ultrafast Demagnetization of Ferromagnetic Films
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Charles Schmuttenmaer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 15,455.00

0340566&lt;br/&gt;Schmuttenmaer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin dynamics in magnetic
materials is of great importance for understanding their properties and for
technical applications in computer memory and storage. This three-year award for
U.S.-France cooperative research addresses the characterization of magnetic
materials using ultra fast demagnetization methods. The U.S. team led by Charles
A. Schmuttenmaer of Yale University has expertise in the generation and
detection of Terahertz (THz) radiation and spectroscopy. The French group,
headed by Eric Beaurepaire and Jean-Yves Bigot at the Universite de Strasbourg
is expert at fabricating, analyzing, and understanding magnetism in
ferroelectric thin films. Together they will characterize the dynamics of
demagnetization when a ferroelectric thin film is heated with an ultra fast
laser pulse. The project involves the use of THz spectroscopy. U.S. graduate
students will benefit from training in THz radiation and spectroscopy and in
techniques developed by the French group for designing and characterizing new
ferromagnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is jointly supported
by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will provide support for visits by the U.S.
investigator and graduate students. The CNRS covers expenses for visits to the
United States by the French investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;