* 0340700
* US-France Joint Workshop:  Genome Analysis of the Plant Pathogen, Erwinia Chrysanthemi 3937, Madison, Wisconsin, June 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Nicole Perna, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,447.00

0340700 Perna

A U.S.-France joint workshop, entitled "The Genome Analysis of the Plant
Pathogen, Erwinia chrysanthemi 3937," will be held in Madison, Wisconsin in June
of 2004. The primary goal of this workshop of French and American scientists and
graduate students is to promote and coordinate cooperative activities in post-
genome sequencing. The participants previously met in Lyon, France in 2002 to
discuss the sequence and annotation of the Erwinia 3937 genome. The Wisconsin
2004 workshop will cover the following topics: how to keep the genome
annotations up-to-date as new information about genome functions is obtained and
how to design and obtain resources such as DNA microarrays that will be useful
to the entire community of Erwinia biologists. In addition, the meeting will
provide an opportunity for Erwinia biologists to plot a course for future
genome-scale research.

Erwinia chrysanthemi is a pathogenic bacteria associated with soft-rot and wilt
of a wide variety of plant hosts. It generates heavy economic losses because it
can destroy major crops like potatoes, carrots, and endives. In addition, E.
chrysanthemi is a model for the study of several fundamental bacterial
mechanisms. Comparisons with related animal pathogens will further understanding
of survival mechanisms, causes of bacteria-related disease, and identification
of genes implicated in plant/bacteria interactions.

The workshop, co-chaired by Nicole Perna of the University of Wisconsin and Guy
Condemine of the Institut National des Sciences Appliquees de Lyon, is jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will provide support to the U.S.
participants, including a cohort of graduate students. The CNRS will cover the
travel costs of the French researchers.