* 0340984
* Collaborative Project: Integrating Information Technology in the Industrial Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Mary Kurz, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 12/31/2005
* USD 29,943.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) This is a collaborative project between
the University of Florida and Clemson University with award numbers of 0341203
and 0340984, respectively. The project is developing two of the most valuable
skills that students need today to enter the IT-dominated workplace; the ability
to extract data from external sources and to embed analytical decision models
within larger systems. This project is producing educational materials that
integrate information technology (IT) with industrial engineering and operations
research (IE/OR) curricula. The materials guide guiding students through the
process of learning how to develop intelligent information systems, or decision
support systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten instructional modules are being
prepared to provide instruction on developing decision support systems using
databases and spreadsheets and to illustrate the use of decision support systems
in the practice of IE/OR. The most innovative feature of the instructional
material is the use of case studies and team projects that illustrate (1) how
information systems arise in the practice of IE/OR, and (2) how IE/OR techniques
can be used to build intelligent information systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quiz
and examination materials are being prepared for each of the ten modules to
provide direct evidence of student achievement of learning. An industry panel
and faculty members from eight universities who teach IE/OR are participating in
the assessment process. The materials are being disseminated through conference
presentations and faculty training workshops. The goal of these activities is to
facilitate the development of several information-systems-development courses in
the IE/OR departments at multiple universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;