* 0340384
* SBIR Phase I:     Filtering Objectionable Imagery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Stuart Blundell, VISUAL LEARNING SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes a new and
innovative approach for filtering objectionable image content distributed on the
Internet. As Internet usage in the workplace has increased, companies have had
to deal with issues such as loss of productivity, unnecessary bandwidth usage
and legal liability due to employees viewing objectionable image content. This
project provides an automated, intelligent, object recognition solution that
understands objectionable image content based on attributes beyond, for example,
skin color. The research leverages the award-winning machine learning technology
for object-recognition in imagery. The methodology is widely recognized within
the industry as the first instance of an adaptive software agent technology
capable of object recognition through both spectral and spatial processing of
image attributes. This project will leverage this technology to develop a visual
content filter. The system will not only be able to filter objectionable
imagery, it will also provide solutions for filtering any image content, or
inversely, providing a user-specific profile for finding imagery of a user's
choice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Internet usage in the workplace continues to
increase, the research has strong benefits for government and private industry.
The anticipated results are an adaptable commercial system that will continually
improve the filtering of objectionable imagery from the database.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;