* 0341754
* U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research:  Lyapunov Exponents and Spectrum for Random and Nonautonomous Parabolic Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Wenxian Shen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,600.00

This is a U.S.-Polish cooperative research project that focuses on the links
between the spectrum of a given parabolic system and its Lyapunov exponent. The
principal investigators are Dr. Wenxian Shen from Auburn University and
Professor Janusz Mierczynski from Wroclaw University of Technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to investigate
spectrum/Lyapunov exponents for nonautonomous/random parabolic equations and to
study their applications. In nature, many systems are subject to time
dependence. Such dependence may be neither periodic nor quasi-periodic or almost
periodic. Systems with such time dependence are characterized more appropriately
by nonautonomous or random equations. It is therefore of great importance to
study general nonautonomous and random equations. The proposed research focuses
on the development of linear theory, namely spectrum/Lyapunov exponents theory,
for nonautonomous/random parabolic equations. Such theory would have important
applications to nonlinear equations. The most obvious of these is its role
played in the analysis of the stability of certain special solutions of
nonlinear parabolic equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in mathematics
research fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in
the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of
equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.