* 0341412
* Assessing the effects of calcite saturation on the benthic foraminiferal Mg/Ca-temperature relationship using a homothermal depth transect in the Norwegian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Yair Rosenthal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 04/30/2007
* USD 259,663.00

Under this award the PIs will be address the question: What is the effect of
calcite saturation on the Mg/Ca - temperature relationship in benthic
foraminifera?&lt;br/&gt;They propose an 11 day cruise in the Norwegian Sea to
collect about 30 multi-cores and 15 giant gravity cores that cover a range of
calcite saturation levels at constant temperature and salinity. Benthic
foraminiferal Mg/Ca from lightly saturated waters display a steep decrease with
increasing water depth. The current global Mg/Ca-temperature relationship can
only explain a fraction of the decrease, leading to the hypothesis that the
degree of calcite saturation also affects benthic foraminiferal Mg/Ca at the low
temperatures typical of the&lt;br/&gt;majority of the deep ocean. The depth
transect from the homothermal and homohaline Norwegian Sea, that was previously
studied by Mackensen et al., (1985) provides an ideal opportunity not only to
test the hypothesis, but also to quantify the Mg/Ca - calcite saturation
relationship at low temperatures. The PI propose to reoccupy the sites that were
used for the Mackensen et al. 1985 faunal study (). Based on that study, they
expect a high abundance of live benthic foraminifera. To further test their
hypothesis they propose studying two down-core records (one spanning the HL-LGM
transition at 150 yr resolution and one record spanning 0 to 35 ka at 250 yr
resolution). Because Norwegian Sea's bottom water temperature (BWT) is close to
freezing, they expect little Glacial-Interglacial variation. Any significant
down-core change would suggest additional control on Mg/Ca ratios in benthic
foraminifera. &lt;br/&gt;