* 0341826
* Collaborative Research: Cosmology with the Lyman Alpha Forest
* MPS,AST
* 04/10/2003,06/30/2005
* Matias Zaldarriaga, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2005
* USD 57,555.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;AST 0098506&lt;br/&gt;Zaldarriaga&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a Collaborative Research Project with Lam Hui (0098437) of Columbia
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The light from a quasar (also called a qso)
often has multiple dips in intensity, or absorption lines, at positions
corresponding to the redshifted Lyman alpha line (at rest wavelength 1216
angstroms) from neutral hydrogen. These often occur as a series of absorption
lines, called the Lyman alpha forest. The redshift is caused by the expansion of
the universe. If we can calculate&lt;br/&gt;how the universe is expanding (based
on a cosmological model), we can tell where the photons were absorbed in
relation to us. Thus, we can use the absorption map to plot the positions
of&lt;br/&gt;clouds of intervening hydrogen between the quasar and us. The
clouds in the Lyman alpha systems are not very massive compared to objects like
galaxies. Because of this, reliable computer simulations (numerical experiments)
of their gravitational collapse (formation) from primordial fluctuations are
possible. These Lyman alpha forest simulations produce structure similar to what
we see in the nearby universe (filaments, walls, and voids ) by starting with
small fluctuations in matter density and then letting gravity and other known
forces act. These detailed calculations of the structure and distribution of
matter are at the frontiers of current research and &lt;br/&gt;these recent
advances in computer modeling have made it possible to use observations of the
Lyman-alpha forest at redshifts between 2 and 4 as powerful cosmological tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forest has offered, and will continue to offer,
interesting constraints on many quantities such as the amplitude and shape of
the primordial mass power spectrum, the neutrino mass, the matter density, the
cosmological constant, and the reionization epoch. These constraints, in
conjunction with those from other observations, provide important checks on our
fundamental understanding of cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
primarily focus on the "transmission power spectrum", a statistic used in
cosmological models which is directly observable. The program has two
goals:&lt;br/&gt;1) Examination of fundamental assumptions: The project will
test several methods to address questions about the influence of continuum-
fitting in determining the measured fluctuations in the forest , the
interpretation of these fluctuations in terms of mass fluctuations resulting
from gravitational instability, and the effect of fluctuations in the ionizing
background and the effective equation of state of the intergalactic medium on
the interpretation.&lt;br/&gt; 2) Maximizing the scientific return from the
data: To this end the program will address redshift-distortions, (which affect
both the program of mass power spectrum recovery, as well as&lt;br/&gt;the
ability to measure the cosmological constant through its geometrical distortion
of the&lt;br/&gt;correlation function), degeneracies among parameters (by
performing a full likelihood analysis&lt;br/&gt;which will reveal the
degeneracies in the 4 to 6 free parameters in the current model of the forest),
and obtaining a better understanding of the thermal history of the universe, (by
using the drop in temperature with time after reionization to infer or at least
limit the epoch of reionization from measurements of the temperature using the
small-scale cut-off of the transmission power&lt;br/&gt;spectrum at redshifts
between 2 and 4.)&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project was provided by the NSF
program for Extragalactic Astronomy &amp; Cosmology
(AST/EXC).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;