* 0341821
* Global Sea Level and Late Cretaceous to Miocene Sequences: New Jersey Coastal Plain Drilling Project
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Robert Fraser, UNITED STATES DEPT OF GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
* Interagency Agreement
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 144,000.00

0341821 Fraser

Successful drilling onshore in the New Jersey Coastal Plain (by the PI and his
colleagues) and offshore on the NJ shelf and slope (ODP) has provided: 1) ages
for major Late Cretaceous-Cenozoic sequence boundaries; 2) causal links between
the formation of sequence boundaries and the growth of ice sheets between 42 and
10 Ma, and evidence that such a link exists in the older, supposedly "ice-free"
world; 3) estimates of the amplitudes of global sea-level changes; 4) evaluation
of links among sequence stratigraphic architecture, global sea-level variations,
and margin evolution; and 5) constraints on the causes of major global events in
Earth history, including the middle Eocene-earliest Oligocene global cooling,
the late Paleocene thermal maximum, the K/T boundary, early and late
Maastrichtian events, and the Cenomanian/Turonian carbon extraction event.

Backstripping results of sequences at Bass River and Ancora, NJ accounts for the
effects of sediment loading, compaction, paleodepth, and basin subsidence,
providing a new eustatic estimate. The PI's studies indicate that large (>25m)
and rapid (<<1m.y.) eustatic variations occurred in the Late Cretaceous
Greenhouse world. This requires that either small ice sheets paced sea-level
changes during this time, or our understanding of causal mechanisms for global
sea-level change is fundamentally flawed. Foraminiferal oxygen isotope changes
are consistent with a glacioeustatic cause. This award will allow the PIs to
take advantage of an opportunity for joint funding and collaboration with the
New Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS) and the US Geological Survey (USGS) by
drilling a borehole on the coast of NJ near Manasquan, NJ that will provide the
thickest marine Upper Cretaceous section in the region and tie to offshore MCS
profiles obtained in 2002. These seismic profiles cross thick marine Upper
Cretaceous strata, revealing sequence stratigraphic geometries for this
Greenhouse interval; drilling at Manasquan will provide detailed age and facies
controls on these seismic sequences. In addition, the NJGS is funding drilling
costs for Upper Cretaceous targets at Millville, NJ (1500 ft) and Batsto, NJ
(1500 ft.). Together, these 5 sites will provide updip-downdip and along-strike
transects that will fully characterize the ages, facies, and distribution of
Late Cretaceous sequences.

The USGS Eastern Earth Surface Processes Team will drill a 1600 ft. borehole at
Manasquan; and will follow this with a 1500-1600 ft. borehole at Batsto in
Spring 2004