* 0341840
* SGER:  Compliant Actuation for Human-Machine Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Thomas Sugar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junku Yuh
* 07/31/2004
* USD 52,361.00

Robotics and Computer Vision Program&lt;br/&gt;Division of Information and
Intelligent
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER
Proposal 0341840&lt;br/&gt;Compliant Actuation for Human-Machine
Interaction&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thomas Sugar&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. T.
Sugar will conduct one year of study in actively controlling compliance and
designing and constructing actuators that physically interact with the user. The
study of compliant actuation is an essential part of integrated systems that
will aid users in locomotion and standing from a sitting position, and offers a
rich framework for exploratory research. Novel designs for compliant actuators
for powered orthotics and mobile assistants will be developed. These actuators
will allow for safe compliant human-interactions. The research activities will
lay the groundwork for the development of rehabilitation aids for the elderly.
&lt;br/&gt;New, selective-compliant actuators based on dynamically changing the
equilibrium position of springs will lead to more functional human robotic
interactions. The proposed research will overcome the outlined challenges that
include the tradeoff between precision, bandwidth, and compliance, and the
robust sensing of forces. From this research, the next generation of interfaces
will be developed for users to interact with personal robotic
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;