* 0341982
* Collaborative Research: Meshless Methods: Mathematical Foundations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Osborn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 246,386.00

Recently Meshless Methods, and the closely related Generalized&lt;br/&gt;Finite
Element Methods, for the numerical solution of partial&lt;br/&gt;differential
equations came into the forefront of interest,&lt;br/&gt;especially in the
engineering community. For example, in the last&lt;br/&gt;two years several
engineering books on the subject&lt;br/&gt;appeared, an international conference
was organized, and many&lt;br/&gt;engineering papers were published. These
methods generalize the&lt;br/&gt;classical Finite Element Method in that they
are neither based on a &lt;br/&gt;mesh nor on classical polynomial
approximation. The theoretical underpinning&lt;br/&gt;and general state of the
art for these methods is similar to that&lt;br/&gt;of the Finite Element Method
in the 1960s, when already&lt;br/&gt;engineering computations based on heuristic
principles were done,&lt;br/&gt;but the theory had not been developed. This
research will address&lt;br/&gt;the theoretical and implementational basis of
these methods in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction with applications. The most important
feature of Meshless &lt;br/&gt;Methods is their flexibility and potential. It is
a challenge to &lt;br/&gt;employ this flexibility to achieve their potential:
the solution of&lt;br/&gt;today's complex problems, with the consideration of
the rapidly&lt;br/&gt;decreasing ratio of cost of computer arithmetical
operations to&lt;br/&gt;the human effort. These issues will be investigated in
this research &lt;br/&gt;project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
proposal lies in the mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;computational science aspects of
Meshless Methods. The broader&lt;br/&gt;mathematical impact includes the
understanding of these methods&lt;br/&gt;and their potential, which will be
directly reflected in the&lt;br/&gt;performance of the methods on complex
problems of solid and&lt;br/&gt;fluid mechanics, for example, multiscale
problems. It is likely&lt;br/&gt;that the development of the mathematical
foundation of Meshless&lt;br/&gt;Methods will have similar or larger impact than
the mathematical&lt;br/&gt;development of the 1970s and 1980s had on the Finite
Element Method.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this proposal is in its
simultaneous&lt;br/&gt;consideration of mathematical theory, modeling of
engineering and&lt;br/&gt;scientific problems, computational issues, and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;computational experience.&lt;br/&gt;