* 0342742
* Purchase of a Stopped Flow Optical Spectrometer with Freeze-Quench Capability
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Hyung Kim, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wade N. Sisk
* 01/31/2007
* USD 104,040.00

With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
(CRIF) Program, the Department of Chemistry at Carnegie-Mellon University will
acquire a stopped flow optical spectrometer with freeze-quench capability. This
equipment will enhance research in the following areas: a) studies on the effect
of spin states on the electron transfer rates for a series of iron complexes; b)
synthesis and characterization of oxidation catalysts based on organometallic
iron complexes; c) studies of hemes groups in the protein hydroxylamine
oxidoreductase; d) synthesis of peptide nucleic acids; e) studies of self-
assembled nanostructures from dye molecules aggregated on DNA; and f) protein
structure and function studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopy is most
commonly used to characterize the equilibrium properties of a system. This
method can also be used to study the chemical reactivity of molecules by
comparing spectra before and after reaction. However, to fully understand the
scope and mechanism of reactivity for a given compound, it is important to study
it in real time. The stopped-flow instrumentation will allow several faculty
members and their students to study the kinetics of molecular recognition
processes and chemical reactions for a variety of projects that interface
chemistry with the biological, materials and environmental sciences. &lt;br/&gt;