* 0342849
* Workshop:   Restructured Power System Reliability and Security:    Building a Mathematical Paradigm With New Analytical &amp; Computational Tools;  Sept. 24-26, 2003; Washington, D
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2005
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 09/30/2005
* USD 80,000.00

This proposal requests funding to run a workshop on applied mathematical aspects
of power systems under restructuring, focusing on reliability and security. The
workshop has several objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. It will provide a forum
for the interchange of ideas between power system researchers and applied
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The workshop focus is of prime
importance, namely, the reliability and security in a restructured power system.
Three main themes have been identified: (a) optimization of restructured power
system operation, (b) system stability and dynamic performance, and (c)
computational intelligence methods. Experts in optimization methods, control
theory, and artificial intelligence will be invited to give presentations on the
new advances that have high potential of fruitful power system
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To motivate the workshop, an article on
open problems of reliability and security in restructured power systems will be
written jointly by the organizers (JHC and FFW) and the NSF program director,
and be distributed to the workshop participants to help them prepare their
presentations. In addition, each presenter will be asked to prepare an article
before the workshop, such that the conference activities can be recorded in a
monograph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a continuation of Reliability and Security
Workshop, a Strategic US-Africa Research-Education Planning Workshop is proposed
to bring together about 15 researchers from US and a comparable number of
African researchers to discuss research and training ideas and then to
prioritize the activities, to jump start the US-Africa Research-Education
Exchange Initiative program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The
Security and Reliability Workshop will cultivate the exchange of ideas between
researchers in several distinct communities: the power system researchers who
are more problem-driven and practical, versus the applied mathematicians who
have stronger theoretical and computational bases. We anticipate the cross
fertilization of new ideas will establish a mathematical paradigm in power
system research in which new analytical and computational tools will play a
dominant role in improving the reliable and secure operation of a deregulated
electric power market. The Strategic US-Africa Research-Education Planning
Workshop will lay out a roadmap of network research and training, setting
priorities on a large number of research, training, and development
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: We encourage a diversity of
participants at the Security and Reliability Workshop. We will invite women
faculty and faculty from underrepresented groups to participate. Young faculty
members are of particular interest because the workshop may help to shape their
research and careers. Although the number of participants of the workshop may be
limited, the workshop monograph and web site will help to extend the benefits to
the power system and applied mathematics community at large. An undergraduate
student, preferably a minority, will be supported to develop and maintain the
workshop web site and to help coordinate the compilation of the articles for the
monograph. The Strategic US-Africa Research-Education Planning Workshop will
potentially propel the research activities of universities in several African
countries to a much higher level, which will have a spillover effect to other
universities and to other African countries. The social and economic benefits of
this Workshop can be substantial.&lt;br/&gt;