* 0342844
* New Condensed-Phase Approaches for Soot Formation, Aging, and Burnout
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Robert Hurt, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 01/31/2008
* USD 271,493.00

This project on combustion-generated soot focuses on the complex carbonaceous
condensed phases present in flames using concepts and tools developed for other
carbon materials in the P.I.'s laboratory. The new tools include direct
measurement of dynamic active-site loss at high temperatures and short times,
the use of distributed activation energy formulations to understand and model
both reactivity loss (aging) and oxidation, and the use of atomic pair-potential
simulations to investigate higher polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)
interactions. New distributed-site kinetic models are being applied to soot
oxidation to resolve the long-standing paradox in the field of apparent power-
law kinetics and to unify the kinetic database at high and low temperatures. A
key modeling concept is the description of the condensed phases not as solids or
liquids, but as polymeric glassy phases with variable nanostructural mobility
that governs the transition from coalescence to agglomeration. The project
includes a novel experimental task employing new aromatic-rich C/H nanoparticles
synthesized in the P.I.'s laboratory as the first physicochemical models for
young soot particles in flames. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion-generated soot
is a respirable, ultrafine particulate material that carries known carcinogens
and mutagens and is thus a key atmospheric pollutant. The reduction of soot
emissions from diesel engines is a particularly challenging goal for U.S.
vehicle manufacturers. Attempts to reduce soot emission from vehicles and
furnaces focus on control of the flame chemistry and structure or on capture of
particulates and subsequent low-temperature oxidation. For the design of both
types of soot-control measures, a better understanding is needed of the
structure, properties, and reactivity of the soot particles themselves from
their first detection as recognizable condensed organic matter in the early
stages of flames to their final release as fractal aggregates of fully
carbonized and partially oxidized nanoparticles. This project applies the most
modern approaches in carbon science to the understanding and characterization of
the various stages of soot formation, evolution, and burnout. &lt;br/&gt;