* 0342796
* Understanding the Role of Clay Mineral Surface Interactions in Pressure Solution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* James Boles, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2008
* USD 384,978.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal combines three disciplines -
geology, materials and colloidal science - to study micamineral surface
interactions at the outcrop, microscopic, submicroscopic, and molecular levels.
This work is motivated by geologic and very recent laboratory observations
(described here) on quartz dissolution at quartz-clay minerals interfaces and on
growth of carbonate crystals on mica cleavages. &lt;br/&gt;Initial experimental
investigations using advanced surface force-measuring instruments have allowed
us to measure the short-range electrostatic, 'hydration' and other forces
between mica surfaces at the angstrom level, and the diffusion rates of ions
into the mica-fluid-mica interfaces for fluid compositions and pressures
comparable to natural geological conditions. The results show that the diffusion
rate is sensitive to fluid composition (for sodium and calcium). They also imply
that diffusion of ions is probably not the rate limiting step in mass transfer
within thin fluid films, as has been proposed to explain enhanced quartz
pressure solution when associated with clay minerals. Rather, the rate-limiting
step appears to be the reaction (binding and exchange) of ions with the mineral
surface. Preliminary results show a strong effect of mica on the dissolution of
a quartz surface pressured against it in water containing electrolyte, which is
not observed in symmetrical mica-mica or silica-silica systems. We have measured
retreat (dissolution) of the quartz surface at rates up to 1,500A per day
(1A/min).&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is largely due to the
use of the Surface Forces Apparatus (SFA) to directly measure surface
interactions, surface dissolution, ionic transport, binding and exchange rates,
and crystal growth in various aqueous salt solutions. The SFA has proved to be a
novel and accurate way to quantify dynamic and kinetic processes. This is the
first time that experiments have been performed to mimic geologic phenomena
providing answers for various crucial questions in earth sciences. The fact that
the preferential growth of carbonate crystals between the mica cleavages could
be directly observed, and to be analogous to natural occurrences, is amazing and
reflects the importance for future work. Experiments involving biotite-biotite
and quartz-mica systems will continue and elucidate the processes related to
pressure solution. Surfaces of natural and experimental materials will be
analyzed by SEM, AFM, microprobe, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and
Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS). Our experimental conditions will be
guided by and the results compared with geologic samples representing a wide
range of geologic age, fluid composition and temperature-pressure conditions.
The theoretical basis for predicting these and other type of interactions are at
present unknown. However, this work will include theoretical analysis of our
findings by Prof. Uzi Landman (Georgia Tech) and Prof. Sidney Yip (MIT), who are
experts in the area of computer simulations (modeling) of electrochemical
reactions and corrosion of surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
research comprises basic understanding of mineral-fluid-mineral interactions
when dissimilar minerals are in close contact. Applications in geological
sciences include explaining the role of clay minerals and electrolyte ions in
pressure solution/precipitation of quartz. In other fields such as material
science the work is relevant to corrosion, the 'colloidal processing' of
composites and water-based ceramic materials, biomineralization and mixed
colloidal particle dispersions. The proposed research plan provides an ideal
educational platform for students entering diverse fields, for instance,
increasing the interest of geology students in the material and surface
sciences, and of materials and engineering students in earth sciences at the
laboratory, fieldwork and theoretical levels. Additionally, a female Hispanic
will be directly involved in this project since she has been trained to perform
detail characterization of mineral surfaces using the SFA, XPS, AFM and SEM.
This project will support student participation at meetings both in geochemistry
and materials owing to the broad interest of this proposal. This project will
include direct communication with the Smithsonian museum in Washington since our
results are related to samples on display; they have also provided biotite
samples for the studies proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;