* 0342290
* ITR:     Computational Design of Strongly Correlated Materials Based on a Combination of the Dynamical Mean Field and the GW Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Sergey Savrasov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

This award was made on a 'small' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports collaborative computational and
theoretical research between groups at New Jersey Institute of Technology and
Rutgers University through award #0312478 that aims for a more realistic theory
of strongly correlated electron materials. The PIs aim to construct a
computational approach for the study, design and visualization of properties of
materials containing strongly correlated electron systems. The theoretical
foundations of this work are based on a non-perturbative many-body method
involving on a combination of dynamical mean field and GW theories, which can
yield material-specific predictions and interpretation of properties of solids.
The PIs' objectives are to: (a) implement this approach using the high-
performance, all-electron, full-potential, relativistic linear-muffin-tin
orbital (LMTO) code for crystals, slabs, and periodic polymers called "LMTART;"
(b) enhance performance so that Green functions, self-energies, and polarization
operators on the frequency axis can be handled for complicated systems with many
atoms per unit cell; (c) design and implement user-friendly interfaces and
visualization capabilities for calculations of correlated electronic systems,
creating a fast, powerful, database enabled and Web integrated Material
Information and Design Laboratory (MINDLab) for the benefit and use in physics,
material science, engineering, and educational communities; (e) test and apply
this information technology enabled quantum many-body theory tool by tackling
frontier problems of material science such as computational design of magnetic
semiconductors and interpretation of de Haas van Alphen experiments in heavy
fermion systems. MINDLab would enhance the infrastructure for research and
education; it has the potential to advance discovery and understanding of
materials while promoting teaching, training and learning through powerful
visualization techniques. %%% This award was made on a 'small' category proposal
submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. It supports
collaborative computational and theoretical research between groups at Rutgers
University and New Jersey Institute of Technology through award #0342290 that
aims for a more realistic theory of strongly correlated electron materials.
Strongly correlated electron materials display unusual phenomena such as high-
temperature superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance, giant optical non-
linearities and large thermoelectric coefficients. These systems are at the
frontier of materials science, and the variety of behavior they exhibit as well
as their complexity makes their study intellectually challenging, and the
prospects for applications exciting. The PIs aim to construct a computational
approach for the study, design and visualization of properties of materials
containing strongly correlated electron systems To tackle the complexity of real
materials new theoretical methods, algorithms, and computer programs will be
developed. By means of these novel information technology tools for computation
and data generation, technologically relevant compounds containing many atoms
per unit cell may be studied at a fundamental level while also including
important material-specific detail. Data visualization enables access to more
abstract theoretical quantities required to capture the physics of electronic
correlation. The PIs' objectives include the design and implementation of a
computational tool for correlated electronic systems, a fast, powerful, database
enabled and Web integrated Material Information and Design Laboratory (MINDLab).
MINDLab would enhance the infrastructure for research and education; it has the
potential to advance discovery and understanding of materials while promoting
teaching, training and learning through powerful visualization techniques. ***