* 0342028
* Engineering Contexts and Concepts for Developing and Promoting Students' Higher Level Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Richard Lesh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,997.00

This Bridges for Engineering Education planning grant project consists of
collaboration between the faculty in the Schools of Engineering and Education at
Purdue University along with middle and high school (6-12 grade level) teachers
with the goal of using engineering contexts and concepts to develop
instructional settings (tasks and pedagogy) to promote higher level learning
(e.g., abilities to problem solve, reason, create models, and perform critical
analysis) for undergraduate students and middle and high school students. The
goal is to strengthen and extend existing informal collaborations between
Engineering, Education, and K-12 schools to develop a coherent, focused, and
integrated research and development program for the purpose of improving the
teaching of undergraduate engineering and to use engineering contexts and
concepts to enhance mathematics and science education in 6-12 education. This
project will involve: &lt;br/&gt;o Setting the stage for a novel coherent and
integrated education program &lt;br/&gt;o Development of prototypical model-
eliciting activities using engineering contexts and concepts for undergraduate
engineering students &lt;br/&gt;o Development of innovative pedagogical
environments for undergraduate engineering students - small group and class
discussions &lt;br/&gt;o Development of prototypical model-eliciting activities
using engineering contexts and concepts for middle and high school students
&lt;br/&gt;o Realization of a framework for a novel coherent and integrated
education program . &lt;br/&gt;