* 0342832
* Symmetry Principles in Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Shou-Cheng Zhang, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2008
* USD 616,000.00

This award supports research on theoretical condensed matter physics. The
physics of strong electronic correlation remains one of the most active fields
of research in condensed matter physics. These correlation effects often give
rise to novel states of matter, such as superconductivity, magnetism and quantum
Hall effect. Because these systems involve many strongly coupled degrees of
freedom, traditional approaches based on perturbative expansions of a small
parameter do not work. In this situation, symmetry principles and topological
structures often prove to be extremely useful to organize the low-energy degrees
of freedom and to extract non-perturbative information. Successful application
of symmetry principles in condensed matter physics will not only help to solve
the problems at had, but also deeply impact our understanding of the physical
world at its most fundamental level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
contains three components: the SO(5) theory of high-temperature
superconductivity, generalization of the quantum Hall effect to higher
dimensions, and dissipationless spin currents in quantum spintronics.
Motivations for these research topics originate from diverse sub-fields of
physics, ranging from fundamental unity of laws of physics to practical
applications in quantum semiconductor devices. Yet all of these seemingly
different topics are tied together by a common mathematical thread and an
unified physical principle. Successful execution of this diversified research
program will not only invigorate our theoretical understanding of strongly
correlated systems and enable practical applications of a new generation of
quantum devices, but also educate a generation of students with broad interests
and skill sets in all aspects of theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research on theoretical condensed matter physics.
The physics of strong electronic correlation remains one of the most active
fields of research in condensed matter physics. These correlation effects often
give rise to novel states of matter, such as superconductivity, magnetism and
quantum Hall effect. Because these systems involve many strongly coupled degrees
of freedom, traditional approaches based on perturbative expansions of a small
parameter do not work. In this situation, symmetry principles and topological
structures often prove to be extremely useful to organize the low-energy degrees
of freedom and to extract non-perturbative information. Successful application
of symmetry principles in condensed matter physics will not only help to solve
the problems at had, but also deeply impact our understanding of the physical
world at its most fundamental level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
contains three components: the SO(5) theory of high-temperature
superconductivity, generalization of the quantum Hall effect to higher
dimensions, and dissipationless spin currents in quantum spintronics.
Motivations for these research topics originate from diverse sub-fields of
physics, ranging from fundamental unity of laws of physics to practical
applications in quantum semiconductor devices. Yet all of these seemingly
different topics are tied together by a common mathematical thread and an
unified physical principle. Successful execution of this diversified research
program will not only invigorate our theoretical understanding of strongly
correlated systems and enable practical applications of a new generation of
quantum devices, but also educate a generation of students with broad interests
and skill sets in all aspects of theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;