* 0342276
*                                                                                                                                         Structure Function Correlation of G-Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Arieh Warshel, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2009
* USD 565,000.00

The objective of this research is to explore the general molecular basis for the
action of G-proteins. This will include: a) continuing studies of the role of
the catalytic Gln61 in the RasGAP system and extending it to other related
systems such as Gas, Gia1, and RanGAP, where related glutamine residues play a
major catalytic role. b) Conducting a comparative study of the action of
different G-proteins, focusing on transducin, EF-Tu, Gas and Gia1. c)
Establishing the relationship between the structures of complexes of G-proteins
and TS analogues (TSAs) and the structure of actual transition states (TSs). d)
Conducting studies of the mechanism and energetics of F1-ATPase. e) Examining
the effect of protein-protein interaction on signal transduction in the Ras/Raf
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of structural information about G
proteins and their accessory proteins offers a unique opportunity for a more
complete understanding of the factors that control signal transduction. This
requires a quantitative structure function correlation that can convert the
available structural information to activation energies and therefore to the
relevant rate constants and catalytic effects. The objective of this project is
to further develop such correlations and explore the general mechanism of signal
transducing G proteins and energy transducing proteins like F1-ATPase. These
studies are expected to advance the understanding of the nature of phosphoryl
transfer in biology as well as the understanding of the molecular details of
signal transduction. &lt;br/&gt;