* 0342330
* Central and Peripheral Actions of Nitric Oxide
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 02/29/2008
* USD 343,292.00

Nitric oxide (NO) is a small, highly reactive molecule produced in both plants
and animals. It is used to protect tissues from infections and acts as a
signaling molecule in the vasculature of vertebrates and the central nervous
system (CNS) of most species. Because NO can dissolve in both cell membranes and
the fluid around cells it is thought to spread widely from where it is produced.
However, the range of NO signaling has not been rigorously defined and may vary
between tissues and species. In the CNS an effective range of 200 microns would
enable NO to control hundreds of neurons, but in peripheral tissues such as
muscles this range could limit NO to a very local or even intracellular role.
Hence, the immense differences in size, metabolic function and cellular
architecture of NO target tissues raise important questions about the mechanisms
of NO signaling at different locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
experiments take advantage of a well-characterized NO signaling system in an
insect model system (larval Manduca sexta) to establish the functional roles of
NO at central and peripheral sites. A key advantage of studies in this insect is
that signaling can be manipulated in the intact, freely moving larva, or in
tissues dissected from the insect and maintained alive for several hours under
defined conditions. Pharmacological tools are available to block or supplement
NO production and to block or increase its effectiveness. It is now also
possible to alter the synthesis of key enzymes at the molecular level in intact
animals using injections of double-stranded RNA. This treatment interferes with
the expression of specific genes in the fully developed animal or in selected
parts of the CNS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of preliminary physiological
experiments, together with the anatomical distribution of enzymes that make or
respond to NO (nitric oxide synthase, NOS; and soluble guanylyl cyclase, sGC;
respectively), suggest that NO is involved in the control of feeding (chewing
movements and foregut activity), the regulation of normal body wall tension and
the direct cellular immune response. The neural and muscular activity will be
recorded using electrodes and pressure sensors implanted in normal larvae and in
larvae that are experimentally deficient in NOS or sGC. These actions of NO on
motor patterns and neuromuscular physiology will also be examined
pharmacologically in isolated tissues. The role of NO in the insect immune
response will be tested by implanting fluorescent micro spheres into the body
cavity and assessing the degree of encapsulation in normal and NO-deficient
larvae. It is expected that feeding (and growth), gut movements and activity of
body wall sensory neurons will all be strongly modulated by NO. The control of
body turgor, motor coordination, and abiotic encapsulation are also potentially
very important sites of action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the
proposed activity is to better understand how NO carries out its diverse
functions. In particular, the results will help to define the specializations
and limitations of NO signaling in very different tissue environments. Because
NO is involved in the locomotion and feeding behavior of this herbivorous
insect, the results could also impact the development of pest-specific
antifeedants for crop protection. &lt;br/&gt;