* 0342526
* High Performance, Multiple Resolution Modeling of Semi-Arid Hydrology at Regional Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Enrique Vivoni, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2007
* USD 130,076.00

0342526&lt;br/&gt;Vivoni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the face of increasing demands
from urban areas, irrigation and environmental concerns, water management in
semi-arid areas is difficult. In the Southwestern US, a critical unbalance
between water supply and demand is prompting water conflicts between multiple
water stakeholders. The NSF STC Center for the Sustainability of semi-Arid
Hydrology and Riparian Areas (SAHRA) is a multi-institutional effort to
accelerate the state of scientific knowledge and water management in semi-arid
areas. In light of climate variations, the scientific community has an urgent
need to deliver predictions of potential hydrologic stress in regional semi-arid
basins. The primary goal of this proposal is to provide SAHRA the capability to
perform fine-resolution hydrologic simulations with an efficient distributed
model that captures spatial heterogeneities in basin properties and
meteorological forcing. The project focuses on coupled rainfall-runoff modeling
in order to: (a) represent the spatial-temporal distribution of surface-
subsurface processes at multiple scales over the Rio Grande, and (b) simulate
the effect of climate and land-use change. The TIN-based Real-time Integrated
Basin Simulator is the proposed model to account for the spatial variability of
the rainfall-runoff process. Through integration into a high performance
computing environment, the proposed model will improve the surface hydrology in
the Los Alamos National Laboratory fine-resolution model. In addition, the
triangulated irregular network model will allow computational savings as
compared to grid-based models through the multi-resolution, multi-scale domain
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to integrating with on-going
SAHRA research, a diversity effort is proposed for enhancing the participation
of Hispanic/Latino undergraduates in semi-arid research and promoting hydrologic
understanding in local high schools, community colleges and universities. A
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program will involve two students
each summer in research involved with the collection, analysis and model
integration of hydrologic data. A Traveling Lecture Series (TLS) program will
bring research results and outreach activities based on SAHRA science and
technology to Spanish-speaking audiences in local Hispanic communities.
Together, these two efforts complement the scientific proposal by leading to the
rapid dissemination of research results and the establishment of long-term
relationships. Ultimately, the knowledge gained from the coupled modeling system
can be transferred to the local management agencies, decision makers and water
stakeholder in the primarily Hispanic communities&lt;br/&gt;