* 0342111
* Multi-study Genomic Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Giovanni Parmigiani, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2011
* USD 1,877,168.00

This project's goal is to develop innovative statistical approaches to multi-
study genomic data analysis. Specific targets include generalization of meta-
analysis tools used in medicine and social sciences to the genomics context,
metrics for evaluating reproducibility of expression measurements across
platform in the absence of a gold standard, approaches for deriving and
validating common expression scales across platforms, and a novel reformulation
of the combination problem based on constructing ``coexpression matrices'' in
which an element represents the coexpression of a subset of genes in a given
study. The project includes software implementation, application to a set of
representative genomic analyses, and development of public-domain support
website.

Genomics studies are studies that measure simultaneously the activity of a large
portion of the thousands of genes in a biological system. These have given a
great impulse to the life sciences in the past decade, and changed the way in
which biology, medicine, and biotechnology make progress. A large number and
variety of genomics studies are accruing. Because of cost and difficulty in the
acquisition of biological samples, especially in medicine, the majority of
genomic investigations are carried out using a limited number of samples, and
focus on highly specific problems. This scenario poses two important questions
for the genomics community. First, given the wide variety of genomic
technologies and protocols, there is concern about reproducibility of genomic
findings across technologies and laboratories. How can one systematically use
the large body of genomic information available to assess reproducibility?
Second, given the large, but fragmented and heterogeneous, set of studies that
are accruing, there is concern about the ability of the scientific community to
efficiently integrate the resulting knowledge. How can one perform analysis of
genomics data across studies, across technologies and across related biological
systems? This project's overall goal is to address these two questions by
developing data analysis tools for comparison and integration of genomic
information across studies, across measurement technologies and across
biological systems. Today, multi-study genomic analysis are rare, despite the
wide availability of genomic data in the public domain. The premise underlying
this proposal is that this is due in large part to the lack of specific,
systematic and rigorous statistical approaches and the associated software
tools. This project aims at providing such tools and therefore, if the
investigator's premise is correct, will promote a more extensive, more efficient
and more rigorous use of the vast resources made available by the massive
investment made on genomic studies.

