* 0342618
* Cloud Condensation Nuclei (CCN) and Large Nuclei in Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* James Hudson, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 06/30/2011
* USD 446,597.00

The goals of this project are to measure cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) in air
ingested into trade wind Cumulus clouds and use those measurements to consider
how the CCN population influences the development of rain in those clouds. New
features of the instrumentation will allow the measurements to extend to low
supersaturation (large particle size), an important extension because such
particles are thought to be important in warm-rain initiation. The measurements
will also be made by different instruments providing different growth times for
the droplets that form on the CCN to investigate if the limited growth time
available in the instrument biases the measurements. The investigators will also
study the possible role of occasional Saharan-dust episodes in accelerating rain
formation. The project is part of the "Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO)
experiment, a multi-investigator study of warm rain formation and the nature of
trade wind Cumulus clouds. The CCN measurements are a critical component of the
broader experiment because, as the key input determining the initial droplet
size distribution, they are needed by many of the other investigators in their
studies of specific hypotheses regarding the warm-rain process. Other broad
impacts of the project include likely resolution of an instrumentation
controversy affecting many other microphysical studies, better understanding of
rain formation as it influences weather and climate, and graduate student
training in this area of research.