* 0342647
* Collaborative Research: Ship-based Measurements of Cloud Microphysics and PBL Properties in Precipitating Trade Cumulus Clouds During Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* C. Fairall, NOAA Environmental Technology Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2008
* USD 392,129.00

This collaborative project among three institutions (the University of Miami,
the University of Colorado, and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration Environmental Technology Laboratory) is part of the "Rain in
Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO) experiment, a coordinated study of precipitation
development in trade-wind Cumulus clouds that will involve more than 20
institutions and four countries. In this project, the investigators will use the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) ship Seward Johnson,
equipped with two short wavelength radars and a scanning Doppler lidar as well
as instrumentation to measure fluxes from the ocean surface. These sensors will
be used to measure the kinematic and microphysical structures of trade-wind
Cumuli, the surrounding air motions, and the boundary-layer fluxes of heat,
moisture and momentum. A complementary modeling effort will use large eddy
simulation, constrained to match observed characteristics of the clouds, to
study cloud-scale processes including entrainment and the roles of cloud
condensation nuclei in cloud development. The radars will be positioned near
other land-based radars and under the region studied by research aircraft so
that the measurements can complement and be compared to those from the other
observing systems. The primary science objectives include documenting the
lifecycles of tropical cumulus clouds, determining how large drops and
precipitation are formed, and learning how precipitation alters the marine
boundary layer in the vicinity of trade-wind Cumuli. The expected result of this
research will be better understanding of how precipitation is formed in trade-
wind cumulus clouds and improved ability to represent the effects of such clouds
in climate and other large-scale models.

The project includes a substantial educational component. Graduate students
involved directly in the research project will gain valuable field experience,
and research experience will also be provided through special programs for
graduate and undergraduate students not in the field. A K-12 component will
include development of middle and high school curricula components suitable for
use in classrooms, an onboard research experience for a K-12 teacher, career
awareness presentations, and visits by scientists to classrooms. Web-based tools
will be used to connect scientists on the cruise to classrooms for interactions
with students and teachers, and this connection will continue after the cruise
through the analysis phase. An objective will be the development of educational
modules that allow students, educators and researchers to contribute to and
interact with data related to the Earth system.