* 0343982
* Use of a Contradictory Glabra3 mutant to study Arabidopsis Trichome Development
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Michael Marks, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 03/31/2009
* USD 405,000.00

The development of the single celled hairs (called trichomes) on the surface of
the leaves of the model plant Arabidopsis is being used to address basic
biological questions. While the nature of this research is basic, it also may
have future practical applications. This is because the trichomes provide a
barrier that helps protect many plants from insects, drought, or excess
sunlight. Thus, information obtained from the study of Arabidopsis trichomes may
lead to strategies to improve crop plants. Furthermore, many of the cellular
processes that control trichome cell fate and differentiation are found in all
eukaryotic cells. Thus, the analysis of trichomes may lead to a better
understanding of cellular differentiation of all eukaryotic cells; both plant
and animal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also will provide a framework
for enhancing the teaching of fundamental basic biological concepts to students.
The trichomes are easy to study in a classroom setting and materials generated
from this grant will be made available to 6-12 grade and undergraduate
classrooms. These materials will aid in understanding the basic concepts of
heredity as well as more advanced concepts concerning protein-protein
interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The actual focus of this research will be on
an Arabidopsis mutant that exhibits unusual trichomes. The gene mutation
responsible for the abnormal trichome development has been identified and found
to be in a gene (called GL3) that is likely required for regulating the
expression of many genes during trichome development. Furthermore, the protein
encoded by the GL3 gene is known to interact with other proteins. This grant
will fund the analysis of this mutant gene addressing such questions as: How
does the GL3 mutation affect the ability of the resulting altered GL3 protein to
interact with other proteins? Why does the mutation cause the trichomes to
develop abnormally? Can mutations in other genes suppress the mutation in GL3?
The answers to these questions will increase our knowledge of many basic
cellular processes such as cell division, cell expansion, cell differentiation,
and gene regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;