* 0343639
* A Proposal to Host an Invitational Urban Key Indicator Data and Evaluation Workshop, Spring 2004
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Jason Kim, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2004
* USD 107,287.00

Systemic Research, Inc is seeking support to host an Annual Invitational Urban
Key Indicator Data and Evaluation workshop in the spring of 2004. The workshop
will target PI/PDs data managers, evaluators, and selected NSF funded study
group members. This workshop intends to build on previous workshop by focusing
exclusively at the classroom level to high local districts use data from student
achievement scores, school and classroom profiles, and evaluations to extend
their understanding of science and mathematics. This workshop will target
approximately 130 participants with the potential to reach hundreds of teachers
and thousands of students through the information gained from the plenary and
other workshop sessions and activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic Research, Inc, (SR) intends to host an
invitational workshop to promote the use of data and evaluation to enhance NSF-
funded urban sites in their understanding and use of data. For several years SR
has held workshops for PI/PDs data managers, and other district and national
leaders to facilitate the use of data as a management and planning tool for
improving science and mathematics education. Therefore, SR has been a leader in
helping school districts establish and enhance how they collect and use data.
This approach has greatly. With prior knowledge of collecting data for several
urban-focused programs and working with representatives in over the years adds
immensely to the likelihood that strategies and practices shared and learned at
the workshop will greatly enhance how districts use data to improve
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
past efforts (See www.systemic.com) this workshop intends to promote further
dissemination of lessons-learned by helping local district leaders effectively
address local issues regarding the use of data and evaluation. In addition to
sharing information and best practices at the workshop, SR maintains a website
with conference proceedings, copies of presentations, links to other relevant
sites, and links to research studies on urban reform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;