* 0343355
* RUI: Documenting, Understanding and Conserving the Biodiversity of Freshwater Siliceous Algae in Coastal Ponds Along Eastern North America
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Peter Siver, Connecticut College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 310,001.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this project is to
provide detailed surveys of two biologically diverse and ecologically important
groups of algae in freshwater lakes and ponds along the east coast of North
America. The scaled chrysophytes and diatoms are integral components of all
aquatic habitats and are among the best known organisms used by scientists to
detect changes in our nations water resources. Despite the importance of scaled
chrysophytes and diatoms, the fact remains that large geographic regions along
the margin of North America remain largely unexplored for both groups of
organisms. Our goals will include describing the floras of these algal organisms
for specific regions along the coast, describing new species to science,
evaluating the relative importance of chemical variables vs. climate-related
factors in shaping and controlling the distributions of these organisms along a
subtropical to arctic gradient, and to train a group of highly motivated
undergraduates in taxonomy and ecology issues. As part of this project, we will
survey waterbodies along the Atlantic Coastal Plain, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland,
Labrador and the Canadian Arctic, and add this information to our existing
databases in order to accomplish our goals. We will use high resolution light
and scanning electron microscopy to document all species, and archive our
samples in national museums making them available to other
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to an in-depth study conducted by the
World Wildlife Fund (WWF), numerous regions along the eastern coast of North
America were ranked "high", "continentally outstanding" or "globally
outstanding" for their aquatic biological distinctiveness. Many of these same
regions had future (next 20 years) habitat threat assessment projections of
"high", and were rated by the WWF as "endangered" or "vulnerable" areas in North
America. Based on this thorough study, all regions to be sampled as part of our
project warrant immediate biodiversity protection efforts. When combined with
our previous results, our work will include detailed analyses of both algal
groups in ponds from all seven freshwater ecoregions defined by the World
Wildlife Fund (WWF) that span the east coast of the North American continent
from subtropical Florida to the Arctic. A primary goal of our study will be to
provide detailed biodiversity evaluations of two ecologically important algal
groups for all seven coastal ecoregions that will complement existing databases
for aquatic animals and enhance conservation efforts, including those of the
National Park Service, the Forest Service and Parks Canada. A goal of NSF is to
increase taxonomic expertise among the scientific work force, especially for
poorly known microscopic organisms. Our program will help meet this challenge by
yielding confident students with a high degree of taxonomic skill eager to
pursue careers in biodiversity-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;