* 0343606
* Redox Regulation of the Transcription Factor Pax-5.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Patty Zwollo, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 04/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

B cells play key roles in the immune response, as they are capable of producing
and secreting large amounts of antibodies specific to foreign invaders. The B
cell-specific transcription factor Pax-5a plays essential roles during B cell
development, cell proliferation, and activation. The Pax-5 gene produces a total
of four different protein isoforms: Pax-5a, 5b, 5d, and 5e. Previous work shows
that the Pax-5e protein can increase the activity of Pax-5a protein. To
investigate the function of Pax-5e in vivo, transgenic mice have been generated
which overexpress the Pax-5e protein in B cells. Preliminary data show that such
mice have increased numbers of precursor B cells in their bone marrow, while the
number of mature B cells of such mice in the spleen is abnormally low.
Furthermore, B cells of these transgenic mice show spontaneous cell
proliferation in primary cell cultures. This project explores mechanisms that
change the cell growth characteristics of B cells and their precursors in
Pax-5e-overexpressing mice, focusing on bone marrow and spleen B cells. The
intellectual merit of this project includes an increased understanding of the
role of Pax-5e in B cell growth. This work is expected to increase knowledge
concerning activity of transcription factors that regulate the antibody
response. Results will provide new insight into the molecular pathways that lead
to normal B cell proliferation as well as elucidate possible causes of malignant
B cell growth. Broader impacts of this research include the exposure and
research training that will be provided to the students of The College of
William and Mary. As the William and Mary biology department has no Ph.D.
program, research effort and productivity is entirely based on work by
undergraduates and Master's students supervised by their PI. Students have the
opportunity to become independent researchers and may be co-authors on papers.
The research will also be discussed during seminar courses, exposing "non-
research" students to molecular immunology research. In addition, the research
will be presented annually at a local elementary school as part of a career
program ("Science is women's work") aimed to increase science interest in girls.