* 0343288
* Chromatin Modification and Pre-Messenger RNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Tracy Johnson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 02/28/2005
* USD 18,000.00

Since the 2001 announcement of the sequence of the human genome, it has become
evident that the next step toward understanding the genome is answering the
fundamental questions: "How does the information contained within the genome get
expressed, and how is the correct expression of each gene controlled?" Two
features of the genome make this a particularly intriguing problem. First, human
genes (and genes from other eukaryotic organisms) are interrupted by long
stretches of non-coding DNA sequence. Once the DNA is "read" by the cellular
machinery and transcribed to make "messenger RNA" (the intermediate information-
containing genetic material that directs protein synthesis), these long
stretches of non-coding RNA must be removed, and the remaining protein-coding
regions must be joined. This cellular process, "pre-messenger RNA splicing,"
takes place with exquisite accuracy and is crucial for proper gene expression.
The second notable feature of the genome is that the DNA is packaged in a
compact protein/DNA structure called chromatin. In order for the DNA sequence to
be transcribed to make messenger RNA, the chromatin must undergo extensive
modification that alters the DNA packaging and makes the DNA accessible. This
change in DNA accessibility plays a pivotal role in regulating RNA synthesis.
While the reactions involved in gene expression have typically been studied
independently, as isolated processes, recent studies have illustrated that RNA
synthesis and splicing are, in fact, tightly coordinated: the splicing reaction
occurs as the RNA is being synthesized. Consequently, the RNA synthesis reaction
can affect the process of splicing, and pre-mRNA splicing can affect RNA
synthesis. Given these connections between pre-mRNA splicing and RNA synthesis,
one might expect connections between the RNA synthesis machinery's ability to
navigate chromatin structure and synthesize messenger RNA, and the coordinated
removal of introns by the splicing machinery. Using the biochemically and
genetically tractable model organism, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this
project will explore the basic mechanisms underlying gene expression by
analyzing the coordination between the pre-mRNA splicing machinery and the
chromatin modifying and chromatin restructuring machineries.