* 0343735
* RUI: Phylogenetic Relationships and Character Evolution in Lycieae (Solanaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Jill Miller, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 338,660.00

0343735&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research by Dr. Jill Miller
and Dr. Rachel Levin of Amherst College is to examine evolutionary relationships
among three closely-related genera in the tomato family (Solanaceae), with an
emphasis on the largest genus Lycium (wolfberry). Relationships will be examined
using DNA sequence data, accumulated from plant specimens collected in Africa
and North and South America. Knowledge of relationships will be applied to the
study of biogeography and fruit evolution. Wolfberry species have considerable
variation in reproductive characteristics; for example, fruits range from
fleshy, multi-seeded berries that are bird-dispersed, to few-seeded, hardened
fruits that are likely dispersed by small mammals. The merits of this project
also extend outside the traditional realm of systematics; the proposed work will
permit examination of breeding system evolution in Lycium. More broadly, this
project will advance understanding of evolutionary relationships among flowering
plants, as well as contribute to on-going, global efforts toward deciphering
relationships in the economically important plant family Solanaceae.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed work include the training
of undergraduates; 6-10 undergraduates over the course of this project will
receive intensive training in molecular methods, techniques for examining
evolutionary relationships (including methods to study morphological character
evolution), and a strong background in plant systematics and breeding system
evolution. This project will also facilitate both existing and new international
collaborations with colleagues, thus enhancing our understanding of
relationships among worldwide wolfberry species. This project will make a
significant contribution to existing collections of Solanaceae, including many
new herbarium specimens, genomic DNAs, and DNA sequences. These will be made
available to the public, thus complementing and extending the work of other
Solanaceae researchers. This project will also result in a new systematic
treatment of the group, including on-line taxonomic keys that can be used by
botanists worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;