* 0343734
* CCLI Program Conference: Invention, Intervention, &amp; Impact: Innovation in Undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education, April 2004, Arlington
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 11/30/2005
* USD 502,575.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) is sponsoring a
conference that focuses on the impact of the NSF Course, Curriculum, and
Laboratory Instruction (CCLI) Program. The overall theme of this conference is
sharing, promoting, envisioning, and sustaining innovations in STEM
undergraduate education. In terms of undergraduate STEM education the conference
is designed to a) Broadly advertise important curricular improvements; b)
Explore the role that the NSF CCLI Program has had in catalyzing curricular
innovation; c) Facilitate cross-disciplinary communication of innovative
curriculum ideas; d) Demonstrate effectiveness of curricular innovations; e)
Foster interdisciplinary interest in emerging science fields; and, f) Engage the
community in discussion of future priorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four hundred
representatives from colleges and universities (including students),
professional societies, government, media, foundations, and business are invited
to participate. The overall outcome of this participatory conference is for
participants to identify actions and strategies that they and others can take to
expand and promote undergraduate curricular innovations. Development and
implementation of the conference, including evaluation spans a 15-month period.
The project evaluation captures actions that participants intend to take
immediately after the conference. An online follow-up survey captures actions
that participants are taking six months after the conference. Products include
proceedings disseminated in print and online and a short paper on ten ideas and
how these ideas can be easily implemented in the undergraduate classroom or
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;