* 0343856
* Molecular Genetics of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Stress Responses and Remediation by Arabidopsis Thaliana
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Adan Colon-Carmona, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 340,000.00

IBN-0343856 Adan Colon-Carmona University of Massachusetts, Boston

Phytoremediation Program

The proposed project explores the underlying molecular mechanisms for
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-induced responses in plants, as well as
their potential biodegradation pathways. PAHs are organic pollutants that cause
human health problems such as cancer. PAHs are contaminants resulting from oil-
based manufacturing. Some plant species, including crop plants such as
sunflower, soybean, pea and carrot, can grow on moderate levels of crude oil-
contaminated soil. Yet, very little is known at the molecular level about the
mechanisms of PAH uptake and degradation, or even cell signaling pathways
regulating PAH stress responses. A better understanding of PAH stress physiology
will lead to the generation of phytoremediation strategies in pollution clean-up
and biomonitoring. The aims of this proposal are the following: 1) to
characterized the physiological responses to PAHs in Arabidopsis thaliana, 2) to
identify the signaling pathways that mediate the various PAH-induced plant
responses, 3) to screen genetically mutagenized populations for plants that are
defective in PAH-induced growth responses, and 4) to identify, through bacterial
screens, plant cDNAs that can be used in PAH degradation. The long term goal of
these studies are to utilize the information regarding PAH-induced responses in
Arabidopsis to engineer trees or crop plants with extensive root systems for
their use in biodegradation and biomonitoring of PAH contamination.