* 0343946
* Flame Synthesis of Completely Graphitic Carbon Nanofibers and Nanofiber Composites Containing Encapsulated Metal Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Ishwar Puri, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 09/30/2004
* USD 30,263.00

FLAME SYNTHESIS OF COMPLETELY GRAPHITIC CARBON NANOFIBERS
AND&lt;br/&gt;NANOFIBER COMPOSITES CONTAINING ENCAPSULATED METAL
PARTICLES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant
for Exploratory Research pertains to the flame synthesis of completely graphitic
carbon nanofibers that contain encapsulated metal particles. Carbon
nanostructures, such as nanotubes and nanofibers, possess outstanding properties
(capillarity, mechanical strength, metallic or semiconducting behavior,
encapsulation of metal particles, and hydrogen storage capability). However,
there are few technologies for producing bulk quantities of high-purity aligned
nanotubes or nanofibers. The combustion synthesis of these nanomaterials is an
attractive method. It has been shown that it is possible to encapsulate periodic
metal deposits in the nanofibers. Nanostructures containing catalytic particles
could serve as efficient nanoscale reactors. The encapsulation of metal
particles may also make it possible to physically or chemically functionalize
CNFs for useful purposes, and to form connected CNF networks. The objective of
the proposed project is to encapsulate a variety of metal nanoparticles in
completely graphitic nanofibers and nanofiber networks that are produced through
flame synthesis. The study examines if: (1) completely graphitic carbon
nanofibers of specified length and helicity can be synthesized as pure species
both with and without heterojunctions (that enable nanofiber networks); (2)
self-assembly techniques can be developed, say by using a variety of catalyst
substrates, to control relative arrangements of nanoscale components to enable
predesigned arrangements and morphologies; and (3) it is possible to
characterize the processes that lead to economic preparation of nanostructures
with control over size and shape for applications. The reactor used stabilizes a
fuel-rich flame at the exit of a porous-media burner. The hot pyrolysis gases
impinge on a substrate. The experimental matrix that influences the flame
synthesis of these nanomaterials includes the substrate material, fuel/air
equivalence ratio, substrate temperature, and the flow velocity and residence
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
economic implications as well as those for the enhancement of knowledge.
Although research on carbon nanostructures is a fast-moving field,
commercialization is hampered by the lack of methods to economically produce the
material in bulk. The understanding of the flame synthesis of ordered carbon
nanostructures, such as CNFs and CNTs, is still at an early stage. The project
contributes to the education of an NSF graduate fellow and the academic and
research training of a research associate.&lt;br/&gt;