* 0343096
* Nitric Oxide as an Inter- and  Intracellular Messenger in Growth Cones
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Vincent Rehder, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 09/30/2009
* USD 500,001.00

Nitric oxide (NO), a non-traditional neurotransmitter/ neuromodulator, has been
proposed to play an important role during neuronal development in both
vertebrates and invertebrates. The exact location and mode of action of NO,
however, is often unknown. Because many of the effects of NO occur during a time
in development when neurons are in the process of 'wiring' the nervous system,
this proposal tests a series of hypotheses aimed at determining the roles by
which NO may function as a signaling molecule at the neuronal growth cone.
Growth cones are the motile tips of advancing neuronal processes and lead them
to their targets by a process termed pathfinding. The ability of a growth cone
to navigate correctly has been demonstrated to depend on its filopodia, which
are actin rich protrusions emanating in a fan-like fashion from the leading edge
of the growth cone, and which function as 'remote sensors' exploring the
molecular environment ahead of the growth cone proper. Preliminary evidence
suggests that NO causes a transient increase in filopodial length and a decrease
in the speed with which a growth cone advances. The same morphological changes
are typically seen in growth cones approaching a decision area in vivo,
suggesting that NO may act as a guidance cue and thus could play an important
role in the process by which the nervous system is being 'wired'. This proposal
has two specific aims which will investigate novel mechanisms by which NO could
act at the growth cone to influence the outcome of pathfinding decisions. Dr.
Rehder's research will be performed on a well-established model system,
identified neurons from the central nervous system of the pond snail Helisoma
trivolvis, and will employ laser confocal microscopy, photolysis of caged
compounds, Ca2+-imaging, electrophysiology, pharmacology, and
immunohistochemistry. The advantage of this preparation is that the snail
nervous system offers large and identified neurons that can be studied in
isolation and under controlled conditions in vitro. The results from this
research will serve as an important stepping stone towards our long-term goal:
to identify the role of NO during neuronal pathfinding in developing and
regenerating nervous systems. The proposed work also has strong educational and
outreach components. It contains projects particularly suited for undergraduate
students and will involve students and K-12 teachers in developing teaching
modules for community outreach activities that serve all
Georgians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;