* 0343268
* Reengineering The Undergraduate Industrial Engineering Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Lesia Crumpton-Young, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,058,807.00

This project will undertake department level reform at the University of Central
Florida to reengineer the Undergraduate Industrial Engineering program. This
comprehensive multi-faceted plan will involve making significant changes in the
curriculum, transforming faculty instructional strategies, introducing new
technology in the classrooms while providing additional developmental
experiences for the students, as well as developing aggressive strategies of
recruiting students into the Industrial Engineering Profession. The specific
objectives&lt;br/&gt;designed to be pursued during this implementation grant to
achieve the stated vision and goals of the project include the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. Reengineering of the Curriculum to include
courses that prepares students for careers in&lt;br/&gt;nontraditional
manufacturing industries (i.e. service industries, information
technology&lt;br/&gt;industries); also the curriculum will be modified to allow
students to Minor in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Management to adequately prepare for
job positions and role responsibilities in engineering&lt;br/&gt;management and
leadership&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;B. Integrating Cognitive Learning Theory, which
emphasizes human information processing,&lt;br/&gt;with instructional design
theory, which emphasizes strategies of instruction. To drive&lt;br/&gt;specific
course development and learning pedagogy that will influence
instructional&lt;br/&gt;strategies, experiential learning, and student
experiences in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C. Integrating Cognitive
Learning Theory and Instructional Design Theory, to
identify&lt;br/&gt;appropriate uses of technology to support classroom
instruction goals and student
learning&lt;br/&gt;objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D. Developing aggressive
recruiting strategies that increase awareness of IE careers among
HS&lt;br/&gt;students and serves to entice them to pursue Industrial Engineering
with special emphasis&lt;br/&gt;upon exposing members of historically
underrepresented groups and females.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;