* 0343958
* JSPS Postdoctoral Fellowship:  Functional Labeling of Olfactory Receptor Neurons
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Jason Sandahl, Sandahl                 Jason          F
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 01/31/2005
* USD 2,363.00

0343958 Sandahl

This award supports a one-year Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
Short-Term Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Jason Sandahl. He will be
collaborating with Professor Hiroshi Ueda at Hokkaido University in Japan. They
will undertake a study on the functional labeling of olfactory receptor neurons.
There are two main objectives of this research. The first is to further develop
techniques that will visually label (and identify) stimulated olfactory neurons
in salmon, including neurons of the olfactory epithelium (the nose), and the
olfactory bulb and telencephalon (the forebrain). The second objective is to use
these methods to identify the targets of three pesticides that are neurotoxic to
the salmon olfactory system and are believed to affect specific regions of the
olfactory pathway. The researchers will develop two labeling techniques. The
first utilizes a compound called agmatine, which is a relatively small molecule
that is able to permeate certain ion channels once they have been activated.
This involves presenting the fish with an odorant (which activates the neurons)
while simultaneously presenting the nose with agmatine. The second labeling
technique was developed recently which utilizes a compound called FM1-43 in
which the labeling is very rapid, and can be performed repeatedly in intact
animals. They have chosen three model toxins to investigate, with each toxin
believed to target a different region of the olfactory pathway. The toxins are
Copper, Esfenvalerate and Chlorpyrifos.

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
complementary expertise and research capabilities. The research is expected to
further knowledge in both fish biology and environmental toxicology. The
anticipated outcomes of this collaborative research include the development of
functional labeling techniques in the salmon olfactory system and identification
of targets within the olfactory system of three common toxins. This project will
offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. Results of
the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific
journals.