* 0343312
* ACT/SGER:     Novel Conjugated Polymer Structures for Use in Bioterrorism Threat Assays
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Guillermo Bazan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 92,742.00

This project explores the synthesis, design and application of conjugated
polymers in biological assays that are relevant for bioterrorism threat
assessment and defense. Specifically, the focus is on cationic conjugated
polymers which behave as light harvesting macromolecules and which substantially
improve, or "boost", the sensitivity of standard fluorometric detection and
identification of DNA, RNA and protein structures. By improving optical
sensitivity one will be able to examine samples, whether from the environment or
from potentially infected methods to minimize non-specific interactions, which
lead to sensor sensitivity losses, by molecular fine-tuning of the conjugated
polymer. Polymers will be synthesized with specific molecular structures that
probe the association between the optically active portion of the polymer and
single stranded- or double stranded-DNA. Fluorinating substantial portions of
the polymer chains will diminish hydrophobic interactions between the conjugated
polymer and biological substrates. Potentially wasteful fluorescence quenching
by photoinduced charge transfer mechanisms between the conjugated polymer and
the electron rich sites of biological substrates will be examined by raising and
lowering the electron affinity of the conjugated segments. The proposal's
intellectual merit stems from its inherent multidisciplinary approach. It brings
together distinct scientific fields, such as polymer synthesis and photophysics,
mechanisms of biomolecular interactions, aqueous chemistry and analytical
methodology. From the information generated by the proposed work we will be able
to obtain insight not only on how to improve biosensors for bioterrorism
assessment, but also on the weak intermolecular forces that exist between DNA
and organic semiconducting materials. Such knowledge is woefully lacking and
could provide the basis for a rational interfacing of electrical and optically
active organic materials with biological matter. This award is supported jointly
by the NSF and Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new
concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security. The broader impact of the proposal rests on the
potential use of biosensors in disease diagnostics and forensic applications,
which provide society with obvious benefits. It should be noted that in
developing countries it is the cost of diagnostics, not treatment, which
prevents medical treatment. With the materials proposed in this study, it may be
possible to reach sensitivity levels that allow DNA examination with naturally
occurring quantities. Such an improvement would circumvent the need to do
polymerase chain reaction amplification and would substantially lower overall
diagnostic costs. Students involved in the project are exposed to an
interdisciplinary range of scientific techniques and approaches and will be well
trained to capitalize on the opportunities offered at the interface of multiple
scientific fields. This award is supported jointly by the NSF and the
Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in basic
research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to national
security.