* 0343758
* Combined high-throughput spectroscopic and modeling approach to the study of heterogeneous catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Jochen Lauterbach, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 03/31/2008
* USD 291,299.00

In the field of material science, the vast array of possible compositions,
structures, and formulations leads to a very high complexity, which has often
kept researchers from predicting material behavior based on the formulation and,
even more importantly, from designing better materials. The advent of high-
throughput technologies has made a large impact in the past few years,
accelerating the discovery of novel catalytic materials through new kinds of
rapid experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
employ FTIR imaging as a truly parallel, high throughput, chemically sensitive
analytical technique in conjunction with molecular-level and reactor scale
modeling to gain insight into the nanoscale behavior of catalyst systems. The
modeling approach will specifically be tailored towards accepting information
from high throughput experimentation, creating a synergy between experiments and
modeling. This work is aimed at the collection of high information content data
in a parallel fashion in order to gain scientific knowledge about NOx storage
and reduction catalysts for automotive exhaust aftertreatment and direct ammonia
decomposition catalysts for onboard generation of hydrogen for mobile fuel cell
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will train students in the
concept of this novel approach to research, development of novel experimental
analytical techniques, the design of experiments, and data modeling on various
length scales. &lt;br/&gt;