* 0343030
* Time Dependent Deformation of Galapagos Sheild Volcanoes Observed with Radar Interferometry
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Falk Amelung, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 75,493.00

Amelung &lt;br/&gt;EAR-0003542 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Galapagos shield
volcanoes on the islands of Fernandina and Isabela are among the most active
volcanoes on Earth with an average of 2-3 eruptions every 10 years. The
investigator's previous radar interferometric study demonstrated how actively
the Galapagos volcanoes deform, and how well this can be measured with radar
interferometry. All but one of the 7 volcanoes show evidence for magma intrusion
resulting in uplift of the volcanic edifice at rates between a few mm/yr to 0.9
m/yr (Amelung et al., 2000). In this project the investigators will obtain a
dense time series of interferograms to map, document and interpret the
deformation of Galapagos volcanoes with high temporal resolution (~35-70 days).
A dense time series of interferograms will address the following issues: Do
subsurface magmatic intrusions occur in pulses or are they continuous in time?
If in pulses, how long do they last? Does the intrusion rate increase prior to
an eruption? Is the center of magmatic inflation stationary or does it migrate
vertically or horizontally prior to an eruption? Do intrusions at different
volcanoes occur simultaneously or are they separated in time? Are the volcanoes
fed by a common or by different deep magma sources? These questions should be
addressed by the dense spatial and time coverage the proposed InSAR
observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;