* 0343873
* RUI:  Elucidating and Manipulating the Role of Malate in the Maintenance of Stomatal Aperture
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Marianne Laporte, Eastern Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2008
* USD 456,075.00

The purpose of Prof. Laporte's research project is to use genetic engineering to
alter plant responses to growth under irrigation. Irrigation is widely used to
prevent crop losses due to drought. In the United States, approximately 70% of
the water diverted by humans is used to irrigate crops. Irrigation has dried up
rivers and caused salinization of crop land, which reduces crop productivity.
Genetically modified crops that use less water under irrigation conditions have
the potential to save massive amounts of irrigation water and to reduce the
destruction of farm land. The majority of water used by plants is lost to the
atmosphere through openings called stomata on leaf surfaces. Specialized guard
cells that border the stomata control stomatal opening and closing through
changes in the concentrations of certain ions in the guard cells. Prof.
Laporte's research focuses on one of these ions, malate, which is maintained at
high concentrations in guard cells when stomata are open. The metabolism of
malate is linked to stomatal closure. Prof. Laporte will study the enzyme that
metabolizes malate to look for ways of altering its activity, thereby modulating
the size of the stomatal opening while maintaining the stomatal function
critical to optimal plant growth. The long-term goals of this project include
not only a better understanding of the way in which malate metabolism in guard
cells regulates the size of the stomatal opening, but also the actual molecular
engineering of plants with conservative water use under irrigation. In order to
accomplish this, Prof. Laporte will conduct genetic studies of the gene for the
malate-metabolizing enzyme, identifying which form of the enzyme is made in
guard cells. She will then evaluate the size of the stomatal opening and the use
of water in plants that make more the metabolizing enzyme in guard cells than
usual, plants that make no metabolizing enzyme in guard cells, and plants that
make a mutant metabolizing enzyme in guard cells. These experiments will provide
the information Prof. Laporte will use to engineer a plant that uses less
irrigation water. Through this research project, Prof. Laporte will also
contribute to the training of undergraduate students. Eastern Michigan
University has a diverse student body of high-quality undergraduates who are
interested in one-on-one training with faculty members. Although many EMU
students go on to graduate or professional school or join the scientific
workforce; an even larger number become K-12 teachers. While pursuing the goals
of this research, Prof. Laporte will train promising undergraduate students,
including members of underrepresented minorities, who will become the next
generation of scientists and teachers. The extensive connections between EMU and
the local K-12 teaching community provide opportunities for high school
students, as well as current and future teachers, to learn from and become
involved in Prof. Laporte's research program. Many of the molecular,
biochemical, and physiological techniques used in this project, along with the
accompanying critical thinking skills, can be adapted for use in high school
classrooms.