* 0343403
* Amphibian Endoderm Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Richard Elinson, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/29/2008
* USD 400,680.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endoderm is the region of an early
embryo that forms the digestive organs. Analysis of the frog model, Xenopus
laevis, has provided a molecular framework of endoderm development, and it
depends on VegT RNA. VegT codes for a transcription factor, and its RNA is
localized during oogenesis to a small region of the oocyte, the vegetal cortex.
After fertilization, VegT causes transcription of signaling molecules and
transcription factors, necessary for development of both mesoderm and
endoderm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many frogs, the anuran amphibians, have evolved
reproductive modes involving great increases in the amount of yolk and the size
of the egg. These natural experiments can be exploited to see the impact of
increased yolk on developmental patterning. Such an increase likely occurred 350
million years ago with the evolution of the amniote egg, which allowed
vertebrates to divorce themselves completely from the water. Derived changes in
development of frogs with large eggs may mirror changes associated with that
critical but obscure evolutionary event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
increased yolk on the molecular organization of three independently derived
cases of large-egged anurans will be examined. The role of VegT in endoderm
development in Eleutherodactylus coqui, whose egg is 20x larger in volume than
that of X. laevis, will be a primary focus. Location of both EcVegT RNA and
mesoderm formation has shifted towards the animal side of the egg and away from
the very yolky vegetal side. The hypothesis will be tested that much of the
yolk-rich vegetal part of the egg has withdrawn from active involvement in
development. These vegetal cells would not be under VegT control and would not
form definitive gut tissues. Their role would be solely to provide nutrition,
much like the uncleaved yolk of the chicken egg. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
respect to broader impacts, most of the research will be done by undergraduates
and MSc students. They will receive excellent training in molecular biology. The
frogs under investigation are endemic to Latin America, so obtaining the animals
provides opportunities for interactions with Hispanic colleagues and students
through seminars, course lectures, and collaborations at the Universidad de
Puerto Rico and the Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador. Finally, the
experience gained by working with E. coqui will allow development of husbandry
techniques that may prove valuable, given the decline in populations of several
species related to E. coqui. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;