* 0343869
* Molecular Studies of Cospeciation Enhanced by Exhaustive Sampling and GIS Technology
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Mark Hafner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2009
* USD 310,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue an in-depth exploration of two
organisms that&lt;br/&gt;have lived together for many millions of years, namely
chewing lice (a group&lt;br/&gt;of parasitic insects) and their mammalian hosts
(pocket gophers). Previous&lt;br/&gt;studies of this host-parasite system by the
PI and colleagues have provided&lt;br/&gt;new insights into how organisms live
in long-term symbiosis and has advanced&lt;br/&gt;our knowledge of rates of
molecular change in insects versus mammals. This&lt;br/&gt;project will take a
new and different approach to host-parasite studies by&lt;br/&gt;analyzing
cospeciation at a previously unexplored scale augmented by use of&lt;br/&gt;GIS
(Geographic Information Systems) technology. Analysis of
cophylogeny&lt;br/&gt;(parallel speciation in the hosts and parasites) will use
DNA sequences from&lt;br/&gt;both nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Recently
developed methods will be&lt;br/&gt;used to compare rates of molecular evolution
among genes, genomes, and&lt;br/&gt;species to identify gene-specific, genome-
specific, and lineage-specific&lt;br/&gt;rate differences. GIS technology will
be used to develop and test predictive&lt;br/&gt;distribution models
(3ecological niche models2) for each species of pocket&lt;br/&gt;gopher and each
species of louse examined in this study. Finally, this&lt;br/&gt;project will
establish Louisiana State University (LSU) as an active node in&lt;br/&gt;the
worldwide louse database (LouseBase), into which will be deposited
all&lt;br/&gt;louse data generated in the course of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data generated in the PI's studies of the gopher-
louse system continue to be&lt;br/&gt;used widely in development of analytical
methods and software for analysis&lt;br/&gt;of host-parasite systems (e.g.,
Huelsenbeck &amp; Rannala, 1997; Huelsenbeck et&lt;br/&gt;al., 1997; and the
programs COMPONENT and TREEMAP developed by Roderic&lt;br/&gt;Page). This work
has also been featured in at least 8 books and textbooks,&lt;br/&gt;including
Parasitology (Noble et al., 1989), A Functional Biology of&lt;br/&gt;Parasitism
(Esch &amp; Fernandez, 1993), and Evolution (Ridley, 1996). Thus,&lt;br/&gt;this
work has reached a large number of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has an explicit plan to involve
students as&lt;br/&gt;collaborators in the research. This includes
undergraduates, graduates, and&lt;br/&gt;postdocs at LSU, collaborators and
their graduate students in Mexico, and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students at the
University of Northern Iowa (UNI), which is a&lt;br/&gt;subcontractor on this
project. Students at UNI will be trained in the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental, yet
rapidly disappearing, skills of parasite taxonomy and&lt;br/&gt;identification,
insect microscopy, and use of the digital microscopy imaging&lt;br/&gt;system
for specimen documentation and morphological analysis. Students
will&lt;br/&gt;also be exposed to the total breadth of the proposed research
program&lt;br/&gt;through intensive, 10-day, summer workshops in the molecular
lab at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;These workshops will not only train the students in the
molecular techniques&lt;br/&gt;involved with the proposed research, but will
also expose them to the&lt;br/&gt;workings of a larger research laboratory. This
kind of exposure and&lt;br/&gt;experience is essential to encourage quality
students to pursue careers in&lt;br/&gt;non-medical basic research.