* 0343417
* A Coevolutionary Theory of Male and Female Alternative Reproductive Behaviors: Combining Phenotypic and Genetic Aapproaches
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,09/30/2004
* Suzanne Alonzo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 09/30/2004
* USD 296,849.00

A Coevolutionary Theory of Male and Female Alternative Reproductive Behaviors:
Combining Phenotypic and Genetic Approaches

Suzanne H. Alonzo

Extensive research has focused on explaining diversity within and between
species. Male alternative reproductive behaviors are one of the most striking
and well-studied examples of individual variation within a population. However,
debate still exists regarding how this kind of discrete variation is maintained
in populations. Two critical factors exist that have received little attention
but need to be considered. First, it is generally assumed that competition
between males usually leads to the evolution of discrete variation in male
behavior. However, female behavior and interactions between the sexes can also
affect male reproductive behavior. Second, discrete variation in female
reproductive patterns is observed, but currently no theory exists predicting
when female alternative reproductive behaviors are expected to evolve and what
patterns are expected. This research will develop a general theoretical approach
and generate new theory that examines how interactions within and between the
sexes affect patterns of diversity within a sex. An increased understanding of
individual variation in reproductive behavior has broad application to
conservation, fisheries and management. This research will also involve training
two undergraduate students and one graduate student in the use of various
modeling.

