* 0343604
* Collaborative Research:  Controls on the Isotopic Composition of Fixed CO2 and Ecosystem-Respired CO2 in Southeastern Pine Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jeffrey Chanton, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 373,444.00

Ever since scientists linked human production of carbon dioxide with global
warming, they have sought to quantify how much impact humans have had on
climate. Half the CO2 produced by humans-mainly from the burning of fossil
fuels-remains in the atmosphere. The other "missing half" is either adsorbed by
the oceans or taken up by terrestrial plants during photosynthesis. Knowing how
much goes where is a crucial link in understanding how human activity affects
global climate and the global carbon cycle. A useful marker to trace the
destination of CO2 is the ratio of 13C to 12C in CO2 in the air. Land plants
preferentially take up 12C, enriching the air in 13C. The oceans don't
discriminate when they take up CO2. So by measuring the ratio of 13C to 12C,
scientists can tell whether the CO2 is going into land plants or into the ocean.
But there is variation in how much 13C to 12C land plants take up, so the models
that predict where human-produced CO2 winds up can have significant error. To
limit the error, and develop better estimates of the fate of CO2, a new study
will be conducted to examine southern pine forests, one of the largest carbon
sinks in North America. The study will look at how climate variability affects
the 13C/12C ratio of the CO2 that plants absorb and release during their
respiration. The result may yield a significant recalculation of how important
land plants are as a "sink" for human-produced CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will look at carbon isotope composition in leaf waxes and respired CO2.
This will be used to improve estimates of the distribution and magnitude of the
terrestrial carbon sink, a step in further understanding the importance of land
plants as absorbers of CO2 produced by humans.&lt;br/&gt;