* 0343071
* Implementation of a New Engineering Studies Program at Sweet Briar College
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Hank Yochum, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2007
* USD 424,184.00

This project will to develop an Engineering Studies Program at Sweet Briar
College, only the second such program in the nation at a liberal arts
institution for women. The new four-year, on campus program is an expansion of
SBC's current engineering option offered under the auspices of the Physics
Department through collaborative five-year programs with four partner
universities. The new Engineering Studies Program will give students the
opportunity to learn about engineering in a variety of ways and levels. The core
of the proposed project is to establish a two-track approach leading to a B.S.
degree in Engineering Science (ES) or a B.A. in Integrated Engineering and
Management (IEM). The two majors share an early curriculum before a student must
choose between the ES and IEM options. This two-track approach will help
encourage women to explore engineering knowing that they can choose either a
liberal arts- or science-based degree. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Another novel
aspect of the program is that both introductory engineering courses that satisfy
general education requirements and an Engineering Studies minor will be offered
to all students. Students combining the minor in engineering with a major in the
sciences will increase their employment opportunities in technical fields and
facilitate their acceptance into graduate engineering programs. Students
combining the minor in engineering with a major in arts, humanities or social
sciences will gain a substantially greater degree of "technical literacy" than
is traditionally available to women majoring in these fields. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merits of the proposal are as follows: &lt;br/&gt;1.
The program is structured to give all SBC students the opportunity to learn
about engineering. &lt;br/&gt;2. The two-track engineering major approach will
encourage more women to pursue engineering by allowing them the flexibility to
choose an Engineering Science or a liberal arts-based Integrated Engineering and
Management degree. &lt;br/&gt;3. SBC will continue to offer students a dual-
degree option in an engineering specialty with partner universities. The new
program will facilitate the second degree to be at the master's level.
&lt;br/&gt;4. A novel use of the engineering curriculum will be the availability
of a subset of engineering &lt;br/&gt;courses to all SBC students through
general education courses, and the creation of an Engineering &lt;br/&gt;Science
minor &lt;br/&gt;a. To further encourage women to experiment with engineering
&lt;br/&gt;b. To facilitate the acceptance of SBC science graduates into
graduate engineering &lt;br/&gt;programs&lt;br/&gt;c. To encourage women in the
arts, humanities and social sciences to obtain a level of &lt;br/&gt;technical
education. &lt;br/&gt;5. The new Engineering Studies Program is based on state-
of-the-art pedagogical approaches and &lt;br/&gt;models, resulting in a cutting-
edge program built on a culture of cross-disciplinary course
&lt;br/&gt;integration and faculty involvement which utilizes engineering design
as a context for learning &lt;br/&gt;throughout the curriculum. The new
engineering program will have an environmental component &lt;br/&gt;and a
research project requirement. &lt;br/&gt;