* 0343080
* A Conceptual Model for Engineering Curriculum Integration and Synthesis, With an Application to Industrial Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Bopaya Bidanda, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This is a planning grant for department level reform in the Industrial
Engineering Department of the University of Pittsburgh. This project addresses
an important and pressing issue in engineering education - how to develop a
comprehensive, integrated curriculum that is (1) pedagogically sound, (2)
thoroughly prepares graduating engineering students for industrial practice and
graduate school, and (3) trains them to readily recognize and apply their
engineering background to solve unstructured problems, both locally and beyond
US borders. In particular, the focus is on the Industrial Engineering (IE)
curriculum but our results could be extended and adapted to other engineering
disciplines. The approach to curriculum reform that contains four overarching
objectives, namely (1) the integration of concepts across the curriculum; (2)
teaching students to synthesize different concepts to solve unstructured
problems; (3) providing problem solving methods and strategies within a societal
framework that allows for their application within a local as well as a global
context; and (4) creating a portable development methodology that can be readily
adapted to other engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
based on a sound understanding of prior work on IE curriculum reform, and is
conceived and organized with input from a variety of sources, including faculty,
students and practicing engineers. The proposal defines the core knowledge areas
that constitute "Industrial Engineering science" and addresses the vital need
for students to see how to integrate different concepts in solving complex real
world problems. The proposal also outlines a plan to emphasize the synthesis of
IE concepts/methods with broader engineering proficiencies in order to solve
open-ended, unstructured problems. The model we propose for integrating and
synthesizing technical skills and life-long proficiencies into the curriculum is
based on two unique aspects: reinforcement and "just-in-time" concept
integration. The proposal outlines a plan to ensure that students receive
greater exposure to and a better understanding of today's global business
environment. The plan also ensures that our graduates will have the life-long
engineering capabilities such as business practice skills; skills to analyze
data and deal with uncertainty; proficiency with information systems and
programming; design, innovation and problem solving skills; and communication
and teamwork skills, in order to successfully apply what they learn.
Additionally, a plan is provided for evaluating both the quality of the approach
and how feedback will be used to improve student learning. Results of this
planning grant are portable to other curriculum planning contexts - within other
IE programs of a similar size; scaled up to larger or down to smaller IE
programs; and to other engineering programs. Plans are also provided for broad
dissemination of our work.&lt;br/&gt;