* 0343387
* NASA Research Announcement NRA-01-OES-05
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* John LaBrecque, NASA
* Interagency Agreement
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 526,572.00

This project will allow the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
to fund two proposals that utilize geomagnetic satellite data. The abstract of
each proposal is listed below:

Catherine Constable Multiple Satellite Induction Studies UCSD 22-8760

Variations in the magnetic field generated by the ring current will be used to
study electromagnetic induction in the interior of the Earth, with the ultimate
goal of determining three-dimensional electrical conductivity structure in
Earth's mantle. Induction studies complement other geophysical approaches to
understanding thermal, compositional, and rheological structures in the deep
earth. Our work will involve data analysis as well as theoretical and algorithm
developments. We will investigate modeling procedures that take advantage of
more than one satellite simultaneously measuring the magnetic field. We believe
this is key to the second part of our study, namely improved representation of
the external source fields that induce magnetic fields in Earth's interior. This
will allow us to use better-parameterized models for both primary and secondary
fields. The third aspect will concern development of both theoretical and
practical tools for studying 3-dimensional induction using satellite data. One-
dimensional satellite electromagnetic response function estimates from single
satellites have already been shown to be compatible with an average of responses
derived from geomagnetic observatory data, and extend the global response
function down to 104 s periods. Current long period satellite response estimates
are rather poorly constrained and we will improve them through the use of longer
time series and better estimation techniques involving multiple satellites
measurements where feasible. Electrical conductivity estimates, obtained using
modem external inversion techniques, will provide constraints on the rheological
and thermal state of the upper mantle and address the issue of conductivity
structure in the transition zone of Earth's mantle. Qualitative measures of
lateral conductivity variations derived from satellite observations demonstrate
the pre-dominant influence of the oceans and crust on near-surface electrical
structure. Current algorithm developments will be used to generate forward
models that predict these effects: this will allow an assessment of whether
3-dimensional conductivity structures can be detected below the crust. We plan
to exploit Champ, Orsted, and SAC-C (Orsted-2) observations, using different
orbital configurations and satellite altitudes to assess limitations in
assumptions about external source field structures. Data used will be 0.1 Hz
samples of orthogonal vector magnetic field components along individual
satellite passes where they are available. When adequate attitude control is not
available, and for long period estimates we expect to use scalar data.
Anticipated duration of this investigation is three years, but once
interpretation techniques and algorithms are in place continued addition of,
data offers potential for ongoing improvement of Earth conductivity models and
understanding of how events such as large storms modulate the structure of the
external source field.

ABSTRACT

Geodynamo Modeling of Core Dynamics and its Applications to Surface Geodynamic
Observables (pI: Weijia Kuang) The solid mantle, the fluid outer core, and the
solid inner core interact with one another through various mechanisms and on
various time scales. We propose to investigate the Earth's core dynamics and the
response of the mantle using a numerical geodynamo model, and study its
applications to surface geodynamic observables. The proposed work has three
specific objectives: (1) We intend to study variation of core flow and
geomagnetic field on decadal time scales, using our numerical geodynamo modeling
in conjunction with the geomagnetic field secular variation (SV) observed at
Earth's surface. In particular, we shall study the non-hydrostatic pressure at
the core-mantle boundary (CMB), and large-scale mass redistribution arising from
density anomalies in the outer core that drive core convection, as well as that
from inner core rotation relative to the mantle.. (2) Based on our
understandings from (1), we intend to examine the responses of the solid Earth
to these core variations. In particular, we shall focus on the magnitude and
time scales of the contributions of core on time-variable gravity field and on
possible surface deformation, and their detectability in gravity field signals
from past and future space missions (including satellite- laser-ranging, CHAMP,
GRACE, GOCE, and possibly COSMIC and GRACE Follow-On). (3) Based on research in
(1), and on previous knowledge about the core angular momentum variation that
changes the decadallength-of-day, we intend to continue our research (supported
by SENH and by NSF) on the core-mantle interactions and their effect on
variation of the Earth's rotation, in particular the decadal polar motion
(Markowitz wobble). The proposed work cuts across several topics listed in the
(A. 1) of the NRA: magnetohydrodynamic modeling of core processes, its
applications to analysis of spatial and temporal variations of internal
component of the geomagnetic field, of core contributions to time-variable
gravity field, surface deformation, and Earth's rotation variation. The proposed
work is a classic example of multi-disciplinary studies of Earth's interior that
makes use of NASA's mission observations and modeling capabilities in advancing
our knowledge about Earth system changes.





