* 0343526
* Barriers to Intraspecific Gene Flow Among Highly Divergent Salamander Lineages
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 05/31/2008
* USD 486,000.00

This research examines in detail the patterns and processes of limited gene
exchange between two highly divergent genetic lineages in the widespread spotted
salamander (Ambystoma maculatum). During the climatic cycles of the Pleistocene,
spotted salamander populations were isolated in two independent refugia,
resulting in highly divergent genetic races. These populations have subsequently
expanded their ranges, resulting in contact zones of different ages and
geographical overlap. The main goal of this proposal is to assess the genetic
consequences of genetic isolation and subsequent re-contact using nuclear DNA
markers and collections along three of these contact zones. Mating experiments
will be used to quantify patterns of mate choice and the degree of genetic
exchange (or lack thereof) that occur between the lineages.

Studies of reproductive isolation are critical to our understanding of
differentiation and speciation. Divergence among lineages within species can be
examples of incipient speciation and therefore help us understand the process
that ultimately leads to novel species and the generation of biodiversity. This
research also has implications for conservation because it documents the
distribution of genetic diversity in a widespread species; information crucial
to interpreting the genetic consequences of habitat fragmentation and new
contact zones in this and other taxa.

