* 0343407
* Bioluminescence:Molecular Mechanisms and Biochemical Control
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* John Hastings, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2008
* USD 505,427.00

This project seeks to define and understand basic aspects of bioluminescence,
from biological functions to genetics and biochemistry. Bioluminescence is
remarkably useful as a marker (by light emission) for the detection of gene
expression and localization, which has already led to many applications in
biological research and biotechnology applications. This project focuses on two
different bioluminescent systems: marine dinoflagellates and dipteran (fly)
larvae. Upon stimulation, dinoflagellates flashes are emitted from small
organelles in the cytoplasm, activated by membrane signals similar to nerve
impulses. The unique luciferase and luciferin are located in the organelle, the
reaction being triggered by a pH change. Luciferase has three intramolecularly
homologous and contiguous repeat units, which are individually active, an
unusual structure. A major goal is to acquire its complete crystal structure,
then that of its complex with luciferin and its associated binding protein. In
contrast to the dinoflagellates, the two diptera, from New Zealand (Arachnocampa
luminosa) and the US (Orfelia fultoni), have different light-emitting systems,
yet they occupy similar niches, build webs to catch prey, evolve into look-alike
adult flies and emit the bluest light of all insects (460-484 nm). The
Arachnocampa reaction requires ATP, as in beetles; the sequence of its
luciferase was obtained and found to be homologous to beetle's. Work on its
expression and characterization is planned. The structure of luciferin will be
determined in collaboration with Prof. Y. Kishi. In Orfelia, the biochemistry of
light emission appears to fit no known model. Three components are involved: a
luciferase (~140 kDa), a small molecular weight luciferin, and a component of
large molecular weight, presumably a protein if not an aggregate, which releases
or activates luciferin to react with luciferase when either DDT or ascorbate are
present. The results suggest a novel system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Basic research on bioluminescence, often carried out for the pleasure
of uncovering how and why it occurs, can be credited with remarkable advances in
unrelated fields and with applications of great biotechnological significance.
One important example comes from the study of bacterial bioluminescence, where
the discovery of autoinduction led to the notion of "quorum sensing", and thus
of chemical communication between bacteria. Another example is the green
fluorescent protein (GFP), an accessory emitter in coelenterate bioluminescence;
GFP and its color mutants are now widely used as reporters for tracking
biochemical processes in vivo. The project will also involve undergraduate
training and educational activities. A freshman seminar on bioluminescence is
offered for undergraduate students.