* 0344265
* Identification, Characterization, and Functional Analysis of Nematode-Inducible Amino Acid and Peptide Transporters in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Erik Nielsen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2008
* USD 536,593.00

Identification, characterization, and functional analysis of nematode-inducible
amino acid and peptide transporters in Arabidopsis &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chris
Taylor (PI), Erik Nielsen (co-PI), Daniel Schachtman (co-PI) &lt;br/&gt;Donald
Danforth Plant Science Center &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant parasitic nematodes
are some of the most destructive plant pathogens, causing worldwide losses
exceeding $77 billion annually to 21 agronomic crops. Of these, root-knot
nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) are capable of reproducing on over 2,000 species of
plants and are responsible for approximately 50% of overall nematode damage.
Symptoms of plant infection by root-knot nematodes include knot- or gall-like
formations on the roots. These knots, or galls, inhibit the root's ability to
take up and transport nutrients and water. The root-knot nematodes induce the
formation of highly specialized plant cells, called giant cells. Giant cells
exhibit many of the hallmarks of transfer cells, which are known for their high
metabolic and solute transport activity. They contain dense cytoplasm and
numerous mitochondria, are multinucleated, and contain thickened cell walls and
a highly invaginated plasma membrane with large surface area. Giant cells also
contain few plasmodesmata, which indicates that they are symplastically isolated
from cells in the rest of the root. The lack of plasmodesmatal connections and
the large increase in plasma membrane surface area suggest that solute transport
into and out of giant cells occurs via an apoplastic route. &lt;br/&gt;Using
microarrays and quantitative real time PCR, it was observed by us that nearly
130 different genes encoding transporters exhibit significant changes in
expression levels during nematode infestation. These transporters are members of
gene families whose function is to transport amino acids, peptides, sugars,
water, anions, or auxin. Of the nematode-induced transporters, nine belong to
the amino acid transporter superfamily and five belong to the peptide
transporter family. These results highlight the importance of amino acid and
peptide transport during nematode parasitism. However, little is known about the
tissue-specific expression, sub-cellular localization, and function of these
transporters during nematode infestation. Therefore a project has been initiated
to examine the role amino acid and peptide transporters play during nematode
infestation. The expression characteristics of nematode-induced transporters
will be examined using promoter fusions and their subcellular location will be
assessed using histo-tagged proteins. The transporters will also be examined in
yeast and Xenopus oocytes to determine their substrate specificity and kinetics.
Knockout plants for each of the transporter genes will be examined for their
ability to support nematode growth. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The analysis of
transporter genes during nematode infestation will provide an opportunity to
examine an important facet of the basic biology of parasitism in plants. The
results of this research might also lead to the development of strategies to
improve the resistance of plants to nematode infection. Other "Broader Impacts"
include the training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. In addition,
the participating labs are involved in outreach programs to undergraduates at
Washington University and to St. Louis area high school science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;