* 0344146
* Integrated stratigraphic, geomorphic, sedimentologic, numeric, and experimental study of hangingwall ramp architecture in continental half grabens
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Gary Smith, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 151,966.00

Integrated stratigraphic, geomorphic, sedimentologic, numeric, and experimental
study of hangingwall ramp architecture in continental half
grabens.&lt;br/&gt;By&lt;br/&gt;Gary A. Smith and John W.
Geissman&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0344146&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates geomorphic and
sedimentologic field studies with experimental and computational approaches to
elucidate tectonic and climatic controls on the development of stratigraphic
sequences within differentially subsiding and tilting, nonmarine extensional
basins. The research is motivated by the hypothesis that differential subsidence
across the hangingwall ramp, or sediment flux from large drainage basins on the
hangingwall ramp, or both, controls the accumulation, stratigraphic
architecture, sediment preservation, and caliber of sediment throughout much of
the basin, as well as the development of unconformities and sedimentary bypass
surfaces. Numerical simulations predicting specific facies patterns will be
tested using experimental methods and field data collected in a well-mapped,
well-dated extensional basin in the Rio Grande rift of New Mexico. New
magnetostratigraphic data will enhance the chronological database required for
the project. PIs research approach differs from traditional stratigraphic
methods primarily through integration of geomorphic and stratigraphic methods
for modeling aggrading continental successions to predict patterns of sediment
dispersal in half graben settings. The resulting insights into the origin of
basin-fill architecture will have immediate implications for conceptualizing
aquifer structure in the arid western United States.&lt;br/&gt;