* 0344670
* Polarizable Atomic Multipole Force Field for Biomacromolecules
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Jay Ponder, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2008
* USD 503,429.00

The goal of this project, funded jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to finalize and
validate an improved set of general potential energy functions, a "force field",
for use in computational analysis of proteins and ligand molecules. This work is
an extension of the AMOEBA (Atomic Multipole Optimized Energetics for
Biomoleuclar Applications) formalism. All applications of force field
methodology are critically dependent on the accuracy of the underlying empirical
energy functions. For biomolecules, accurate treatment of electrostatics,
polarization and environmental effects is of major concern. Traditional energy
functions include environmental effects in only an average, mean-field sense.
This project proposes a new group-based scheme that yields a consistent model
for both inter- and intramolecular polarization. This methodology is the first
to reliably compute the molecular polarizability, electrostatic potential and
conformational energetics of flexible molecules with an efficient and easily
differentiable model suitable for lengthy molecular dynamics simulations or
conformational search protocols. The major aim is to produce a next-generation
energy model that will routinely provide "chemical accuracy" of 0.5 kcal/mol or
better in the estimation of the thermodynamics of ligand binding to protein
molecules. AMOEBA's use of polarizable atomic multipoles results in a much more
flexible and accurate description of the underlying permanent electrostatics and
response to the molecular environment. Improvements are also made in other
potential energy terms, including limited anisotropy of repulsion-dispersion
interactions and use of coupling energies between selected adjacent torsional
angles. The AMOEBA force field provides free energies for the solvated alanine
dipeptide in excellent agreement with quantum mechanical results. The new model
is also capable of predicting absolute free energies of ion solvation to within
chemical accuracy. These consistent and highly accurate absolute single ion
values suggest decades-old experimental ion hydration energies may need
reinterpretation. Polarization is also considered to play a key role in ion
transport through membrane protein channels, ion mobility and concentration in
DNA structural grooves, and protein secondary structure and stability.

Empirical potential functions are the cornerstone of a vast array of atomic-
level molecular modeling techniques. They derive from simple, classical
principles of chemical physics, and represent the computer-based analog of
physical "ball-and-stick" molecular models. As such, "molecular mechanics"
software sees use in settings ranging from undergraduate chemistry and
biochemistry courses to advanced research in molecular biophysics to commercial
applications. The new Force Field Explorer (FFE) graphical front-end for TINKER
is being tested in both research and teaching environments at Washington
University. Recently, the University has organized an interdepartmental Center
for Computational Biology (CCB), which will provide a campus-wide focal point
for teaching and research in molecular and biophysical modeling. TINKER and FFE
will play a key role in a new course, "Modeling Biomolecular Systems", which is
team-taught by the CCB faculty. Course-related instructional materials and
suggested projects will be made available via the Internet. The TINKER package
will serve as the development platform for the next-generation force field
efforts. The software is presently used worldwide by as many as 20,000
researchers and laboratories, and is cited in over 200 refereed scientific
papers published within the past two years. As is currently the case, the TINKER
source code and all force field parameter sets developed under this project will
remain freely available to any interested parties. The ready availability of
modular, documented code and parameters will also enable the incorporation of
the AMOEBA potential energy model into other, even more widely used, molecular
modeling suites.