* 0344405
* Evolution of Behavior and Associated Structural and Physiological Traits in the Leafhopper Genus Cuerna (Hemiptera, Cicadellidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Christopher Dietrich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2008
* USD 303,414.00

Loss of ancestral traits and trait complexes is a pervasive aspect&lt;br/&gt;of
the evolutionary process, but its causes, mechanisms, consequences,
and&lt;br/&gt;the possibility of restoration of the lost traits are still
poorly&lt;br/&gt;understood. The current project aims to explore the patterns of
repeated&lt;br/&gt;decay and loss of a stereotyped maternal behavior in the
North American&lt;br/&gt;leafhopper genus Cuerna as a model of the regressive
evolution of a complex&lt;br/&gt;biological function at the species level. In
some of the 31 known species&lt;br/&gt;of the genus, females display an
ancestral egg-powdering behavior, coating&lt;br/&gt;the egg nests with a layer
of specialized Malpighian tubule products and&lt;br/&gt;displaying a suite of
corresponding physiological and structural&lt;br/&gt;modifications, while in
other species no such behavior is observed.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary phylogenetic
analyses suggested that egg-powdering has been&lt;br/&gt;lost or lost-and-
restored within the genus multiple times. In the three&lt;br/&gt;years of the
project the investigators will collect detailed comparative&lt;br/&gt;data on
the egg-laying behavior and associated specializations of the&lt;br/&gt;external
morphology and the Malpighian tubules for every species of
Cuerna.&lt;br/&gt;Then, they will analyze these in the context of a detailed
DNA-based&lt;br/&gt;phylogeny of the genus to address the following questions:
Did the changes&lt;br/&gt;of particular traits proceed as quantum leaps or
gradually? Do&lt;br/&gt;morphological, behavioral, and physiological traits
display similar&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary plasticity? Did they change in a certain
order? Did any&lt;br/&gt;restorations of lost egg-powdering occur in the
evolution of Cuerna? What&lt;br/&gt;were the most likely causes of the losses?
The study will also result in a&lt;br/&gt;taxonomic revision of the genus, which
currently contains a number of&lt;br/&gt;poorly defined
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will contribute to management of
economically important&lt;br/&gt;species of Cuerna by providing identification
aids, as well as behavioral&lt;br/&gt;and physiological data for improved
integrated pest management. An&lt;br/&gt;interactive key to species of Cuerna,
complete with bionomical and&lt;br/&gt;distribution data, will be served on-
line. The project will also provide&lt;br/&gt;training for a graduate student in
the systematics, molecular&lt;br/&gt;phylogenetics, and evolutionary biology of
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;