* 0344070
* Species-Dependent Regulation of Excitability by RNA Editing
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Joshua Rosenthal, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Deshler
* 05/31/2009
* USD 410,977.00

All modern biology is based on the principle that genetic information is stored
in genes and realized in proteins. Surprisingly, recent genome sequencing
projects indicate that drastically different organisms, such as humans, flies
and worms, carry a more or less common set of genes. What then is the genetic
basis of complexity? RNA editing, a process that changes and increases genetic
information, could obviously play an important role, however its biological
significance remains poorly understood. One form of editing, mediated by the
hydrolytic deamination of adenosine (A) residues in mRNAs, is prevalent in the
nervous system of all metazoans. By changing A to Inosine (I), which is read by
the ribosome as guanine (G), codons can be mutated and protein structure and
function changed. In mammals, relatively few mRNA substrates for A-I editing
have been identified, most encoding proteins involved in synaptic transmission.
More recent investigations, however, have identified a surprisingly large number
of substrates in Drosophila and Loligo, suggesting that editing in invertebrates
is a particularly robust process. Many of these examples are ion channel
transcripts. Editing permits multiple proteins from a single gene. How and when
do different organisms edit? Which mRNAs are targeted and how is protein
function changed?&lt;br/&gt;In terms of behavior, cephalopods are the most
sophisticated invertebrates. Experiments outlined in this proposal will compare
how K+ channel mRNAs, expressed in the giant axons of four closely related
species of squid, are edited. These species were chosen because their habitats
span a large thermal gradient, and physiological studies have determined that
their potassium conductance varies according to temperature. Earlier
investigations identified fourteen editing sites in a K+ channel mRNA from
Loligo opalescens. These edits influence channel function in diverse ways,
regulating voltage-dependent gating, overall K+ conductance, and subunit
tetramerization. Preliminary evidence suggests that the position, and A-I
conversion frequency, of some of these sites can vary between species. During
the present funding period, experiments will examine the molecular basis, and
functional consequences, of species-specific edits, using a broad range of
approaches. Molecular techniques will be used to map editing sites and the
associated A-I conversion frequency. Biochemical and molecular techniques will
be used to identify the critical secondary structure that surrounds edited
adenosines and regulates their deamination. Biophysical techniques, including
both macroscopic and single channel recordings, will be used to study how the
amino acid changes caused by editing sites affect channel function. Taken
together, these approaches will be used to investigate how the pattern of
editing changes between species, the biochemical and molecular properties
underlying these differences, and how species-specific edits affect the
physiological properties of K+ channels. These data are important because they
provide a window on how A-I editing influences the evolution of nervous
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;