* 0344360
* Immune Systems of Long-lived Invertebrates
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Peter Armstrong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 03/31/2009
* USD 315,174.00

One of the important threats to survival is the hosts of parasites that infect
all organisms, causing disease and threatening premature death. The immune
system is the first line of defense against attack by parasites. An effective
immune system is particularly important for long-lived species because they
typically show an extended period between conception and the age of
reproduction. The immune system targets the invading parasite, typically by
processes of immobilization and direct cytotoxic attack on the parasite and also
has proteins that bind and inactivate toxic products of the invading parasites.
This proposal will characterize distinct elements of the immune system of the
long-lived invertebrate, the American horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus,
including its blood clotting system and a system that protects the surface of
the carapace from colonization by fouling organisms. (1) The blood clot is an
under-appreciated component of the immune system for arthropods and vertebrates.
The research will investigate the potential importance of the binding of a
collection of proteins of the immune system to fibrils of the blood clot. Bound
immune effector proteins include the broadly reactive plasma protease inhibitor,
a2-macroglobulin (a2M), which may function to protect the fibrillar blood clot
from proteolytic degradation by entrapped microbes, and a suite of other
effector proteins that target toxic microbial products such as
lipopolysaccharide and that are directly cytotoxic to the invading microbes.
Both mammals and arthropods utilize the blood clot to immobilize parasites and
reduce their potential for systemic dissemination. This research will test the
proposition that the clot is, in addition, directly toxic to invading microbes
and is directly involved in neutralizing their toxic products. This is an
entirely new perspective on the operation of the blood clot in immunity. (2) The
adult Limulus infrequently, if ever, molts its carapace. Nevertheless, the
carapace is surprisingly free of the sessile fouling organisms that decorate
every other solid surface in direct contact with seawater. This laboratory has
identified a system that potentially contributes to maintaining the pristine
character of the adult cuticle, a mucous layer secreted onto the surface of the
cuticle from a system of glands that lie immediately beneath the carapace. This
secretion has potent cytolytic activities and the proposed research will
characterize the cytolytic activity of the dermal exudate and to characterize
the protective functions of that system. It is possible that the system that
keeps the carapace of Limulus free of fouling organisms can be adapted to
protect man-made surfaces in contact with the marine environment from
colonization by fouling species.