* 0344883
* Phylogenetics and Evolution of Crassula (Crassulaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Mark Mort, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 295,577.00

The jade plants (Crassula, Crassulaceae) are a group of approximately 200
species of flowering plants that are largely confined to South Africa. These
plants, while best known for their highly fleshy leaves, display a great
diversity of growth forms, ranging from annuals to long-lived shrubs and trees.
Species in this group also display a spectacular diversity of flowers; some
species possess tiny star-shaped flowers while others have large tubular
flowers. Also noteworthy is the high diversity of chromosome numbers that have
been reported for some species of jade plants; however, the significance of this
variation has yet to be investigated comprehensively. In South Africa, jade
plants occur in many different habitats, with many found on moist cliff faces,
whereas others are confined to coastal sand dune habitats. In certain areas of
the country (e.g. the Succulent Karoo Desert) these species form a major
ecological component of the vegetation. Despite their ecological importance and
high level of morphological diversity, the taxonomy of these plants has yet to
be studied comprehensively. The proposed research by Dr. Mark Mort of the
University of Kansas, with colleagues in South Africa, focuses on this
attractive and complex group of plants and has several major goals: 1)
Evolutionary relationships among species of jade plants will be determined
through comparison of DNA sequences from multiple gene regions. This study will
result in a necessary framework for examining the diversity in growth form,
flowers, and chromosome numbers. In combination, this will permit an assessment
of the boundaries of species within this group of plants and ultimately will
assist in determining how many species should be recognized. 2) Floral diversity
will be assessed via detailed measurements of approximately 17 morphological
traits from field-collected flowers. This will provide important insights into
floral change in this genus. 3) The extent of chromosome diversity in jade
plants will be documented by conducting extensive chromosome counting.
Examination of chromosome diversity in conjunction with the estimate of species
relationships will permit an assessment of the importance of chromosome changes
in creating the species diversity present in jade plants. &lt;br/&gt;South
Africa, despite its relatively small size, contains a diversity of plants that
is comparable to the more widely publicized tropics. Despite its uniqueness,
much of the botanical diversity of this region has yet to be examined.
Considering the current and ongoing threat to global biodiversity, areas of
concentrated diversity, such as South Africa, require special attention. This
work will contribute to graduate education at the University of Kansas and is
being conducted in collaboration with botanical researchers in South Africa; the
results will be communicated to educators and the general public through
informal lectures in the U.S. and in South Africa. &lt;br/&gt;