* 0344583
* CRB: Consequences of Forest Fragmentation for an Endemic Montane Tree
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Henry Howe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2005
* USD 31,400.00

The forest archipelago of the East Usambara Moutains, Tanzania, holds the
richest remnants of 30 million year old rainforests that once extended across
Africa. Endemic tree species, comprising 24% of the tree flora, include
overstory and understory species of all successional stages and a variety of
pollination and dispersal systems. This investigation tests potential reasons
why Leptonychia usambarensis (Sterculiaceae), an endemic bird-dispersed
successional tree, reproduces less well in forest fragments &lt; 30 ha than in
nearby continuous forest of 3500 ha. Forest fragmentation in tropical systems
may have biotic or abiotic consequences for trees. Biotic consequences include
pollinator or disperser limitation from loss or reduction of insects, birds or
mammals that pollinate flowers or disperse seeds, reduction of seed or seedling
survival from pathogens or animals that are more prevalent or more devastating
in disturbed habitats, and inbreeding depression among small isolated
populations of only a few related individuals. Abiotic effects can be numerous,
but usually reflect responses to altered light regimens with the increase in
edge to area ratio that occurs with reduction of forest patch size. The proposed
study would extend for one year an ongoing investigation of the consequences of
forest fragmentation. Our results to date show that birds that disperse seeds of
this species in continuous forest are reduced in numbers or absent in fragments,
that fewer seeds are dispersed away from parent trees, that more seedlings occur
near parents than further away in fragments than in continuous forest, and that
juvenile plants more than one year old recruit less well in fragments than in
extensive forest. Remaining issues in need of evaluation require a reciprocal
seedling transplant experiment that will test potential inbreeding effects and
habitat and edge effects on regenerating seedlings. Two thousand establishing
seedlings from 20 continuous forest and 20 fragment trees will be transplanted
to edge and interior locations to test: (1) presence or absence of potential
inbreeding effects under competitive field conditions, and (2) edge and interior
habitat suitability of seedlings from continuous forest trees in both extensive
and fragmented habitats. If either or both effects are shown, further support
will be requested to dissect their causes and consequences for this and other
endemic and pan-African trees species. The broader impacts of this study relate
to a clearer understanding of the causes of diversity and rarity in tropical
forests. These forests typically contain a few common species together with many
species that are present in low abundance or are rare in any given unit area.
This fact makes tropical trees especially vulnerable to forest fragmentation,
leaving the majority in low densities in small relict patches. This study has
been the first to clearly demonstrate that tree species in tropical forest
fragments are dispersal limited, and it may be the first to clearly document an
environment by seed source interaction that would alert ecologists to the
ubiquitous threat of inbreeding depression in small relict stands. The study
supports graduate training of an African student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;