* 0344497
* Mitochondrial Retrograde Regulation in Plants: Identification of Regulated Genes and Signaling Pathway Components and Involvement in Stress Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2007
* David Rhoads, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2007
* USD 455,987.00

Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound sub-compartments called organelles (e.g.
nuclei, chloroplasts, mitochondria, and peroxisomes). Communication between
organelles is of central importance to the functioning of cells. Of particular
interest is the way in which organelles such as chloroplasts and mitochondria
communicate their status to the nucleus to cause changes in gene expression. The
status of each of the metabolic activities, such as respiration and the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in the mitochondria, photosynthesis in the
chloroplasts, and other key metabolic pathways that take place in organelles, is
vital to the functioning of cells. If the metabolic activities of the organelles
are not functioning properly, then, in general, the organelles seem to be able
to communicate this to the nucleus so that changes in gene expression can occur
that will help to alleviate the situation at the molecular level. Relatively
little is known about the way in which this is accomplished, especially in
higher eukaryotes. One important category of the type of stimuli that may alter
organelle function is environmental changes. This includes changes in light
level and environmental stresses such as cold stress, heat stress, nutrient
deprivation and pathogen attack. Plants are sessile and, therefore, must adjust
to changes in environmental conditions by attempting to maintain or regain
cellular homeostasis. It is clear that plants respond to stress and changes in
metabolism by altering gene expression. Environmental changes may rely on
communication between organelles and the nucleus (a process referred to as
retrograde regulation of gene expression) to alter the expression of key genes
vital to a successful response to the particular stress. The main focus of the
research in this project it to test the hypothesis that there are multiple modes
of communication, referred to as signaling pathways, from mitochondria to the
nucleus in plants: one pathway to communicate to the nucleus that there has been
a perturbation of respiration, which may be caused by some environmental
stresses, and another pathway to communicate that there has been a perturbation
of metabolic processes, such as the TCA cycle, which also may be caused by some
environmental stresses. If mitochondria-to-nucleus signaling is a key part of
the overall response of plants to stresses, then it will be very interesting to
determine the exact roles of mitochondria-to-nucleus signaling in individual
stress responses. Several approaches will be used to address this problem. The
promoter (gene expression controlling) region of the AtAOX1a gene, which
responds to mitochondrial retrograde signaling, will be mutated at specific
sites to determine regions that are important for the response. A full view of
the genomic changes in gene expression that result from perturbations of
mitochondrial respiration or perturbation of the TCA cycle will also be
determined. A genetic screen will be utilized to isolate mutant Arabidopsis
thaliana plants that lack mitochondrial retrograde signaling pathways. These
mutant plants will be analyzed to determine the effects of the mutation in each.
Undergraduate students, especially those of groups that are under-represented in
the life sciences, will be recruited for participation in this research program.
Graduate student training and post-doctoral training are also intended to be a
major part of this project. Because of the diverse approaches used in my
laboratory and the presence of close colleagues interested in inter-organellar
communication, the training environment for students and post-doctoral fellows
should be very stimulating.