* 0344888
* Maternal Control of Pattern Formation at the Ends of the Drosophila Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* David Stein, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms through which the seemingly simple
fertilized egg generates a complex multicellular organism is a topic of
fundamental interest that has been pondered since the time of Aristotle. A major
insight that has emerged from studies of early development in the fruitfly
Drosophila melanogaster is that the generation of pattern in the embryo is
dependent upon the prior establishment of pattern in the ovarian follicle in
which the egg is formed. The mother fly provisions the developing egg with a set
of localized determinants that will later direct the spatially- specific
expression of the embryo's own genes. Among the structures that are specified by
localized maternal determinants are the most terminally-positioned structures of
the Drosophila embryo, the acron at the anterior and the telson at the
posterior. Formation of the termini requires activation of the transmembrane
receptor tyrosine kinase Torso, which is distributed throughout the membrane of
the early embryo. This activation must occur specifically at the ends of the
embryo. The ligand for Torso is thought to be the Trunk protein, which is
secreted into the fluid-filled perivitelline space that lies between the
embryonic membrane and the inner surface of the eggshell, the vitelline
membrane. Spatially-restricted activation of Torso by Trunk is believed to be
controlled by the product of the gene torsolike. During oogenesis, torsolike is
expressed in two specialized groups of polar follicle cells at the anterior and
posterior ends of the developing oocyte. Our laboratory has found that Torsolike
is localized to the anterior and posterior ends of the eggshell. These
observations suggest a mechanism whereby an inactive precursor form of Trunk is
secreted uniformly into the perivitelline space and processed into an active
ligand specifically at the ends of the egg where it then binds and activates the
Torso receptor. Trunk activation requires the function of Torsolike in a process
that has not been elucidated. The objectives of this work are to determine the
molecular mechanism by which Trunk becomes activated, and to elucidate the role
Torsolike protein plays in this process. The specific aims are: (1) To determine
whether Trunk is processed from an inactive precursor into an active ligand. (2)
To identify other effector molecules involved in the formation of the Trunk
ligand by their abilities to interact with Torsolike, and through the
characterization of new mutations that affect the specification of the termini.
(3 ) To identify the determinants of Torsolike that mediate its localization in
the vitelline membrane of the eggshell. Intellectual merit: In addition to their
contribution to the understanding of pattern formation in early development
these experiments have significance outside of the context of Drosophila early
development. Signal transduction through receptor tyrosine kinases is required
for a wide variety of cell/cell communication pathways that operate in numerous
physiological and developmental contexts, including axonal pathfinding, cell
migration, cell differentiation and proliferation. The role of the Drosophila
Torso receptor in embryonic patterning is a particularly compelling paradigm
because of the exquisite regulation of its activation, both spatially and
temporally. The control of Torso activation by its ligand is likely to provide
important insights applicable to a variety of other ligand/receptor interactions
that are of intellectual, as well as medical interest. Broader impacts resulting
from the proposed activity: (1) Discovery, understanding, teaching, training and
learning. The maternal control of Drosophila embryonic anterior-posterior
polarity is a textbook paradigm that is used in undergraduate teaching of
developmental biology. The experiments described herein seek a deeper
understanding of this process. Furthermore, the investigations proposed provide
numerous opportunities for experimental contributions by undergraduate students
at the University of Texas, which will contribute to "hands on" training of
those students in a research setting. Interested undergraduate students will be
encouraged to participate in this project. These students will have the
opportunity to present their work at local and national scientific meetings.
Both the graduate student researcher and faculty associates comprising the
research team on this proposal will also engage in undergraduate teaching. (2)
Participation of underrepresented groups. The University of Texas matriculates a
large population of students from historically underrepresented groups.
Opportunities for hands on training in laboratory research related to the
proposed studies will be available to interested students from these groups. (3)
Dissemination of Results. Results obtained will be published in the scientific
literature and reported at scientific conferences. Moreover, segments of the
proposed investigations involve the generation of reagents likely to be of use
to other investigors. These will be disseminated freely to any who request them.