* 0344601
* The Structural Basis of Transit Peptide Interaction(s) with the Chloroplast Toc Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 04/30/2009
* USD 451,124.00

Plastids have evolved into semi-autonomous organelles whose metabolic function
is heavily dependent upon the import of nuclear-encoded proteins that were
initially encoded by ancestral cyanobacterial genomes. The majority of nuclear-
encoded proteins that function within the plastid are synthesized as higher
molecular weight precursors with an N-terminal extension known as a transit
peptide, which mediates specific and efficient targeting of the precursor to
plastids. Analysis of the Arabidopsis genome predicts that more than 3000
precursors are plastid-targeted. The structural and functional criteria that
define these thousands of transit peptides are not well understood. Analysis of
hundreds of transit peptides to date has failed to reveal significant conserved
primary sequence, suggesting that a common secondary or tertiary structure may
account for the specific targeting activity of transit peptides. In this study,
site-directed molecular mutagenesis, NMR, isothermal titration calorimetry, and
analytical ultracentrifugation will be used to directly determine the structural
basis of peptide-receptor interactions in Arabidopsis. This project will provide
a new level of mechanistic understanding of chloroplast protein import. Findings
from the project will provide a starting point for additional structure/function
analysis of other transit peptides and their interaction with other components
of the chloroplast translocation apparatus. An applied aspect of this research
may be the enhanced targeting of novel plastid precursor proteins to plastids,
thereby improving both the utility and safety of many different agronomic plants
and plant products.