* 0344116
* Collaborative Research: Systematic Analysis of Evolutionary Radiation of Eupatorieae (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Jose Panero, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 311,391.00

This collaborative research by Dr. Jose Panero from the University of Texas
with colleague Dr. Edward Schilling at the University of Tennessee will analyze
the systematic relationships and phylogenetic history of the Asteraceae
(sunflower) tribe Eupatorieae. The tribe includes horticultural species such as
sweetleaf and blazingstar, as well as noxious weeds such as Siam weed and
Crofton weed. It is of particular interest for systematic studies because it has
a large number of species (over 2400) and a widespread, primarily New World
distribution, yet appears to be of relatively recent origin. A primary source of
new information will be DNA sequence data from the chloroplast genome, and more
than 10,000 base pairs of sequence data will be obtained from each of 180
samples representing 140 genera. Nuclear DNA sequences of the ribosomal regions
totaling about 1,100 base pairs per sample will also be obtained. Assessments of
these extensive data sets will rely on computer-based methods, including
parsimony analysis, to produce a phylogeny ("family tree") that shows the
relationships among members of the tribe. Comparison of the tree with data from
other sources will be done to help understand the timing and sequence of
morphological or chromosomal changes that have led to the species-level
diversity of the tribe. The phylogenetic tree will also provide the basis to
resolve contentious issues regarding the generic and subtribal classification of
Eupatorieae. The result will be a more stable and predictive classification, and
monophyletic groups will be identified that can be a target for future taxonomic
studies to clarify the overall biodiversity of the tribe.&lt;br/&gt; This
research will have broad and lasting impacts through its additions to the body
of publicly available baseline information about Eupatorieae, training and
education of students, and applications to resources about the family
Asteraceae. The extensive fieldwork, much of it in tropical and subtropical
areas that are actively threatened by human encroachment, to collect plant
material will be documented by deposition of voucher specimens in scientific
collections. Results of DNA sequence studies will be deposited at GenBank, a
public database that is freely accessible by other researchers. Participation of
graduate students in the research will provide training in basic systematics of
a family that is large and widespread as well as in the laboratory and
analytical procedures of molecular phylogenetics. The project will also provide
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research, and will coordinate
with initiatives such as the McNair Program to target students from groups
historically underrepresented in science research. New scientific findings from
the research, including adjustments to the classification of Eupatorieae, will
be documented by publication in peer-reviewed journals. Broader dissemination of
the information will be accomplished by expansion of web-based resources to make
information about systematics and phylogenetic relationships of Asteraceae
widely available, using formats including images and graphics that make it
accessible and understandable to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;