* 0344556
* Conference: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on Computational and Systems Neuroscience, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, March 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 02/28/2005
* USD 13,780.00

It has long been recognized that the fundamental questions of neuroscience
require a multidisciplinary scientific approach in order to be properly
addressed. In particular, systems neuroscience, which deals with information
processing and systems of large numbers of neurons, has been recognized as
requiring a computational and mathematical component. For example, questions
such as: "how does the nervous system represent the world around us?" and "what
is the relationship between neural activity and behavior? " involve postulating
and testing hypotheses about the links between very high dimensional spaces: the
space of neural activity, and the world. Computational methods and models suited
to high dimensions have grown increasingly common in the analysis,
interpretation, and design of neurophysiological experiments. Many of the
methods and concepts that have been developed are not tied to specific sensory
modalities or systems, but are ideas that address fundamental aspects of
neuroscience, and can be applied to a wide range of problems. However, perhaps
in part because of its multidisciplinary nature and the breath of its scope,
computational and systems neuroscience has not yet emerged as a distinct
community. That is, researchers asking similar questions and using complementary
approaches, are often unaware of the related work of other researchers, and
therefore cannot benefit from their insights and advances.

It is proposed to host the first computational and systems neuroscience (Cosyne)
meeting at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in March, 2004. The emphasis of Cosyne
will be on combining computational experimental approaches, highlighting
concepts that carry across systems and modalities. This meeting will bring
together a critical mass of scientists with shared interest and perspectives,
including both experimental systems neuroscientists who are seeking to benefit
from computational approaches, and theorists who are working on problems of
direct interest to experimental systems neuroscientists. This meeting is
intended to have a particularly strong impact on graduate students and
postdoctoral associates, since it may change the perspectives within which they
do their work.

