* 0344661
* Segregation and Positioning of Basal Bodies
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Carolyn Silflow, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2009
* USD 730,000.00

Basal bodies and centrioles are microtubule organelles with both longitudinal
and nine-fold rotational asymmetry. In addition to their role in ciliary
assembly, basal bodies are important for the rotational positioning of motile
cilia to properly orient the direction of ciliary beat. Little is known about
the molecular components that establish or recognize the asymmetry to assemble
appendages onto basal bodies at specific locations. Using the model organism
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular, biflagellate green alga, the PI has
isolated a series of mutants with a variable flagellar number (vfl) and with
defects in rotational positioning of basal bodies, in orientation of probasal
bodies with respect to mature basal bodies, and in segregation of basal bodies
during cell division. Two VFL genes have been cloned. This new project continues
the PI's study of the vfl mutants. The specific aims of the project are to 1)
Clone and characterize the VFL4, VFL5, and VFL6 genes and localize the VFL5 and
VFL6 gene products using light and electron microscopy; 2) Identify additional
genes involved in basal body segregation and positioning using genetic
approaches including insertional mutagenesis and chemical mutagenesis; 3)
Examine interactions among vfl genes and identify interacting proteins using
genetic approaches and yeast two-hybrid technology. The experimental approach
will identify evolutionarily conserved molecules that specify rotational
asymmetry in basal bodies as well as molecular components of fibers that bind to
specific sites on the walls of basal bodies. The study will advance the long-
term goal of understanding the molecular mechanisms that underlie the structure
of basal bodies, the attachment of appendages to specific sites on the wall of
the basal body, and the initiation of basal body duplication at a specified
rotational position. The project will provide research training at three levels:
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral.