* 0344377
* Genetic and Molecular Interactors in Circadian Clock Function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* David Somers, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2007
* USD 469,475.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of coordinating whole-organism
processes with often-predictable changes in the environment has been met to some
extent by the circadian clock. This internal timing system provides for both the
anticipation of coming changes and as a buffer against rapid variation in the
environment. In plants, close coordination between the environment and
development is by now axiomatic. Flowering time and dormancy onset are just two
examples of the importance of coordinating environmental and developmental
timing in plants, and the circadian clock plays a crucial role in this. Recent
cloning advances have shown that the molecular components of plant and animal
circadian systems are distinctly different, though the two kingdoms share the
same basic circadian properties.&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this work is a
better molecular understanding of the mechanism of action of the plant circadian
clock. There has been a recent rapid increase in the identification of gene
products that affect circadian period and amplitude, but the relationship
between these factors remains unclear. This work aims at understanding these
relationships by working outwards from one component, the Arabidopsis F-box
protein ZEITLUPE (ZTL), using a combination of molecular and genetic strategies.
The objectives of this proposal are:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Characterization and
positional cloning of the enhancers of the long period ztl-1 phenotype. Genetic
screens for suppressors or enhancers of mutant phenotypes have become a common
and successful strategy for identifying the principle players in a genetic
hierarchy and for identifying unexpected interactions between pathways
previously thought to be independent. Seven mutants that enhance the long period
phenotype of ztl-1 have been identified. In addition to the primary circadian
phenotype, each mutant is being characterized for changes in hypocotyl length
and flowering time. Each is being physically mapped to determine the number of
loci involved, and map-based cloning will then be used to identify the
responsible genes.&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterization and positional cloning of
suppressors of the arrhythmic ZTL overexpression phenotype. High constitutive
overexpression of ZTL causes arrhythmicity. It is likely that a unique class of
interactors may be found by searching for genes that can down regulate ZTL-
mediated activity and restore rhythmicity in the continued presence of high ZTL
levels (trans mutations). Two independently-isolated trans mutations that confer
wild type (24.5 h) or slightly shorter (22.5 h) periodicity to a high ZTL
overexpressing line have been identified. Each candidate is being further
characterized and mapped to determine allelism, and map-based cloning is ongoing
to identify the gene(s) involved.&lt;br/&gt;3. Proteins that interact with ZTL
in plant extracts will be identified. These proteins should provide insight into
the mechanism of action of ZTL.&lt;br/&gt; The broader scientific benefits of
this research include a clearer understanding of the circadian clock, with
potential agricultural consequences. The interaction of the circadian system
with flowering pathways implies a potential for increased control over the
timing of floral initiation. The latitudinal range of some agricultural species
is limited by daylength, so manipulation of clock components could contribute to
increasing the growing range of some plants. From the perspective of training,
the laboratory research environment is a hands-on learning experience that no
lecture series can replace. The present project will employ undergraduates,
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. The research experiences of these
people will broaden their scientific expertise and contribute to their
development as future PI's, post-docs and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;