* 0344541
* The Endocytic Pathway of Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Margaret Clarke, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2009
* USD 609,406.00

Intracellular vacuoles play important roles in cell function. The PI's research
group is using a combination of molecular genetic and imaging techniques to
characterize the dynamics and interactions of the contractile vacuole complex,
an osmoregulatory organelle, and early steps in the endo-lysosomal pathway in
the model microorganism. Dictyostelium discoideum. Prior NSF support enabled the
PI to create a novel probe that allows proton pump trafficking to be monitored
in living cells to explore the function of the V-ATPase. In this new project the
PI will use the proton pump trafficking probe and other probes that monitor the
evolution of pH along the endo-lysosomal pathway to characterize the trafficking
of the V-ATPase and other key proteins in relation to endosomal acidification,
neutralization, fusion, and exocytosis. Other studies will test the hypothesis
that the endocytic pathway treats food particles differently from non-digestible
substances. In related work, the PI will utilize GFP chimeras of ER-resident
proteins to examine the proposition that endoplasmic reticulum is incorporated
into a forming phagosome, and to investigate whether such incorporation depends
on the nature of the phagocytosed particle. Finally, genetic and biochemical
screens will be used to identify the cell surface receptors that allow
Dictyostelium cells to recognize their prey, and the possible relationship of
these receptors to macrophage receptors that function in innate immunity will be
explored. This project will be coordinated with an ongoing outreach program, the
Oklahoma Science Project, which brings rural high school teachers to the
Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation for two summer months to participate in
research.