* 0344929
* COLLAB: Discontinuous Gas Exchange in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Allen Gibbs, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2005
* USD 161,923.00

Collaborative Research: Discontinuous Gas Exchange in Insects&lt;br/&gt;Michael
C. Quinlan and Allen G. Gibbs&lt;br/&gt;Midwestern University (Glendale) and the
University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project examines the
respiratory physiology of insects in an effort to better understand the enormous
success of these organisms in terrestrial environments. A major challenge for
any terrestrial organism is the retention of body water, and thus it is not
surprising that insects and other terrestrial arthropods have a evolved a suite
of adaptations that serve to reduce evaporative water loss. Behavioral
strategies to minimize dehydration include nocturnal activity, exploitation of
moist microhabitats and seasonal activity synchronized with periods of high
moisture availability. Equally important are physiological adaptations that
reduce water losses through the integument and respiratory system. Water loss
through the arthropod integument (cuticle) is generally very low due to the
presence of complex lipid mixtures that permeate and coat the chitinous cuticle.
Respiratory water loss is less well understood in insects, in part because it is
difficult to measure, and in part because it is highly variable, both within and
among individuals. Recent research suggests that respiratory water loss can be
an important determinant of survival in many insects, particularly those from
xeric habitats. It is the intent of this project to study the interaction of
respiratory behavior and respiratory water loss in a wide range of insects.
&lt;br/&gt; Many terrestrial arthropods perform cyclic, discontinuous release of
carbon dioxide through precise regulation of the valves (spiracles) that control
access to their air-filled respiratory structures (tracheae). For over 50 years
our understanding of gas exchange in these organisms has been dominated by the
view that water balance was the primary selective force behind this discontinous
gas exchange (DGE). Numerous recent studies, however, have questioned the
applicability of the water conservation model to terrestrial arthropods in
general, and several alternative hypotheses have been proposed. The chthonic
hypothesis proposes that DGE arose as a means to increase the gradients for
carbon dioxide release and oxygen uptake in burrows and other
hypercapnic/hypoxic habitats. Another hypothesis holds that DGE acts to reduce
internal oxygen levels and thereby minimize cellular damage from free radicals.
A non-adaptive hypothesis views DGE as emerging from the simple regulatory
mechanisms of insect ventilation. None of these hypotheses have been subjected
to systematic investigation, and no experiments have been performed to
distinguish between models in a rigorous manner. &lt;br/&gt;The present project
will test these hypotheses by thoroughly analyzing ventilatory patterns in
closely related insects from arid and mesic habitats, from burrowing, arboreal
and surface habitats, and from different altitudes. This work will be performed
in a rigorous phylogenetic context, using families of beetles from the New and
Old World (Tenebrionidae, Carabidae, Scarabaeidae) and fruit flies (Drosophila),
for which phylogenetic information is available. In addition to testing specific
predictions of each model, critical tests will be performed to distinguish
between models. For example, if the water conservation hypothesis is true, then
DGE should be more evident in xeric-adapted organisms and DGE cycles should
change in other predictable ways. If the chthonic hypothesis is true, then DGE
should be more prevalent in fossorial taxa, as compared with arboreal forms.
Under the oxidative damage hypothesis, high-altitude species should exhibit DGE
less often than low-altitude species. In biochemical tests of these hypotheses,
buffering capacities, carbonic anhydrase levels, and oxidative defense enzymes
will be assessed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;