* 0344237
* Dynamics of Heavy Precipitation over Mesoscale Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Michael Kaplan, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2008
* USD 365,000.00

The objective of this research is to advance scientific understanding of
orographic rainfall. Three major questions will be addressed:

(1) In addition to the moist Froude number, what are other major non dimensional
parameters that control the propagation of orographically induced mesoscale
convective systems over mountains? (2) What are the formation and propagation
mechanisms of convective cells embedded in an orographic mesoscale convective
system? (3) How does an upper-level jet streak couple with the low-level flow to
create an environment that is highly favorable for heavy orographic
precipitation?

In order to address the first question, the Principal Investigator will extend
previous studies to investigate other major control parameters for a
conditionally unstable orographic flow. A series of idealized numerical
experiments will be performed using a mesoscale numerical model to study the
effects of basic flow speed, instability, moisture content, aspect ratio of the
mountain, Coriolis force and vertical wind shear on moist flow regimes. In order
to address the second question, the Principal Investigator hypothesizes that
advection is the major mechanism for the generation of convective cells. This
advection mechanism will be tested by performing a series of numerical
experiments. Regarding the third question, it is hypothesized that there is a
vertical coupling process between the boundary layer flow and upper-level jet
streak that creates an environment that is highly favorable for heavy orographic
precipitation. A mesoscale numerical model will be adopted to perform real-case
numerical experiments to help answer this question.

The intellectual merit of this approach is largely derived from the unique
multi-faceted synthesis of idealized numerical modeling, real data numerical
modeling and observational data analyses as applied to the problem of why heavy
orographic rainfall occurs over mesoscale mountains.

The broader impacts will be achieved by utilizing the research findings for the
development of improved forecast techniques of extreme orographic rainfall
predictions. It is anticipated that this will result in the saving of lives and
the reduction of property losses.