* 0345441
* DMUU: Statistical Disclosure Limitation for Geospatial Image Data
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Alan Karr, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2006
* USD 98,788.00

In order to be usable for scientific and policy purposes, remotely sensed data
such as satellite images, which have become ubiquitous in the social and natural
sciences, must be accorded the same confidentiality protection long provided to
other forms of data. The project will produce initial formulations and
techniques for statistical disclosure limitation (SDL) for geospatial image
data, using longitudinal analyses to frame questions and as pointers to testbed
data sets. In particular, the research will address the extent to which existing
risk-utility formulations for SDL, existing techniques for record linkage and
existing computational methods and systems, especially geographical information
systems (GIS), can be adapted to yield immediate impact. In the process, the
project team will develop new abstractions and techniques for record linkage,
disclosure risk and data utility to multiple stakeholders. Scalable data
structures and algorithms will be created that can handle complex, high-
dimensional image data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formulation, implementation and
evaluation of sound decisions to deal with climate change depend significantly
on longitudinal analyses of geospatial image data, at both the pre-decision (Is
the problem getting worse?) and post-decision stages (Is the policy working?).
Much such data is, however, collected without the consent or even the knowledge
of data subjects such as landowners. In order that the scientific benefits of
capturing image data outweigh privacy intrusions, confidentiality must be
maintained. The research will provide techniques that enable effective use of
longitudinal image while preserving privacy and accommodating profound
differences between images and traditional---numerical or categorical---data.
The project will yield a deeper understanding of privacy issues associated with
geospatial image data, and serve as the basis for future research. This
developmental award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and
Social Dynamics priority area special competition on Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU).