* 0345323
* Collaborative Research:  Mercury Cycling in Soils: Dynamic Sources for Aquatic Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* John Warwick, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2004
* USD 52,790.00

Warwick&lt;br/&gt;9975406&lt;br/&gt;The biogeochemistry of mercury in aquatic
systems has received considerable attention because of the toxicity and
biomagnification of methylmercury. However, much of the methylmercury entering
water bodies is derived from soils. This program will utilize a
multidisciplinary approach to investigate factors controlling mercury
methylation in soils and its transport into aquatic systems using the Carson
River, Nevada as the test site. Field and laboratory investigations will include
analysis of mercury speciation, measurements of methylation, demethylation, and
reduction of mercury, the distribution and expression of bacterial genes
responsible for mercury transformations, and application of a mercury biosensor
for investigating mercury bioavailability. Manipulative experiments will be
conducted to determine effects of wetting and drying cycles and oxygen
availability on pathways of mercury cycling. The biogeochemical/molecular
results will be used to greatly improve a mercury transport model, which will be
tested empirically during low and high flow conditions. The results will
delineate controls on net methylmercury formation and eventual transport in a
contaminated site, and will be useful for understanding the role of soils in
controlling methylmercury pollution in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental Geochemistry and
Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 99-9, and is being funded jointly by the
Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, and Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;