* 0345787
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Technologies and Emerging Communicative Practices Among the Navajo
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Joel Sherzer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,750.00

Under the direction of Dr. Joel Sherzer, Mr. Leighton C. Peterson will conduct
ethnographic research for his doctoral dissertation concerning the impact of new
technologies on Navajo language and society. Private initiatives and Federal
policy decisions have recently made subsidized cell phones and free high-speed
Internet connections available to the Navajo Nation, a traditionally underserved
area in the US Southwest. This study focuses on the subsequent shifts in Navajo
communicative practice, investigating how changing beliefs and attitudes
regarding language and technology converge to form new ways of communicating.
The research will consist of participant observation, recorded interviews, and
video and audio recording of on-line and off-line interactions with technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant in several ways. First, it
brings the scientific study of language maintenance and sociolinguistics into
new areas, including the potential of new media for the vitality of indigenous
and minority languages. Second, this research investigates the micro and macro
level processes involved in technologically-mediated language and culture. This
is an important area of inquiry in linguistic anthropology, especially as
indigenous and minority groups around the world increasingly engage new media in
efforts of self-representation and cultural preservation. Third, this research
explores the impact of programs designed to bridge the digital divide,
investigating how members of a marginalized community, the recipients of the new
technologies, are actually being served, and how the use of these new
technologies is affecting them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;