* 0345471
* Evolution and Environment of Tropical American Cupuladriid Bryozoa
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Jeremy Jackson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2007
* USD 325,540.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution and Environment of Tropical American
Cupuladriid Bryozoa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jeremy Jackson, Scripps Institute of
Oceanography&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0345471&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs will determine the
extent to which major environmental change in the Caribbean Sea has driven the
macroevolutionary patterns of cupuladriid bryozoans over the past 15 million
years. Cupuladriids are small, free-living colonial animals whose skeletons are
among the most abundant and well-preserved fossils from tropical America. They
vary greatly in their life histories, from entirely sexual to almost exclusively
asexual species, and these differences are well preserved in the budding
patterns and shapes of colonies. Cupuladriids also record changes in the mean
annual range of temperature and total productivity in the environment through
seasonal variations in size of their modular living chambers called zooids. Thus
we have the opportunity to precisely observe major evolutionary and
environmental changes from the same fossils. Preliminary work suggests that the
Caribbean closely resembled the tropical eastern Pacific until about 10 million
years ago when there was still strong oceanographic mixing between the Atlantic
and Pacific through the Panamanian Strait. At that time, seasonal upwelling,
temperature fluctuations, and high biological productivity occurred in both
oceans. Then, as the Isthmus rose and connections between the oceans diminished,
the Caribbean slowly became more stable with little upwelling and low seasonal
variations and productivity. There is also evidence that the cupuladriid
bryozoans shifted from predominantly asexual reproduction and dominance of the
genus Discoporella to predominantly sexual reproduction and dominance by the
genus Cupuladria - conditions that are observed between the eastern Pacific and
Caribbean today. PIs will test all these patterns using abundant, replicate
collections in both space and time to document in great detail the changes in
environmental conditions and corresponding changes in bryozoan life histories
and taxonomic composition. By using the same samples for measures of both
environment and biological change they will be able to reconstruct the relations
between evolution and environment with high statistical confidence, thereby
avoiding the broad-brush approach and lack of precision that have plagued
earlier studies of this nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;