* 0345149
* Microbially Induced Sedimentary Structures from the 2.9 Ga old Pongola and Witwatersrand Supergroups, South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Nora Noffke, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2008
* USD 150,763.00

EARTH'S EARLIEST BACTERIA IN A SANDY MARINE ENVIRONMENT: FOSSIL MICROORGANISMS
FROM THE 2.9 BILLION YEARS OLD PONGOLA AND WITWATERSRAND SUPERGROUPS, SOUTH
AFRICA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nora Noffke; Department of Ocean, Earth &amp;
Atmospheric Sciences; 4600 Elkhorn Avenue; Norfolk, VA 23529;
nnoffke@odu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria and cyanobacteria form organic,
carpet-like layers that cover large areas of coastal sediments. Such layers have
been termed "microbial mats". In sandy marine sediments, microbial mats cause
very characteristic sedimentary structures. These structures have been termed
"microbially induced sedimentary structures - MISS", and they are known not only
from modern marine environments, but from sandy sediments of all Earth ages. The
fossil MISS include significant information about the ancient, mat-forming
microorganisms, and therefore they also constitute a significant tool in
deciphering the strange world of the earliest Earth, the
Archean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas many studies on Archean marine deposits
focus on carbonate rocks or cherts, the PI follows a new approach by
investigating sandstone successions in order to detect MISS. Therefore, the
proposed study opens a new window in understanding Earth's earliest life and
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A pilot study conducted by the PI in the
Pongola Supergroup, South Africa, detected microbially induced sedimentary
structures that provide evidence for the existence of filamentous bacteria
forming microbial mats in 2.9 billion year old shelf environments - the oldest-
known occurrence of microbial mats in siliciclastic (sandy) rocks (Noffke, Hazen
&amp; Nhleko, 2003). The structures include body fossils that resemble the cells
of modern cyanobacteria, chloroflexi, or sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. The body
fossils could indeed hint on the oldest cyanobacteria. Mineralogical,
geochemical, and isotopic analyses are consistent with a biological origin of
the structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The follow-up investigations will
elucidate the paleoenvironmental conditions that permit the development of
microbial mats in the Archean. A detailed survey of MISS-bearing rock strata
will document the distribution and variation of the ancient microbial mats. It
will show, how different microbial mat types reflect the extreme life conditions
characteristic for the Archean Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
study will set up a catalogue of MISS in order to compare the structures with
those of younger Earth ages. The PI will organize a reference repository of MISS
at Old Dominion University, which would serve the national and international
geoscientific community for research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;