* 0345500
* Neural-Glial Communication Networks: A Computational Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Peter Jung, Ohio University
* Continuing grant
* James Deshler
* 03/31/2010
* USD 481,500.00

The emerging picture of brain function is that of a complex communication
network between neurons and astrocytes. It has now become clear that astrocytes
- the most numerous types of non-neuronal cells in the brain - are important
partners to the neurons. Astrocytes listen to the neuronal chatter, respond to
it and talk back to the neurons, thus modulating their functions. Understanding
the complex communication network of neurons and astrocytes is therefore
significant for the understanding of the brain. While this emerging field of
research has been driven so far predominantly by methods of cellular and
molecular biology, the main objective of this project is to add a new set of
tools - mathematical and computational modeling - that can offer new avenues to
explore the complex neural-glial communication network. A
mathematical/computational model - consisting of functional coupled units -
generates a unique conceptual framework that allows categorizing biologic
processes and generating predictions.

Specifically, this award will enable an exploration of the generation of signals
in astrocytes in response to neuronal activity, the spatial spread of the signal
through the network of astrocytes, and the effect of the spreading signal back
on the neuronal circuit, all significant aspects of interactions between neurons
and astrocytes. Realistic mathematical models of these interactions will be
developed. After the significant components of the neural-glial communication
system are understood, neuronal circuitry with an architecture resembling that
in the cortex can be modeled, and the influence of astrocytes on the network
will be explored.

These goals will be achieved through the use of modern imaging tools employed in
a cell biologist's laboratory, from which critical data on intracellular calcium
signaling will be used to develop realistic mathematical modeling of the neural-
glial interactions.

This project has significance far beyond the specific purpose of understanding
the communication network of astrocytes and neurons in the central nervous
system. Quantitative and conceptual understanding of neural-glial interactions
may provide a basis for a better understanding of brain disorders such as
migraine and epilepsy, in which a glial component is strongly suspected.
Additionally, understanding of the intracellular calcium signaling, an important
signaling pathway between astrocytes, is of critical importance for signaling in
a variety of tissues, such as liver, where it contributes to the release of
enzymes, and in corneal and bronchial epithelia where it is involved with wound
response.