* 0345142
* 3rd International Zeolite Membrane Meeting; July 25-28, 2004; Breckenridge, OH
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Proposal Title: Third International Membrane Meeting&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Richard Noble&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Colorado&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3rd International
Zeolite Membrane Meeting will take place at the Great Divide Lodge in
Breckenridge, CO from July 25th to 28th, 2004. The funding will be used for
travel and registration expenses especially for graduate students, post-doctoral
research associates and new faculty to assist them to participate in this
meeting. The intellectual merit of this meeting is to bring together an
international group of material scientists, chemists, and chemical engineers.
The speakers for the meeting will include many of those working in the "cutting
edge" of this field. The program will be directed to new and/or modified
membrane materials that provide nanoscale separation abilities and expanded
temperature and chemical environment operating conditions. The meeting topics
will span the gamut from fundamentals through important applications. The
session topics have been chosen to attract researchers with a wide range of
interests that relate to nanoporous membrane materials. The broader impact of
this meeting is two-fold. The dissemination of knowledge in this rapidly
expanding field to researchers with a wide range of interests should provide
intellectual stimulation for new and promising research thrusts. Also, the
interactions between researchers should facilitate collaborative
interdisciplinary efforts that will move the field in novel directions.
&lt;br/&gt;