* 0345985
* SAFOD: Mineral Transformations and Fabrics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Ben van der Pluijm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2010
* USD 129,192.00

Mineral transformations and fabrics, particularly involving phyllosilicates, can
critically affect the mechanical behavior of shallow faults. Fabric development
in fault rocks may also significantly influence the permeability/porosity and
role of fluids in fault zones. Thus, detailed mineralogy, mineral transformation
history and fabric development are central to the study of fault rocks and our
understanding of fault mechanics. The SAFOD Hole of the Earthscope Program
provides the opportunity to study the in situ change from undeformed protolith
to fault rock, thereby establishing a reference for the characterization of the
type and magnitude of changes in buried fault zones. The SAFOD hole samples also
allow for direct comparison with nearby exhumed protolith and fault rocks (e.g.,
the Punchbowl Fault), which have been used as representative for fault processes
at depth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach on SAFOD hole samples
consists of X-ray diffraction (for mineral identification, quantification and
crystallinity), X-ray texture goniometry (to quantify phyllosilicate fabrics),
scanning electron microscopy (micron to millimeter scale mineral distribution,
microstructure and qualitative chemistry), transmission electron microscopy
(nanometer-scale microstructure and semi-quantitative chemistry), and ICP-OES
(to quantify elemental composition and material transport). These complementary
techniques provide a thorough characterization of the physico-chemical changes
from protolith and fault rock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from SAFOD Hole
samples (1) offer the mineralogic framework for interpreting fault zone
transformation, particularly in seismically active settings, (2) test the
relevance of the processes inferred from the study of exhumed fault rocks, and
(3) provide constraints on the thermo-mechanical behavior of seismogenic faults.
The work complements studies by other geologic and geophysical teams on
Earthscope's SAFOD hole, and allows comparison with results from exhumed fault
zones nearby and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;