* 0345121
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis for Reductive P-adic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Stephen DeBacker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 97,589.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DeBacker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will work on a number of topics which arise in the study of harmonic analysis
for reductive groups over nonarchimedian local fields. The unifying theme for
these topics is their relation to homogeneity statements. At their most basic
level, homogeneity questions ask: given two distributions, what is the largest
set of functions on which the two distributions will agree? The first topic
concerns the homogeneity question for invariant distributions supported on the
compact elements in the group. This is the last unproven (in general)
homogeneity statement, and it has implications for the "fundamental lemma"
(which is a conjecture). The second topic concerns questions of stability for
distributions supported on the unipotent set. The final topic concerns the
meaning of the constants occurring in the Harish-Chandra-Howe local character
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;The topics discussed above fall under the rubric of
harmonic analysis on Lie groups. This area of mathematics, which is solidly
rooted in physics, was pioneered by Harish-Chandra beginning some fifty years
ago. Since the 1970s, much of the work in this area has been directed toward
questions which arise naturally in the Langlands program (which seeks to relate,
in a strong sense, number theory, representation theory, and harmonic analysis).
For example, Harish-Chandra studied the distributions which arise when one
integrates over a conjugacy class. From the perspective of the Langlands
program, it is also important to study the distributions which arise when one
integrates over certain stable conjugacy classes, that is, classes which become
conjugate over an algebraic closure of the ground field. The investigator hopes
his program of research will contribute to future progress in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;