* 0345680
* Mayangna: a database and study of nominal features on its verbal inflectional system
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Elena Benedicto, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2009
* USD 299,998.00

Mayangna: a database and study of nominal features on its verbal inflectional
system. Benedicto (0345680)

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elena Benedicto will conduct three
years of research on the grammatical system of Mayangna, an endangered language
in Nicaragua. The main study concerns the role of a specific type of verbal
inflection, namely nominal features integrated in the verbal system. Descriptive
and theoretical linguists have long dealt with inflectional systems as a way to
understand the common properties of human language and, at the same type, the
ways in which they can diverge. The Mayangna inflectional system provides a
quite rare type of feature combination that has as yet not been analyzed, and
which can contribute in important ways to our understanding of inflectional
systems in general and, thus, of the nature of human language and the possible
cross-linguistic variation. The data will be collected in conjunction with local
indigenous teams of linguists, as part of the training/educational component of
the project, and will be processed into an integrated, searchable database,
which will be made available to the linguistic community.

The project will contribute to the cross-linguistic mapping of inflectional
systems, while developing a participatory research approach to linguistic
practice, especially, to linguistic fieldwork. A team of indigenous local
linguists, for whose training the PI has been responsible in the past, will be
involved in the collection and processing of the linguistic data. At the same
time, both undergraduate and graduate students in the U.S.A. will also be
involved in collecting and processing the data, in close connection with the
Mayangna team. The training and integration of U.S. and non-U.S. teams will
contribute to new, more balanced ways of understanding international
collaborations with indigenous communities.

