* 0345875
* Improvement and Computerization of the Invertebrate Paleontology Collections at the CU Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Dena Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 432,132.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Colorado Museum under the
direction of Dr. Dena M. Smith to improve the Invertebrate Paleontology
Collections and incorporate all specimen data into a secure computer database.
The Invertebrate Paleontology Collections at the University of Colorado Museum
currently contain 277,520 catalogued invertebrates and 11,500 plants. There are
an additional 4,800 specimens that have yet to be catalogued. Although the
Invertebrate Paleontology Collections have been heavily utilized in the past and
contain one of the best invertebrate paleontology collections for the Rocky
Mountain Region, including a sizeable and historically important fossil insect
and spider collection, the Invertebrate Paleontology Collections have had little
curatorial supervision for nearly 100 years. The planned improvements will
improve the collections, ensure that specimens are available for study and
provide the staff necessary to maintain and promote the
collection.&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the project are to: 1) bring the
Invertebrate Paleontology collections up to the highest curatorial standards by
stabilizing and reorganizing all invertebrate specimens; 2) to prepare and
identify invertebrate and plant material that has not yet been attended to; and
3) to incorporate all specimen data into a new, secure computer database.
&lt;br/&gt;The improvements to the Invertebrate Paleontology Collections will
have a major impact on the University of Colorado Museum's ability to serve the
research and educational needs of both academic and public communities. Not only
will specimens be properly stored, but they will also be better-organized and
more accessible for research, teaching and exhibits. Creating a relational
database for the collections will make it easier to manage specimens, process
loans, and extract data for curatorial and research purposes. Placing the
collection database online will allow a wide audience to view collection
materials and gather valuable information. The online database will be
especially important for producing national and international research
collaborations and will also serve as a valuable tool for teachers and the
public. Finally, the project will have a major impact on the University of
Colorado Museum's ability to train future students and museum
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;