* 0345677
* Statistical Approaches to Examining Ecological Models of Human Development
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Janet Marquis, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 11/30/2004
* USD 20,000.00

Increasingly, researchers are discussing and examining the potential influences
on human development of families, peers, schools, neighborhoods, communities,
and so on. This increased attention to modeling ecological influences highlights
a growing need to understand how best to represent and model contextual impacts
on human development. This conference will bring together leading
developmentalists, quantitative scholars, and statisticians to address
ecological/contextual effects as direct influences on development, mediators
and/or moderators of change, nested hierarchical levels of influence, and as
dynamic systems. In addition to the primary themes of ecological impacts, common
methodological concerns will be addressed, including: measurement issues;
incomplete data; sample heterogeneity (a person-centered approach); and power
and sample size considerations. Each conference participant is explicitly asked
to address at least one of the primary themes, consider the methodological
concerns, and relate each to the developmental applications, thus allowing for
a) appropriate conceptualizations and analyses of ecological factors, b)
increased awareness and inclusion of ecological factors in future research, and
c) expanded scientific knowledge on the complex interplay among all the factors
that contribute to human development. Approximately twenty-five scholars will
participate as presenters or discussants with considerable meeting time
allocated for round-table discussions of the themes and issues. The 2-day
intensive retreat format, to be held in Tempe, Arizona, on March 4-6, 2004,
allows significant cross-fertilization of ideas so that each presenter's work
will be refined and extended as a result of their direct participation in the
conference. The final product is an edited volume to consist of 12-15 chapters,
4-6 commentaries and discussions pieces, and a supporting web site.