* 0345745
* Measuring long-term, mineral-specific weathering rates in diverse climatic settings
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2007
* James Kirchner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2007
* USD 96,552.00

ABSTRACT Chemical weathering and physical erosion are interdependent processes
that sculpt landscapes, regulate the composition of soils, and deliver solutes
and sediment to streams. They also play critical roles in Earth's long-term
climatic evolution. Silicate weathering is the long-term sink for atmospheric
CO2. Hence, to the extent that silicate-weathering rates increase with
temperature in natural settings (as theoretical considerations and laboratory
experiments indicate that they should), weathering feedbacks will, over millions
of years, buffer Earth's climate against large temperature shifts. To the extent
that silicate-weathering rates depend on rates of mineral supply from physical
erosion, tectonic forcing of erosion may affect Earth's long-term climatic
evolution. Quantifying these mechanisms has remained difficult, however, because
weathering rates of individual mineral phases have rarely been measured under
field conditions. Recently developed methods now allow long-term rates of
physical erosion and chemical weathering to be measured from the chemical and
isotopic composition of actively eroding soils. Concentrations of cosmogenic
nuclides in actively eroding soils can be used to infer their long-term
denudation rates. We have recently shown that these denudation rate estimates
can be combined with mass balance calculations (based on the bulk chemistry of
soils and their parent bedrock), to yield measurements of long-term chemical
weathering rates. Intellectual merit Here we propose to further extend these
recent advances, by extending our cosmogenic methods to measure weathering rates
of individual mineral phases. These methods should be widely applicable, because
they do not require unusual field situations; by contrast, conventional soil
mass-balance methods typically require non-eroding soils of known age and known
initial composition. Thus these methods should provide an important new tool for
measuring mineral weathering rates in the field. In previous work we have used
cosmogenic nuclides to measure denudation rates and bulk chemical weathering
rates in a widespread network of sites spanning diverse climatic regimes. Here
we propose to measure the mineral phase composition of soils and parent
materials at four of these sites, and thus quantify the weathering rates of each
of the major mineral phases. Because this project leverages our previous
measurements of cosmogenic nuclides and bulk geochemistry, it can be pursued
very cost-effectively. Moreover, our proposed XRD, thin section, and microprobe
analyses will use samples that we have already collected, thus eliminating field
expenses. Across the proposed sites, mean annual temperatures span a range of 2
to 25C, and average precipitation spans a range of 67 to 420 cm/yr. This project
aims to identify and quantify the effects of climate on long-term mineral
weathering rates. Because long-term denudation rates have already been measured
in previous work, and because bedrock mineral composition will be quantified as
part of the proposed work, it should be possible to explicitly account for
potentially confounding effects arising from site-to-site differences in rates
of mineral supply from erosion of bedrock. Hence, these results should
contribute to better models of nutrient cycles and long-term climatic evolution,
and to a more quantitative understanding of mineral weathering and soil
development processes. Broader impacts This study will provide postdoctoral
training for one research associate. Undergraduates will gain hands-on research
experience through involvement in many phases of the project. Results from this
work should find application in a wide range of fields, including geomorphology,
geochemistry, and pedology.