* 0345686
* SGER - Global Analysis of Functional Units of Plant Chromosomes: DNA Replication, Domain Structure, and Transcription
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* George Allen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Scientific objectives and approaches Plants have many advantages for studying
eukaryotic DNA replication origins and their relationship to structural and
transcriptional domains. Rice and Arabidopsis have small genomes that have been
or will soon be fully sequenced. Plant tissues at different stages of
development and rapidly proliferating, synchronizable cultured cells are readily
accessible in quantities amenable for biochemical analysis. The long term goal
of this research is to exploit these properties to construct and overlay
chromosomal maps of replication origins, matrix attachment regions, modified
histones, DNA methylation levels and transcription.

As a step toward this long term goal, this SGER award will allow evaluation of
two approaches to mapping replication origins, both of which recently have been
used successfully in yeast. One approach uses in vivo labeling of newly
replicated DNA in a synchronized cell population. The feasibility of
synchronizing cells and obtaining the levels of BrdU incorportation required for
this procedure will be tested. The other approach uses chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to identify sequences associated with proteins of the
ORC and MCM origin-binding complexes. It does not depend on synchronous cell
division, but it does require specific antibodies and sensitive
immunoprecipitation procedures. This funding will be used to develop and test
additional antibodies and the necessary ChIP procedures for origin mapping by
this approach.