* 0345401
* US-Egypt Workshop: Advances in Science &amp; Technology of Treatment and Utilization of Industrial Wastes, June 2004, Cairo, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Hassan El-Shall, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,080.00

0345401 &lt;br/&gt;El-Shall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a "US-Egypt Workshop on Advances in Science and Technology for Treatment
and Utilization of Industrial Wastes" to be held in Cairo, Egypt in June 2004.
The organizers are Dr. Hassan El-Shall, Engineering Research Center for
Particles Science and Technology at the University of Florida and Dr. Nagui
Abdel-Khalek, Department of Mineral Evaluation and Processing, the Central
Metallurgical Research and Development Center, Helwan, Egypt. The workshop is to
address the fundamental science and technology issues related to treatment and
resource recovery of industrial waste, to discuss state of the art of waste
treatment and utilization technologies and related research in both countries
with specific emphasis on waste from the metals industry, to identify approaches
to be taken to understand and adapt new technologies for minimizing waste and
recovery of resources from wastes produced in the metals manufacturing
industries, and to stimulate cooperative research in the field of waste
treatment and utilization, between scientists and engineers in the United States
and Egypt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project enables US and Egyptian
scientists to participate in a workshop to discuss an area that is important to
both countries, and to identify potential collaborative research of mutual
benefit. Dr. El-Shall is active in research in metal processing as the deputy
director for research at the NSF-supported Particle Engineering Research Center
at the University of Florida, and has worked extensively with the CMRDI in
Egypt. The CMRDI is Egypt's premier materials research center. The cooperative
research resulting from workshop could lead to economic developments involving
the private sectors in Egypt and US. This project is being supported under the
US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out these joint scientific activities. &lt;br/&gt;