* 0345428
* Collaborative research: Vertical control of groundwater arsenic concentrations
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Yan Zheng, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/29/2008
* USD 60,686.00

0345428&lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elevated levels of arsenic (As) in
groundwater of the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Delta (GBMD) consumed by tens of
millions of people has caused what may be the largest case of human poisoning in
recorded history. Although the source of As is natural, the spatial distribution
of As in groundwater is highly variable. Field investigations conducted by the
team of PIs in Araihazar upazila, Bangladesh, over the past 3 years suggest that
in the case of the shallowest aquifers, this spatial variability across 101-102
m is driven vertically by the surface geology: (a) groundwater As concentrations
tend to remain low to ~20 m depth wherever sandy deposits extend to the surface,
(b) As concentrations are typically elevated in shallow aquifers that are capped
by a surface layer of fine silt or clay. Demonstrating the expression of this
relationship in a complex fluvio-deltaic environment required the collection of
spatially dense data using a novel combination of geophysical and geochemical
tools. In this proposal, we propose to apply the new approach developed in
Araihazar, which includes on-site measurement of labile sediment properties, to
investigate the spatial controls of As in shallow aquifers of several other
areas of Bangladesh. &lt;br/&gt;NSF Criterion 1 - Science: Fluvio-deltaic
deposits are intrinsically complex systems because their architecture reflects
changes in the position and order of stream channels over time. Somewhat
serendipitously, this team of PIs has discovered what appears to be a very
consistent relationship between the nature of surfacial deposit and the redox
state of the underlying aquifers on spatial scales of 101-102 m. If this
relationship holds on such scales elsewhere in Bangladesh, it could also explain
regional differences in the mean and variability of groundwater As
concentrations on spatial scales of 104-105 m throughout the GBM, as wells as
similar environments where elevated As in groundwater As has been reported, such
as Vietnam and Argentina. The proposed investigation will also set the stage for
parallel studies of the impact of surface geology on the microbiology and
hydrology of shallow aquifers. &lt;br/&gt;NSF Criterion 2 - Impact: The vast
majority of the ~10 million tube wells in Bangladesh are shallow (&lt; 20 m). As
more of these wells are tested, the usage of high-As wells for drinking and
cooking (as opposed to washing) will hopefully drop. If the hypothesis that
redox conditions in shallow aquifers are anchored to the local surface geology
can be confirmed in different fluvio-deltaic settings of the GBMD, this
knowledge could be used for targeting safe aquifers more effectively. A critical
question facing policy makers, however, is whether tube well As concentrations
could change over time as irrigation, which draws water primarily from the
shallow aquifers, continues. An implication of the hypothesized vertical control
by surface geology would be that the spatial distribution of groundwater As
concentrations in the shallow aquifers is relatively insensitive to changes in
hydrology caused by large-scale groundwater pumping for irrigation. This is
clearly important to know since it would reduce the need for repeated testing of
tube wells over time and the need for switching irrigation from groundwater to
surface water. Finally, our observation might lead to field-scale manipulation
of surface deposits to produce low-As groundwater in areas with very few other
options. &lt;br/&gt;