* 0345060
* Signaling From the Molluscan D Quadrant Organizer
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Lisa Nagy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 12/31/2006
* USD 447,200.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The mud snail Ilyanassa obsoleta has long been a model
for the study of developmental mechanisms because it provides a spectacular
example of localized cytoplasmic determinants. Ilyanassa has a distinctive
pattern of cell division known as spiral cleavage, which it shares with several
other phyla. In addition, it extrudes a cytoplasmic bulb - the polar lobe-
during its first&lt;br/&gt;two cleavages. When the polar lobe is removed, the
embryo lacks a dorsal-ventral axis and has radial symmetry. Not only are the
direct physical progeny of the polar lobe missing in polar lobe ablated embryos,
but lobeless embryos lack structures known to descend from other cells. Thus,
through a process of cytoplasmic localization, the polar lobe provides one or
more cells in the&lt;br/&gt;embryo with the ability to induce the fates other
cells. The localization of polar lobe determinants thus specifies the organizer
of the Ilyanassa dorsal-ventral axis. Although it has been more than 100 years
since the discovery of the effects of the polar lobe (Crampton, 1896), the
molecular mechanisms underlying the localization of the organizing activity, as
well as the nature of the organizing activity itself, are only just being
discovered.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Nagy has identified the first known component of the
molluscan organizer: a localized activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK). MAPK activation is initially activated in the signaling cell, the 3D
macromere. MAPK is secondarily activated in all cells that require the inductive
signal for normal development and is functionally required for specification of
second and third quartet micromeres. Based on our preliminary data, she has
constructed the&lt;br/&gt;following model for the establishment and function of
the Ilyanassa organizer: MAPK is activated cell autonomously in the signaling
cell (3D) as a result of inheriting polar lobe determinants. Once activated, it
triggers the release of at least two signals. The first signal is as yet
unidentified, and functions to activate PKC and MAPK in a subset of the
micromeres. MAPK in 3D also activates a second signal, DPP, by regulating dpp
mRNA translation. Release of the DPP ligand functions to pattern the first
quartet micromeres, whose progeny will&lt;br/&gt;become eyes. The aims of this
grant are to test each of the steps of this model by probing the mechanisms that
activate MAPK in the 3D macromere and the mechanisms by which the 3D signals to
the rest of the embryo. More specifically, we propose the following
aims:&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1) To determine whether the inheritance of the polar lobe is
necessary and sufficient to activate MAPK in 3D, by performing a series of
ablation experiments to assay the contribution of non-D quadrant cells to MAPK
activation in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 2) To characterize the nature of the mechanism
by which 3D signals to the micromeres, by analyzing the physical interactions
between cells in the 24-cell embryo.&lt;br/&gt;Aim 3) To identify factors
upstream of MAPK activation in both 3D and the micromeres by biochemically
inhibiting components of the major pathways known to regulate PKC (micromeres)
and MAPK activation (3D and micromeres).&lt;br/&gt;Aim 4). To determine whether
DPP signaling functions downstream of MAPK in 3D to pattern a subset of the
micromeres, by analyzing Dpp, tld and pSMAD expression in polar lobe ablated and
MAPK inhibited embryos and assay their function with methods to over-express and
knock-down function.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Dr. Nagy's findings on the
molecular basis of Ilyanassa 3D signaling puts her in a position to integrate a
century of embryological manipulations aimed at understanding the molluscan
organizer into a molecular framework. Once completed, the proposed experiments
will significantly increase our understanding of inductive signaling in
molluscan development. As molluscan embryos share striking similarities of cell
division and cell fates with embryos of a number of different phyla, insight
into the patterning mechanism of Ilyanassa will have significant impact on our
understanding of other molluscan and lophotrochozoan embryos.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This project promotes education at multiple levels of inquiry. Some of
the proposed work forms the basis of graduate training; other aspects will form
undergraduate research projects. One of the graduate students currently working
on the project is using her results in this system to design an online teaching
module for developmental biology. The results of our research will be published
in scientific journals and regularly presented at local, national and
international meetings and discussed in undergraduate classes, seminars, and
online discussion sections.&lt;br/&gt;