* 0345877
* DMUU: Developing Approaches to Climate Change and Native Communities
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Keith James, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Decision making regarding climate and the environment on Alaska Native and
Native American lands is complicated by a variety of unique social-cultural,
legal, and other factors, such as limited information technology
infrastructures. Moreover, mainstream climate and environmental sciences have a
growing interest in the traditional knowledge and traditional environmental
management approaches of Native groups. There are some obstacles to researching
traditional knowledge, however, as well as some barriers to effectively
integrating it with mainstream environmental science. Relative to Native lands
and Native communities, there are unique climate-decision research topics that
require investigation. No systematic agenda of priorities and plans for climate-
decision research and application in Native lands currently exists. This award
supports a workshop and related activities that will bring together Native and
non-Native environmental and social scientists to examine goals, needs, and
approaches for such research, and ultimately to develop a list of priorities and
recommendations for advancing the science of Native-lands climate decision-
making. In addition, the plan will detail an approach to researching the
integration of traditional ecological knowledge with mainstream climate and
environmental science.

Alaska Native and Native American lands are varied and sizable. Natural and
human forces that do not respect boundaries on a map affect the environments and
climates of Native lands. Those forces often either come from or extend to
related non-Native lands. Native environmental decision making therefore has
important implications for non-Native communities, and vice versa. Native
environmental decision making is poorly understood, though, as are strategies
for effectively integrating Native and non-Native environmental decision making.
This project will help to advance understanding of both issues. In addition,
mainstream environmental science has a growing interest in traditional Native
knowledge of the environment and traditional Native approaches to managing it.
Native people are interested in systematizing such traditional knowledge and
using it to help revitalize their cultures, but they are also often suspicious
of the motives of mainstream researchers. This project will yield a set of
priorities for research on traditional environmental knowledge and management,
as well as recommendations of strategies for overcoming potential Native
resistance to that research. This developmental award was supported as part of
the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics priority area special competition
on Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).