* 0345905
* Technician Support for the laboratories for stable isotope geochemistry at Caltech / Period 2
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 97,832.00

0345905&lt;br/&gt;Eiler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides two-years
partial salary support for a research technician in the laboratories for stable
isotope geochemistry at the California Institute of Technology. This is a Phase
II technician support grant under the Instruments and Facilities (IF) Program.
The stable isotope geochemistry technician at Caltech, Nami Kitchen, will
provide the following contributions to our facility: 1) training of students,
postdoctoral fellows, and visiting scientists in the use of instruments within
this laboratory, 2) maintenance of gas-source mass spectrometers and other
experimental apparatus; 3) processing samples through established analytical
procedures in support of research conducted by users of this laboratory; and 4)
construction and refinement of components of new analytical apparatus. Her
greatest specific scientific contributions will be to provide continuous
productivity and quality control for two semi-automated analytical methods
developed in our laboratories over the last two years: 1) laser fluorination of
minerals and glasses, applied to projects in petrology, mantle geochemistry,
paleoclimate studies, and geobiology; and, 2) on-line reduction and D/H ratio
measurement of trace quantities of water released from geological and meteoritic
samples. This second analytical method is a relatively recent development that
we anticipate will be a foundation for an innovative and productive research
program over the time-scale of this grant.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;