* 0345849
* Collaborative Research:   The Cultural Context of Infertility in Southern Nigeria:   Meanings, Consequences and Coping Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Ulla Larsen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2008
* USD 140,000.00

Infertility (the inability to conceive or to carry a pregnancy to full term) is
a problem of major proportions in sub-Saharan Africa, where in many societies
women who are unable to bear children are stigmatized and are often unable to
reach full social adulthood. The problem of infertility in Africa received
relatively little attention from social scientists since it was obscured by the
region's high fertility rates, which resulted in a concern over population
growth. This research by a team of an anthropologist, a demographer and a
sociologist involves a comparative in-depth study of infertility in the context
of two southern Nigerian communities. It will investigate local meanings of
infertility as these are shaped by the social and cultural context; the impact
of the prevalence of infertility on these meanings; and how the community
responses as well as the life experiences and treatment-seeking behaviors of
infertile women and their male partners among the Ijo and Yakurr people. The two
communities, Patani in the Niger Delta and Ugep in Cross River State, are
primarily rural and located in the same region of the country. Descent in Patani
is patrilineal whereas in Ugep it is double unilineal. In addition, high levels
of infertility are historically documented for Ugep, whereas infertility levels
in Patani are relatively low. The amount of stigma attached to female
infertility in Patani is considerably higher than it is in Ugep. The project
will study how these differential responses to infertility are related to the
differences in social organization and infertility rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comparative study of these communities will examine
the meaning of infertility in its local context as well as analyze the social
and cultural variables that influence those meanings. The broader impact of the
research lies in the value of the new information for policy makers, health care
specialists and social service providers. Given that no cure exists for
infertility in the context of sub-Saharan African, prevention through awareness
of the causes of infertility is the only means whereby its incidence and
prevalence may be lowered. A better understanding of the social consequences of
infertility will help formulate strategies aimed at ameliorating the stigma
associated with it and also contribute to better understanding of fertility. The
research will also contribute to building a partnership with Nigerian
researchers. The intellectual merit lies in a contribution to the field of
demographic anthropology, specifically to the creation of "whole demographies"
which take account of the interaction of individuals with their cultural
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;