* 0345789
* Acquisition of a 193 nm laser ablation system for ICP-MS and (U-Th)/He chronometry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Peter Reiners, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2006
* USD 106,750.00

EAR-0345789&lt;br/&gt;Reiners&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial
funding for a 193 nm laser ablation system for use in laser ablation
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and (U-Th)/He
chronometry at Yale. The laser will increase the versatility of the existing
sector ICP-MS and the inorganic geochemistry program at Yale, allowing in situ,
spatially-resolved trace element and isotopic analyses of a wide variety of
geological materials. Besides benefits to trace element and isotopic studies in
ongoing petrologic and environmental studies, the laser will particularly
benefit two new geochronologic applications: 1) characterization of
intracrystalline U-Th zonation in zircon, to improve precision and accuracy of
(U-Th)/He ages and thermochronologies derived from them, and 2) routine
measurement of U/Pb ages in single zircon crystals also dated by (U-Th)/He (He-
Pb double dating), which is a new and powerful technique for detrital provenance
studies of sedimentary rocks. The laser will provide analytical experience and
state-of-the-art analyses for graduate and undergraduate students, postdocs,
technical staff, and faculty at Yale, as well as for visiting researchers
performing (U-Th)/He and ICP-MS analyses including undergraduate participating
in summer He dating workshops at Yale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;