* 0345049
* Characterization of the Acidovorax-Earthworm Association
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* David Stahl, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 412,791.00

Characterization of the Acidovorax-Earthworm Association&lt;br/&gt;David A.
Stahl&lt;br/&gt;University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common
earthworms (lumbricids) are among the most well recognized of soil-dwelling
animals. Favored by gardeners for their composting abilities, they are active in
altering soil structure and nutrient availability in soils throughout the world.
Soil transformation is not solely due to the earthworm, but is assisted by
microorganisms living in association with the worm. The best understood
associations occur in the worm's digestive system. The worm's gut selects for a
variety of microbial populations and activities not prevalent in the soil. A
much more specific association is found in the worm's waste fluids elimination
system. Each segment of the worm contains a pair of internal kidney-like organs
(nephridia) adjacent to the body wall (ca. 200 nephridia per worm) that
eliminate fluids ("urine"). Unlike the diverse microbiota of the gut, a single
species of microorganism is present as a dense population in each nephridium.
This appears to be a stable and specific association since different species of
earthworm harbor different symbiotic Acidovorax species. The character of this
association and the bacterial contribution to the development, physiology, and
excretion chemistry of the host are virtually unexplored. The main objectives of
this project are to resolve the early events of colonization and determine the
contribution of bacteria to host physiology, including symbiont-conferred
changes in host tissue architecture. These studies are enabled by the ability to
maintain the full life cycle of the worm (Eisenia foetida) in the laboratory,
and the recent success of these investigators in resolving and reforming the
symbiosis. The worm can be "cured" and later reunited with its symbiont by
inoculating egg capsules with symbiotic bacteria propagated in pure culture.
This offers the opportunity for experimental manipulation of each stage of the
symbiosis. A combination of analytical chemistry, molecular genetics, and
microscopy (confocal laser scanning microscopy and electron microscopy) will be
used to characterize the association. The bacterial contribution to the
earthworm fluid chemistry and tissue architecture will be evaluated by comparing
worms with and without their symbionts during development and at adulthood. The
contribution of the bacteria to the overall fitness of the worms will be
evaluated by comparisons of growth rates, reproduction rates and response to
certain environmental stresses of worms with and without their symbionts.
Characterization of bacterial symbiont in pure culture will be used to identify
metabolic traits relevant to waste transformation. Genetic modification of the
symbiont will also be evaluated. The development of tools for genetic
manipulation would greatly enable more highly refined studies of microbe-animal
associations, including the identification of factors governing the specificity
of colonization. The results from this work will contribute to an understanding
of the physiology and chemistry of this abundant, widespread and ecologically
significant member of soil systems. More generally, this symbiosis could provide
a new model system for resolving basic features of the most common type of
interaction between animals and bacteria, host epithelial tissues colonized by
extracellular, gram-negative bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;