* 0345195
* Strategic Planning and the Management of Technology in National Science Foundation-Funded Engineering Research Centers
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Steve Currall, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Lynn Preston
* 09/30/2007
* USD 437,314.00

This pilot study seeks to determine empirically how large engineering-based
academic research centers function from an organizational management
perspective. Using sample of NSF-funded Engineering Research Centers (ERCs), the
study will be pursure three lines of inquiry: how strategic planning is done and
the utility of the Three-Plane Chart conceptual model ERCs use to develop and
portray their strategic plans; general management of technology within the
centers, and the organizational effectiveness of ERCs. The methodology includes
obtaining information in a variety of ways from personnel from active ERCs,
particularly those involved in planning and management. A combination of
interviewing and surveying through questionnaires will be used to collect
information about resistence to using the three-plane chart construct for
planning, the alignment of center goals, personnel, and facilities; resource
allocation; the involvement of stakeholders in planning; and data in the ERC
Indicators Data. A Technical Advisory Committee will ensure that the centers'
research context will be included in this novel study of management of
technology within large, complex engineering-based university-industry research
centers. The results will provide important information on strategic planning
and management of technology are integrated in a sample of academic research
centers and implications for enhanced organizational effectiveness in this
challenging management setting.