* 0345843
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Chinese Nationals Among "Overseas Chinese" in Singapore: The Sociolinguistics of Multiple Linguistic Identities
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Qing McFatter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,401.00

Under the supervision of Drs. Keith Walters and Qing Zhang, Ms. Er-Xin Lee will
conduct fieldwork research for her dissertation. She will study the linguistic
practices of professional workers from the People's Republic of China (also
referred to as Mainland China or China) who are living in multiethnic Singapore,
where an established community of Singaporean-born Chinese predominates. She
will examine the extent to which the Chinese nationals use the language
resources associated with Singapore, that is, Singaporean English and Mandarin,
to index multiple identities within the Singaporean society and within a broader
transnational Chinese context. Besides examining patterns of language mixing,
she will also study patterns in the use of specific phonological and lexical
features across a range of styles and social contexts, as well as discursive
data comprising speakers' ideologies regarding language and identity. Lee will
combine ethnographic observations of speakers' language behaviors across a range
of situations and contexts with metalinguistic data recorded from participants'
self-recordings and from one-on-one and group interviews.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to an understanding within linguistics and
linguistic anthropology of how patterns of language use can be linked to
multiple layers of identity, specifically where the forces of influence are both
local and transnational. On a larger scale, the project also contributes to a
growing interest among anthropologists, economists, and sociologists in studying
the ways in which new migration patterns have allowed strong economic, cultural
and emotional ties to be maintained between migrants and their sending
countries.&lt;br/&gt;