* 0345030
* Expoloring the Intensity and Consequences ofPhenological Assortative Mating in Plant Populations.
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Arthur Weis, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 01/31/2008
* USD 469,101.00

It has been long supposed that variation in flowering time induces assortative
mating in plants: Early bloomers mate predominantly with other early plants,
while late bloomers tend to mate with other late plants. Theory predicts that
when 'like mates with like,' the offspring generation contains more individuals
with extreme gene combinations, compared to random mating. This can facilitate
plant response to selection on the assorting trait. But assortment may also
increase the genetic covariance between the assorting trait and other traits. If
so, selection on the assorting trait can be either accelerated or decelerated,
depending on the direction of selection on the correlated trait. This will be
the first comprehensive study of assortative mating and its impacts on plant
genetic variation. Field and greenhouse experiments will provide reinforcing
information on the ways that mating patterns can modulate the response to
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will enhance standard breeding
methods for plant improvement. It also has applications in bio-safety analysis
for genetically engineered crops. Understanding the contribution of flowering
time to crop-weed hybridization rates is a key factor in determining whether
particular crop varieties will be unsafe in areas where the modified gene can
potentially 'escape' from cultivation and into weed
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;