* 0345185
* Horizontal Gene Transfer and the Evolution of Life on Earth
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2009
* James Lake, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The principal investigators on this project propose to analyze the genomes of
the diverse life forms found on Earth and to relate their interrelationships to
the geological, paleontological, climatological, chronological, and biochemical
records. They will take into account the effects of horizontal gene transfer
using newly developed mathematical algorithms. Horizontal gene transfer refers
to the passing of genes between different organisms, much like computer
programmers share programs over the internet. This exchange has had an important
influence on the evolution of prokaryotic (bacterial) life. But at the same
time, it greatly complicates reconstructing the tree of life. They have three
related objectives. Among the objectives of the investigators will be to
correlate genomic information with theories for the origins of the bacterial
life on Earth. Also, methods will be developed so that one can utilize complete
genome information in order to derive phylogenetic trees which can accurately
resolve major events in the history of life and yet not be affected by the
complexities of horizontal gene transfer. These genome comparisons, will be
related to the fossil and geological records, through correlation with such
factors as the time of appearance of oxygen in the atmosphere, the isotopic
abundances of sulfur and carbon, and the appearance of eukaryotic and
prokaryotic fossils, in order to understand past changes on the Earth and
predict future changes.

The proposed basic research also has broader impacts on society. For example,
by clearly understanding the evolution of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells and
of their biochemical pathways, these studies may suggest new technologies. In
particular, understanding how organisms have evolved to live in extreme
environments may lead to new and more efficient industrial processes. In another
sphere, the correlation of genomic data with phylogenetic, geological,
climatological, and paleontological data may provide clues to the evolution of
life on Earth and life's response to past environmental crises. For example,
understanding the evolution of life during "Snowball Earth", may provide
critical information that could have practical applications to such important
problems as global warming. Additional impacts will result from teaching and
training graduate and undergraduate students, and from the dissemination of
scientific information to the public, especially to underrepresented groups.
This lab consists of 8 scientists, five are female and three are males. The Co-
PI (one of two Latinas in the lab) has lectured frequently at public forums that
serve minority groups. During the past summer the lab hosted the Professor in
charge of Tennessee State University minority program to learn genomics. This
lab is very concerned about the broader impacts of their research.