* 0346436
* SGER Grant: Plant Evolutionary Genomics: Develop and Test Bioinformatic Tools to Automate Ortholog Identification for Phylogenomics and Functional Genomic Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Gloria Coruzzi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 08/31/2004
* USD 83,201.00

One of the critical issues in comparative genomic studies is to distinguish
genes derived from a common ancestral locus (orthologs), from paralogs, which
are similar genes that arose as a result of duplication in one or both lineages,
subsequent to an evolutionary split between species. Determining true orthology
on a genome scale level is essential to enable researchers to understand species
relationships using genome scale data (phylogenomics), and also to enable
scientists to understand gene functions. New informatic tools will be further
developed and tested to enable high throughput and accurate ortholog
identification, using known genes from rice and Arabidopsis as fully-sequenced
model organisms. The testing and refinement of these tools will involve three
major steps. In step 1, putative orthologs will be identified using ViCoGenta
(Viewer for Comparing Genomes to Arabidopsis) to scan a set of ESTs (Expressed
Sequence Tags) spanning key Gymnosperm species. This will identify a set of ESTs
that are each "top matches" to the same gene in the rice and/or Arabidopsis
genomes. In Step 2, the orthology of these genes will be further verified using
CAOS (Character Attribute Organization System) a new, rapid parsimony-based
ortholog identification tool. In Step 3, orthology defined by CAOS analysis,
will be compared to that determined by three other traditional phylogenetic
methods. Validated orthologs will be used to generate phylogenetic hypotheses
for the Gymnosperms, based on genome-wide test cases in rice and Arabidopsis, in
order to understand how seeds evolved. The informatic tools developed, tested,
and validated in this proof-of-principle project to determine gene orthology
among diverse species, will be made available in a web-based form to enable a
range of phylogenomic and functional genomic studies in the scientific
community, spanning important crop and other plant genomes.