* 0346848
* CAREER: Development and Experimental Validation of Percolation Theory for Interfacial Networks in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Christopher Schuh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 475,744.00

This CAREER award to Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to study
interfacial networks in polycrystalline materials and to tailor the network
interfaces treating the network as a complex system, and to understand
interfacial network topology, and, specifically, the long-range connectivity of
interfaces with 'desirable' and 'detrimental' properties. Computational modeling
and experimental approaches will be utilized to design metallic microstructures
with the ultimate aim of quantifying microstructures and correlating their
properties. In the broader impact of this award, research and teaching will be
integrated with the involvement of students at all levels of education,
including graduate, undergraduate, and secondary. Upgrading undergraduate level
teaching of materials and organizing interactive programs with local high school
students through scientific demonstrations are stated goals of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational modeling and experimental approaches
will be utilized to design metallic microstructures to understand interfacial
network topology, and, specifically, the long-range connectivity of interfaces
with 'desirable' and 'detrimental' properties. The ultimate goal of these
studies would be quantifying microstructures and correlating their properties.
Potential applications of these studies include those materials, which would
benefit through grain boundary engineering processing such as high temperature
nickel-based super alloys, and low temperature semiconductors and devices
including materials used in micro-electromechanical systems. In the broader
impact of this award, research and teaching will be integrated with the
involvement of graduate, undergraduate and secondary school students.
Interactive programs including scientific demonstrations will be organized for
local high school students to educate them about the privileges, benefits and
challenges involved in a science career.