* 0346887
* CAREER:     MIMO Fading in Links, Cells, and Networks:      Coding and Information Theoretic Challenges
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Hesham El Gamal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* William H Tranter
* 12/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

We are in the midst of a new wireless revolution, brought on by the adoption of
wireless networks for consumer, military, scientific, and wireless applications.
This revolution presents exciting new challenges due to the marked departure
from the traditional additive white Gaussian noise channel paradigm. Recently,
antenna diversity techniques have received considerable attention due to the
significant information theoretic gains promised for multi-input-multi-output
(MIMO) fading channels.

Our research can be broadly categorized in three main thrusts: 1) Developing a
unified algebraic coding theory for point-to-point MIMO fading channels, 2)
Developing joint coding and scheduling algorithms for cellular MIMO channels,
and 3) Developing cooperative (i.e. antenna sharing) schemes for ad-hoc MIMO
channels. The first research thrust will develop bridges between different
branches in Algebra and space-time coding. The cross fertilization between these
two areas is expected to introduce useful algebraic tools in space-time coding
research and formulate new problems of possible interest to the mathematical
research community. The second and third thrusts will enhance the understanding
of the information and coding theoretic foundations of cellular and ad-hoc MIMO
channels. The education plan aims to expose students to the state of the art in
wireless communications and provide the well-rounded training needed for both
future academic jobs and leading-edge industrial positions.