* 0346664
* NSF-EC Cooperative Activity in Materials Research:  Failure Mechanics of Layered Ceramics and Ceramic-Metal Coatings Due to Environmental Exposure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Anette Karlsson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2008
* USD 316,858.00

The implementation of multilayered ceramics and ceramic-metals coatings is
limited due to premature failures. To date no satisfying or adequate
understanding of these failures exists. Most failures are caused by an intricate
interaction of thermo-mechanical loads with an array of dynamically evolving
material properties. The material properties evolve due to in-use chemical
changes generated by factors such as thermal exposure, oxidation, electro-
migration, and/or environmental attack. These changes result in lower intrinsic
strength, internal redistribution of stresses, and residual stresses. The
present work focuses on determining and relating property changes to pre-mature
failures of multilayered ceramics and ceramic-metals coatings. In order to
understand the mechanical and physical mechanisms of failures, a research effort
that integrates experiment and modeling is essential. Experimentally, the
evolution of the microstructure will be characterized using TEM, SEM, nano-
indentation and other appropriate methods at appropriately different spatial
scales (e.g. nano, micro, meso). The spatial distribution, chemical composition,
and other factors influencing thermo-mechanical properties will be characterized
at various fractions of service life under different temperature cycles. From
this experimental characterization sequence the evolving state of the material
degradation will be identified along with the associated mechanical processes.
Analytical and numerical models will be developed to simulate the failure
mechanisms, to link fundamental principles with experimental observations, and
to provide a greater understanding of these complex systems. The models will be
published in industry journals to enable design engineers to enhance multilayer
component performance.&lt;br/&gt;Multilayered ceramics and ceramic/metal
coatings are used in a range of engineering application to improve the
performance and functionality of components and structures. Examples ranges from
thermal barrier coatings that protect gas turbine blades from the high
combustion gas temperatures in the engine, to bio-compatible coatings on hip or
a knee implants to improve the in-vivo performance and bio-compatibility in
humans. Unfortunately, ceramic coatings sometimes fail prematurely, limiting
their usefulness in these advanced material system. This research aims to
understand the failures and to develop predictive mathematical models that will
assist design engineers in eliminating such flaws in future versions of these
important products.&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Division of Materials Research (Ceramics)
and the International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in
Materials Research between the NSF and EC (NSF 03-565). This project is being
carried out in collaboration with the Polytechnic University of Catalonia,
Spain; Institute of Ceramic and Glass, Spain; Slovak Academy of Sciences,
Slovakia; Research Institute for Ceramic Technology, Italy; Institute for
Structural and Functional Ceramics, Austria; the Catholic University of Leuven,
Belgium; the German Aerospace Center, Germany; and the University of Sheffield,
UK.&lt;br/&gt;