* 0346650
* EPR Studies of Protein-protein Interactions: Distances, Orientation and Molecular Modeling
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Piotr Fajer, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,028,359.00

Myosin is a mechanochemical enzyme that transforms the chemical energy of ATP
into mechanical force. As with any motor, biological or man-made, the force is
generated by movement of specific parts. The success of x-ray crystallography
and electron microscopy in the past decade revealed the anatomy of the motor
parts in various intermediate states of the ATPase cycle. What needs to be done
now is to: (a) verify that the crystal structures exist in solution; (b) find
missing intermediate states that involve actin as well as myosin; (c) correlate
the structures in time i.e. build a movie from static snapshots. This project
addresses these questions using electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy. It
combines recent developments in spectroscopy, computational biology, synthetic
chemistry, and molecular biology. These novel approaches include (a) new
distance measurement technique, (b) site directed spin labeling, (c) the use of
newly designed bifunctional spin labels, and lastly, (d) direct interpretation
of EPR signals in structural terms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This
project is expected to have an impact that transcends biological motor systems.
Two aspects deal with the development of electron paramagnetic resonance
spectroscopy as a structural technique. Such development is timely, as the
technique is becoming more popular, yet the theory that targets structural
biology aspects is lagging behind similar developments in nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and electron microscopy. The tools and techniques
developed in this project could be applied to solve many structural biology
problems. The broader impacts also include integration of teaching and research
activities as well as training aspects. This project will continue to train
post-doctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduate students at the
interface of chemistry, physics, and biology.