* 0346249
* The Evolution of Embryonic Polarity: A Molecular and Phylogenetic Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Athula Wikramanayake, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 12/31/2007
* USD 798,116.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This grant is focused on understanding the developmental and
evolutionary origin of embryonic axial properties that are responsible for
organizing the segregation of germ layers in a small solitary sea anemone
Nematostella vectensis (Anthozoa, Cnidaria). Anthozoans are basal members of the
diploblastic, "radially" symmetric Cnidaria: the sister phylum to all
bilaterally symmetrical triploblastic metazoans. Unlike bilaterally symmetrical
metazoans, N. vectensis eggs have no apparent molecular polarity, and
asymmetries generated at, or soon after, fertilization result in the activation
of nuclear beta-catenin signaling at the future site of gastrulation. Because
cnidarians like N. vectensis possess many of the same genes involved in axial
organization in bilaterians, they have the potential to provide insight into the
mechanisms that led to the evolution of egg anisotropies in all multicellular
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three specific aims will be pursued: 1) To use
experimental embryological methods to characterize the onset of axis formation
and origins of developmental polarity in the N. vectensis egg/zygote, 2) To
identify the roles of the PAR proteins in establishing early asymmetries in the
N. vectensis zygote and determine the possible role of these proteins in
regulating asymmetric beta-catenin signaling. These experiments will establish
the function of the par genes in a cnidarian and will reveal if cnidarians use
these genes to polarize the early egg/embryo as in bilaterians. Additionally,
these experiments will reveal if the PAR proteins play a functional role in
polarizing canonical Wnt signaling, 3) To produce the critical regents and
further develop methodologies necessary for further exploitation of N. vectensis
as a model system for developmental and evolutionary
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is the first comprehensive experimental
and molecular analysis of anthozoan cnidarian development. It provides a unique
opportunity to understand how these embryos "work", and thus provide insight
into the development of more commonly studied bilaterian systems. These studies
will link sperm-derived asymmetries to the localization of the PAR proteins and
the activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signal transduction pathway, and thus,
provide insight into the evolution of the A/V axis and the evolution of germ
layers. The proposed work involves postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate
students from groups under-represented in science. The findings from this
research will also incorporated into the undergraduate and graduate curricula.
Additionally, the proposed collaborative work will also improve the research and
training infrastructure at the University of Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;