* 0346293
* New York Botanical Garden Type Specimen Catalog: Macrofungi.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Barbara Thiers, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 336,338.00

A grant has been awarded to the New York Botanical Garden under the direction of
Dr. B. Thiers to create a fully illustrated electronic catalog of the type
specimens of macrofungi (e.g., mushrooms and related organisms) currently
preserved the New York Botanical Garden Herbarium. Because macrofungi change
drastically in appearance upon drying (the state in which they are maintained as
museum specimens), photographs and descriptions of the living organism must
supplement dried specimens to permit proper identification. Because of the
diverse nature of these supplemental elements (some of which are handwritten on
paper or in notebooks, some photographs or paintings, some printed in books), it
is impossible to store them physically with the specimens to which they refer.
The goal of this project is to associate digitized data from the specimens
themselves with digitized renderings of supplemental data derived from them, so
that all data held by the institution that pertains to a given type specimen are
associated virtually through the Garden's on-line specimen catalog, the NYBG
Virtual Herbarium. The project to create the type catalog of macrofungi has four
parts: 1) data entry, or the transcription of the data from specimen label into
the NYBG Virtual Herbarium database system ; 2) supplementation of the label
data with information from the published literature; 3) creation of digital
images of the specimen and of other supplemental data elements; 4) data
evaluation and editing; 4) publication of data through NYBG Virtual Herbarium
web site. The project will require both a full-time cataloger to transcribe data
from approximately 20,000 specimen labels into the institutional database and
assemble ancillary illustrations or other documentation for digitization and a
specimen digitizer assistant to capture images. Two student digitizers will
learn the techniques of data transcription and specimen imaging, and will
develop web pages that interpret the data in the catalog to a broader audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYBG fungus collection is a key resource for research
in this group of organisms. It is the second largest collection of its kind
North America, consists of approximately 500,000 specimens. When completed, the
type catalog of macrofungi will allow more scientists to use the Garden's
collections, and will allow them to obtain the information they need from the
collection more quickly and inexpensively. Macrofungi remain one of the most
poorly documented groups of living organisms, and many species have not yet been
named or classified. Yet, these organisms are critically important in the web of
life. The availability of the macrofungi type specimen catalog on-line will
reduce the access time to these reference specimens and the data associated with
them and facilitate identification and characterization of these organisms. This
project will serve the education as well as scientific research. It will
actively support work and training by college students as student digitizers.
All curriculum aids developed using the Virtual Herbarium will be available for
integration directly into other on-line science or technology exhibits or other
educational aids.&lt;br/&gt;