* 0346473
* PECASE:  Direct Measurement and Manipulation of Colloidal Interactions and Dynamics in Template Directed Photonic Crystal Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Michael Bevan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 05/31/2008
* USD 405,228.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0346473&lt;br/&gt;M. Bevan, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Direct Measurement and Manipulation of
Colloidal Interactions and&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics in Template Directed Photonic
Crystal Assembly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned with
measurement and manipulation of colloidal interactions involved in the assembly
of single photonic colloidal crystals on interfacial templates and in the
presence of external fields. The objective is to understand fundamental
mechanisms linking colloidal forces and hydrodynamic interactions to formation
of thermodynamic structures and kinetic pathways in interfacial "self-assembly"
and "driven assembly" processes. A central task in this work is to combine total
internal reflection, video, and confocal scanning laser microscopy techniques to
measure particle-particle, particle-template, and particle-field interactions in
increasingly complex interfacial colloidal systems ranging from single particles
to concentrated three dimensional dispersions. With the ability to directly
measure many-body interfacial interactions, weak attractive forces relevant to
colloidal crystal self-assembly on templated substrates will be controlled by
finely tuning temperature and specific ion dependent polymeric dispersion
forces. To avoid formation of irreversible gel and arrested glass structures, AC
electrophoretic driven-assembly of intermediate metastable crystalline
structures will be used to manipulate the kinetic route in photonic crystal
assembly processes. Monte Carlo and Stokesian dynamics simulations will be used
to understand how to form optimal equilibrium particle configurations and how to
control dynamics to avoid kinetic traps. Each proposed experiment provides
complementary information on how to manipulate colloid systems to assemble large
single interfacial photonic crystals, which has broad significance for any
technology that seeks to assemble arbitrary nano- and micro- structured
materials and devices on substrates. The intellectual merit of the proposed
career plan is based on its fundamental significance to manipulating ordered
interfacial structures on colloidal length, time, and energy scales, which are
inherently intermediate to molecular and macroscopic systems and therefore of
utmost importance to nano- science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational plan in this proposal involves extensively incorporating image,
video, and animations from microscopy/simulation experiments in my research
group into a colloidal complex fluids/nanotechnology course for both undergrad
and grad students. The objective is to use visualization and multimedia tools to
help students with different learning styles quickly develop mental pictures
necessary to retain a physically intuitive understanding of colloid science.
Because I employ optical microscopy to explore fundamental colloidal phenomena
in my research, directly incorporating images and videos into class lectures is
a natural way for me to passionately teach students using "real" multiscale
research examples, which is also consistent with chemical engineering curriculum
reform initiatives. As part of developing visualization tools, a virtual reality
presentation in the Immersive Visualization Center at Texas A&amp;M will be
delivered as a special class lecture, and will also be used as a frequent
outreach tool to underrepresented groups, k-12 students, and teachers through
existing NSF sponsored campus programs. To assess the effectiveness and optimize
the implementation of classroom multimedia tools, collaborators in School
Psych./Ed. Tech. at Texas A&amp;M will help to evaluate cognitive and
pedagogical aspects of my visualization based lectures, with findings
disseminated in education journals and at national conferences. The broader
impact of the proposed career plan is related to the direct use of microscopy
and simulation visuals from my research in courses and outreach programs to
improve the depth, rate, retention, and enjoyment of learning in the training of
future engineers and in improving scientific literacy of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;