* 0346385
* CAREER:  Directed Nanoparticle Growth by Oriented Aggregation and Elucidating the Link between Reactivity and Particle Size, Shape, and Microstructure
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2010
* R. Lee Penn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2010
* USD 564,000.00

Professor R. Lee Penn of the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Geology and Paleontology
program to investigate the formation of crystalline, nanometer-scale, transition
metal oxides and hydroxides through the mechanism of oriented aggregation. This
mechanism involves the assembly of primary crystals by attachment through
specific crystallographic planes. Emphasis is on the control of orientated
aggregation through manipulation of crystal surface properties. In addition to
nanoparticle growth, chemical properties of these materials are probed through
the study of dissolution and redox reactions. Particle structure is determined
primarily by x-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and photon correlation
spectroscopy measurements. Professor Penn is also developing a program for
middle school students and science educators designed to enhance awareness of
the structure of materials at the atomic level. Laboratory exercises that center
on crystal growth and characterization are implemented to assist students and
educators in understanding relationships between the macroscopic properties of
materials and the underlying atomic level structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of inorganic oxide crystal growth and crystal
decomposition through dissolution and redox reactions is providing insights into
processes that affect the natural environment through atmospheric and geological
chemistry. The education plan is providing learning opportunities for middle
school age students and educators to enhance awareness of relationships between
bulk materials properties and atomic level structure. &lt;br/&gt;