* 0346276
* Intraspecific Variation in Thlaspi Caerulescens: The Key to Increasing Metal Sequestration in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Stephen Ebbs, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Award Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IBN-0346276&lt;br/&gt;PI Stephen D. Ebbs
&lt;br/&gt;Intraspecific Variation in Thlaspi Caerulescens: The Key to
Increasing Metal Sequestration in Plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Metal
hyperaccumulation and hypertolerance are unique traits observed in a limited
variety of plant species from around the world. A relatively understudied aspect
with respect to metal hyperaccumulating plant species is the natural variation
in hyperaccumulation and tolerance observed between populations within a species
(i.e., intraspecific variation). For example, recent studies have shown marked
differences in the hyperaccumulation of Cd and Zn across populations of Thlaspi
caerulescens. The inherent variability in hyperaccumulation displayed by T.
caerulescens and the unique cellular and subcellular patterns of metal
distribution (e.g. - epidermal and vacuolar sequestration) in leaves provide a
natural model system in which to examine the leaf-level mechanisms that control
metal homeostasis. Understanding the basis of this variation will contribute to
the ongoing efforts to develop more efficient hyperaccumulators for metal
phytoremediation and metal "bio-mining". To examine these leaf-level mechanisms,
this project will (1) use cell viability assays to compare the metal tolerance
of leaf mesophyll cells from different populations of T. caerulescens to
determine the contribution of these cells to the intraspecific variation in
metal hyperaccumulation; (2) conduct radiotracer transport studies with isolated
vacuoles and/or vacuole membranes from different populations to determine
whether intraspecific variation in the rate or extent of vacuolar sequestration
contributes to hyperaccumulation; and (3) use 2-D protein gel electrophoresis to
determine if the more efficient metal-accumulating plant populations possess
novel proteins that contribute to their ability to tolerate and sequester metals
in leaves. Together the results of this study will add to our understanding of
the relationship between metal distribution in leaves and the extent to which
different populations of T. caerulescens hyperaccumulate Cd and Zn. This unique
insight into the metal dynamics in leaves will be instrumental in the
development of higher biomass plants for phytoremediation. The proposed research
will provide training for two undergraduate students (including one female non-
traditional student) in plant transport physiology and molecular physiology,
including hydroponic culture techniques, use of radioisotopes, cellular and
biochemical fractionation, 2-D protein gel electrophoresis, elemental analysis,
experimental design, and statistical analysis (e.g., ANOVA). This array of
techniques is at the forefront of modern plant physiology and molecular biology.
Students will take primary responsibility for specific aspects of this research,
through the preparation of manuscripts for submission to peer-reviewed journals,
building foundation skills important to their future career goals. &lt;br/&gt;