* 0346619
* AILANTHUS Grows in Brooklyn:  Curation, Data Capture, and Presentation of Historical Specimens from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Kerry Barringer, Brooklyn Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2007
* USD 310,066.00

Brooklyn Botanic Garden &lt;br/&gt;Abstract for National Science Foundation
Proposal, #0346619&lt;br/&gt;January 22, 2004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has
been awarded to Brooklyn Botanic Garden under the direction of Dr. K. Barringer
for 'AILANTHUS Grows in Brooklyn: Curation, Data Capture, and Presentation of
Historical Specimens from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.' The goal of
this project is to make data on 90,000 contemporary and historical herbarium
specimens from New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut available on the Internet.
The project is part of a long-term effort to catalog the complete holdings of
the Garden's Herbarium. The Herbarium contains a valuable collection of 290,000
contemporary and historical plant specimens used by researchers from around the
world to study plants and their distribution. The majority of contemporary
specimens have been collected through the Garden's New York Metropolitan Flora
project, an active 20-year study of the flora of the tri-state area. Among the
historical specimens from the region are collections found nowhere else, such as
the George Scarborough collection from southern New Jersey, the George Hulst
collection (1860's), the Henry Dautun collection (1890's), and others from Lake
George and Long Island. This project will enable researchers to compare these
contemporary and historical records in new ways - from analyzing changes in the
distribution of plant species over time, to exploring the decline of native
species, and the spread of invasive species - helping to build a more accurate
model of the contemporary environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
project will add data on 60,000 historical specimens to the Herbarium database,
AILANTHUS, and make the data universally accessible via the Garden's Web site,
http://www.bbg.org. The result will be increased awareness of Brooklyn Botanic
Garden's Herbarium collection, providing access to a unique dataset that was
previously unavailable, and enabling researchers to easily use data from the
collection in their work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By making previously unavailable
botanical information accessible on the Internet, the project has significance
for a broad spectrum of individuals - from scientists and environmental
professionals, to teachers, students and amateur naturalists. The data will be
used by researchers and students studying environmental change and vegetation
history, as well as State and Federal botanists tracking rare plants and
invasive species. The project will make data available on critical habitats,
like the New York - New Jersey Highlands, wetlands, and the Pine Barrens, and
will provide data on the effects of habitat loss and urban sprawl. Also, the
data will be used to help develop appropriate land use regulations, improve
understanding of native biodiversity, limit the impact of invasive plants, and
protect rare and endangered species. The project will also be used to enhance
the Garden's science education initiatives that include the first environmental
high school in Brooklyn, the Brooklyn Academy of Science and the Environment, as
well as on-site internship programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;