* 0346636
* SGER: A Scalable, Flexible, Secure Educational Computing Lab
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Gary Nutt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/2005
* USD 78,152.00

Educational computer laboratories have evolved from rooms full of terminals
connected to a large timesharing system, to rooms full of desktop computers
connected to a file server. In the former case, the main computer provides both
cycles and file storage; in the latter, the desktop computers provide the cycles
and some of the file storage, while the file server provides more stable file
storage. This approach does not scale well in universities where space and other
capital improvements are nearly insurmountable barriers (and even if funded,
take years to implement). The quality of educational labs for computer science
students deteriorates due to these space constraints, economy of&lt;br/&gt;scale
requirements, and to the rate at which laboratory computers become
obsolete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A survey of our undergraduate students shows that
they typically use their own computer for university tasks rather than using the
lab computers. This is because they have newer equipment and a familiar
computing environment. Unfortunately, it is rare for a student's computer to
have regular file archiving; if the student's machine crashes, the consequences
are dire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project describes a new model for
constructing an educational laboratory - one that provides a scalable, flexible,
and safe computing infrastructure in which students can use their own machines
in concert with a lab infrastructure. The infrastructure provides software-
specific extensions to the students' computers, e.g., a particular version of a
compiler or package, as well as a very large amount of file storage space that
is systematically archived to support failure recovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model encourages the development of tailored
environments to enable an instructor to create a virtual lab with a unique
operating system (e.g., Windows .NET for web service programming instead of
Linux), language environments, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This study investigates the application of leading edge storage system research
to an important practical problem. Although various aspects of the technology
currently exist, others will be created along with the synthesis of all aspects
to create a new approach to distributed computing that leverages large storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Universities are in a continual
cycle of lab computer acquisition, deployment, and replacement. This approach
shifts the "rapidly aging" aspects of computers to end users. These users can
decide whether or not they desire newer, faster equipment to use with the
infrastructure, or if they prefer to avoid acquisition to save money. The
university saves space by providing a cafe -like atmosphere where students can
use their equipment, rather than providing rooms full of rapidly-aging
computers. More importantly, the infrastructure provides a robust and
configurable infrastructure where it is possible to ensure that students have
access to exactly the right tools (and software versions) for a particular
course. Students benefit by having their personal computer become a component in
the educational computing infrastructure (with appropriate authentication and
authorization), and by having a large, safe, archived file system at their
disposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;