* 0346843
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Tissue-Specific Transcriptional Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Mark Hiller, Goucher College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 02/28/2010
* USD 521,192.00

Cellular differentiation in multi-cellular organisms depends on tissue-specific
gene expression. Although many genes are ubiquitously expressed, others are
expressed in a restricted number of cell types or tissues at specific stages of
development. Recent evidence suggests that altering the composition the core RNA
polymerase II transcription machinery may regulate cell type-specific
transcriptional activation. This is in contrast to the more traditional model
that presumes combinations of transcriptional activator and repressor proteins
regulate the time and place of transcription. The core machinery, although
essential for the process of transcription, is not usually what determines the
choice of promoters used during transcriptional initiation. The mechanisms that
allow alternative forms of the general transcription machinery to differentially
recognize specific promoters and thereby regulate tissue-specific transcription
are not completely understood. The scientific program uses Drosophila germline
differentiation as a model system to investigate the contributions of
alternative forms of the general transcription machinery to developmentally
regulated gene expression. Execution of the spermatogenesis cellular
differentiation program in Drosophila depends upon transcription of a cohort of
spermatid differentiation genes in germline cells. This transcriptional program
requires the function of several genes including no hitter, cannonball, and
meiosis I arrest, which are testis-specific homologs of TFIID subunits.
Drosophila also express a testis-specific TFIIA subunit homolog. Interestingly,
mammals express testis-specific homologs of TFIID and TFIIA subunits, suggesting
the mechanisms regulating transcription of spermatid differentiation genes are
conserved and that insights gleaned from study of Drosophila germline will
contribute knowledge concerning reproductive health in humans. The educational
program will incorporate undergraduates into the scientific research program.
Independent laboratory research is an essential educational component for young
scientists, future medical doctors and science teachers. Drosophila
spermatogenesis offers a model system with genetic and molecular techniques that
are relatively simple to master and yet intellectually challenging. The program
will familiarize students with the scientific process and methodology valuable
in a broad spectrum of life science careers, and stimulate the intellectual
exhilaration that comes from independent research. An Advanced Genetics course
will incorporate modern genetic analysis with traditional genetic subject
matter, and the associated laboratory course will use Drosophila to demonstrate
common genetic and molecular techniques that are applicable to mutational
analysis in a wide range of organisms. The semester long project in the
laboratory class will allow students to analyze previously uncharacterized male-
sterile mutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;