* 0346679
* Botanical Inventory of the Cordillera del Condor Region of Ecuador and Peru
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* David Neill, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 03/31/2007
* USD 359,846.00

0346679&lt;br/&gt;Neill&lt;br/&gt;Dr. David Neill and colleagues Steven
Churchill and Henk van der Werff at Missouri Botanical Garden and several Latin
American colleagues will conduct a comprehensive, three-year botanical inventory
of the Cordillera del Condor, a geologically complex section of the Andes
located in southeastern Ecuador and neighboring Peru. Large-scale gold and
copper mining pose an imminent threat to the still largely intact forests of the
Condor region, which is composed mainly of sandstones and limestones with
mineral-bearing igneous intrusions. The Cordillera del Condor has an
exceptionally rich flora-one of the most diverse and poorly known floras in the
Neotropics, including many plants that occur nowhere else. Of particular
interest are the region's sandstone areas, where researchers recently discovered
several plant species that are closely related to species from the sandstone
mountains of the Guayana region situated 3000 kilometers to the northeast in
Venezuela; project investigators anticipate additional similar discoveries. They
will survey the flora on selected sandstone and adjacent non-sandstone areas at
different elevations and will install permanent study areas to examine the
habitat preferences of plants growing on different underlying soils. The project
will produce a wealth of information on the flora of the region, including
collections of many species new to science and checklists and species
distribution maps of the region's flora to be distributed over the Internet.
Drawing on these findings, project investigators will analyze the relationship
between variations in plant composition and factors such as elevation and
underlying soils. They will also examine the biogeographical linkages between
the Cordillera del Condor and the Guayana region. &lt;br/&gt;The project results
will provide information needed to guide selection of protected areas, to be
established under a major conservation initiative launched recently in the
Cordillera del Condor region by the Ecuadorian and Peruvian governments with
participation by non-governmental conservation organizations and the indigenous
communities that inhabit the region, the Shuar in Ecuador and Aguaruna in Peru.
In addition, the project's general inventory surveys and permanent study areas
will provide training and research opportunities for Ecuadorian and Peruvian
undergraduate students and representatives of the native Shuar inhabitants of
the region. &lt;br/&gt;