* 0346689
* CAREER: Mineral Surface Mediated Organization of Biological Macromolecules
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,06/30/2012
* Nita Sahai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2012
* USD 674,225.00

Abstract

The investigator's overall career vision is to develop a research program
exploring mineral surface interactions with biological macromolecules in
processes that are relevant to biogeochemistry (including environmental
chemistry, biomineralization and geomedicine), integrated with an educational
initiative that (i) increases the public 's awareness of the impact of
biogeosciences in their lives,(ii)illustrates how the core physical sciences
provide a language for interpreting natural phenomena whether in the external
environment or within the human body, and (iii)increases participation of
minorities and women in the physical sciences. One major segment of the career
plan is described in the present proposal. The research component is to
investigate the unique adsorption and self-assembly of phospholipids at the
surface of quartz compared to other oxides. The study is motivated by the
observation that quartz ruptures cell membranes, composed primarily of
phospholipids, whereas amorphous silica, octahedral crystalline silica
(stishovite) and other oxides such as corundum and anatase are relatively
benign. No satisfactory model currently exits to explain the different
biological activity of the mineral phases. Preliminary thermodynamic modeling
suggests that the different bioactivity of oxides is due to differences in
crystallography and chemical composition as reflected in oxide surface charge
and hydration (hydrophilicity) compared to the hydration of the phospholipids.
Differences in surface charge and hydration ultimately affect phospholipid
adsorption, self-assembly, and extent of organization or rupture. A major
objective of the proposed work is to test this hypothesis using a combination of
ab initio calculations and collaborative experimental work. Results could have
implications for understanding cellularization in the early stages of the
evolution of life, cell adhesion to mineral surfaces, the effect of inhaled
dusts on cells in the lung, designing biocompatible medical devices, and
industrial applications such as the biobeneficiation of ores during processing.
Adsorption and self-assembly of phosphatidylcholine from aqueous solution onto
the surfaces of quartz, silica glass, orthoclase and anatase will be studied.
The effects of pH and background electrolyte will also be examined. Isotherms
and microcalorimetry will provide adsorption energies. These experiments will be
performed in collaboration with Prof. Anant Menon and Prof. Thomas Record,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW). Attenuated
Total Reflectance-Fourier Transform Infra-Red spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR)
spectroscopy combined with quantum chemical cluster calculations of energies and
vibrational frequencies will indicate which specific functional groups of the
phospholipids interact with the mineral surface. Morphological changes in the
phospholipid self-assembled surface aggregates, which reflect changes in
interfacial solvation, will be monitored using Atomic Force Microscopy.
Vibrational spectroscopy and AFM experiments will be accomplished in
collaboration with Prof. Robert Hamers, Department of Chemistry, UW. As part of
the career-long educational initiative, during the period of this project, the
P.I. and her research group will develop a novel exhibit at the Geology Museum,
UW, that demonstrates the interdisciplinary nature of the biogeosciences, and
emphasizes the concept that similar fundamental physico-chemical principles
underlie natural geochemical and geomedical processes. The exhibit will
highlight results from the research proposed above, and from other projects of
our research group. The strength of this approach is that it integrates the
research efforts with the broader educational initiative. The impact of this
novel exhibit may be estimated from the greater than 25,000 visitors annually to
the Geology Museum at UW. Design of the exhibit, short-term feedback and long-
term evaluation of the project, its modification, and expansion to other museums
in the upper Mid-West will be conducted in collaboration with the Museum
Director, Dr. Richard Slaughter and UW's Centre for the Integration of Research,
Teaching and Learning (CIRTL), a new NSF funded Centre for Learning and
Teaching. The involvement of a post-doctoral associate, graduate and
undergraduate students in all aspects of the proposed work will provide both
research and outreach training to the future academic workforce in the physical
sciences.