* 0346411
* Louisiana's Strategic Infrastructure Improvement
* O/D,EPS
* 05/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2008
* USD 9,200,000.00

The objectives of Louisiana's 2003-2006 Research Infrastructure Improvement
proposal are to enhance Louisiana's R&amp;D competitiveness; to build
partnerships among EPSCoR universities, national laboratories, and the private
sector; and to recruit students, especially from underrepresented populations,
into S&amp;E fields. In order to accomplish these objectives, the proposed
project will support research and educational activities that are not only of
the highest intellectual quality, but also will have broad impact within the
state of Louisiana. &lt;br/&gt;The Center for Biological Modular Microsystems
(CBM2), a research center of national eminence consisting of established
scientists and engineering with state-of-the-arts facilities, will focus in the
areas of Bio-MicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS). Development of BioMEMS
has been recognized as a crucial driver of advances in biotechnology, including
DNA diagnostic and forensics. CBM2 will pioneer the development of an array of
micromanufacturing capabilities to build high-aspect-ratio microstructures that
serve as masters to reliability and inexpensively fabricate multiscale parts
(nm-mm). These parts, made from a variety of different materials will be
assembled into automated systems for applications in high throughput genomics-
based research. The center will constitute a hub for the highest quality
research in BioMEMS bringing together multidisciplinary teams of science and
engineering faculty from Louisiana State University (Louisiana's flagship
university), the J. Bennett Johnston Center for Advanced Microstructures &amp;
Devices, LSU Health Sciences Center, Tulane Health Sciences Center, and Xavier
University (an HBCU). The scientific program proposed will focus on
manufacturing reliable and cost-effective high-performance devices, while at the
same time increasing their functionality through integration using facilities
located at the State-supported synchrotron source, the Center for Advanced
Microstructures and Devices.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and educational
activities will be fully integrated to enhance faculty and graduate student
recruiting, to take science to K-12 classrooms, to involve underrepresented
students in educational and research opportunities, and to provide options for
the State's R&amp;D faculty to expand their expertise and collaboration.
Examples of programs contributing directly to a broader impact are the Joint
Faculty Appointments Program to establish competitive science and engineering
research teams through faculty hires at its HBCU and research-
extensive/intensive institutions; the Information Technology Infrastructure to
establish twelve sites across the State providing 95% of Louisiana's active
researchers an EPSCoR audio/video center within a 30-minute drive; Links with
Industry and National Labs to establish alliances that will expand training
opportunities for selected undergraduate/graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers, including underrepresented populations; Mini-sabbaticals for
Faculty, which will allow researchers to travel to federal agencies, visit
research centers, and enhance their research and education programs; and
professional development opportunities for K-12 science and mathematics
teachers. The proposed project will bring together the Louisiana academic
strengths and resources to establish the pursued research and education
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;