* 0346455
* ACT/SGER:     Enhancement of Magnetically-Transduced Surface Acoustic Wave Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Robert van Dover, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2004
* USD 86,013.00

This project aims at demonstrating a potential breakthrough concept in remote
chemical and biological sensor systems. The approach is to explore the
possibility of obtaining enhanced magnetomechanical coupling when the resonant
precession frequency of individual magnetic moments in a ferromagnetic thin film
is identical to the surface acoustic wave resonant frequency of a
magnetostrictive transducer. If feasible this would strongly enhance the
viability of magnetically-transduced surface acoustic wave devices for remote
detection of chemical/biological threats. Fabrication of such devices is
compatible with conventional integrated circuit processing, so device arrays
could be integrated with transistor electronics on a single chip to make a
versatile, inexpensive system for remote chemical detection. The interaction
between resonant precession (Ferromagnetic Resonance) and acoustic resonance
will be characterized by measuring the ultrahigh-frequency (UHF) complex
permeability of magnetic stripe structures with a fixed acoustic resonance
frequency, varying the precession resonance with an external magnetic field. The
structures, materials, and fields used will result in resonances in the range 1
MHz - 1 GHz. The coupling of resonant precession with a resonant surface
acoustic wave has not been explored previously, and in addition to the sensor
application, may lead to new insights into UHF properties of magnetic materials,
particularly magnetic damping. %%% An important feature of the project is
education and training, with emphasis on integration of research and education.
The graduate student supported by this funding will establish a foundation for
developing and characterizing novel magnetic devices for chemical/biological
sensing applications. In addition, undergraduates will work in the PI's
laboratory on projects related to this research effort and gain their first
experience of performing research in a state-of-the-art environment.
Additionally, the PI will participate in outreach activities via the NSF-funded
Cornell Center for Material Research, as well as in other activities sponsored
by the College of Engineering, such as the Cornell University Research In
Engineering (CURIE) Academy, a program offering high-school girls the
opportunity to explore careers in Engineering. This award is supported jointly
by the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism
(ACT) Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports
new concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security.