* 0346253
* ACT/SGER:      Virus Recognition Using Self-Assembled Nanoscale Block Copolymer Patterns
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 104,999.00

This exploratory proposal will present a new method which uses a Nickel-
functionalized amphiphilic block copolymer pattern to separate and collect
viruses. Block copolymers can provide flexible transparent functional nanoscale
devices with non-lithographic nanoscale patterns which could be made compatible
with biologically active molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is
divided into two specific objectives: The first deals with synthesizing and
processing functionalized block copolymers, the second will apply these
materials to biomimetic virus sensing.&lt;br/&gt;1. Nickel functionalized block
copolymers will be synthesized and processed into thin films.&lt;br/&gt;2. Virus
binding of different sizes and shapes (BV-GFP, TMV, TNV, PVX, CGMMV) will be
carried out, and &lt;br/&gt;their specificity on the block copolymer pattern
will be evaluated in aqueous and physiological media.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
exploratory methodologies for the synthesis and characterization of thin-film
virus binding nanoscale polymer patterns thus offer exciting avenues for the
development of novel biosensing materials and techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed exploratory research
relate to a block copolymer nanoscale device system which would apply in the
identification, classification, and removal of viruses. This is currently a very
difficult task, but the need is widespread in diverse sectors, including
national security (e.g. bioterrorism), human and animal health, crop protection,
and biologics production. The education activities to be undertaken in this work
include undergraduate and graduate teaching, middle school teacher training,
graduate student advising, and various opportunities in undergraduate research
involvement and mentoring, as well as the development of a K-12 tailored
interactive web page.&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the NSF and
the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism Program in the
Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new concepts in basic
research and workforce development with the potential to contribute to national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;