* 0346938
* Workshops on the Science of Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2011
* Kevin Sullivan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0346938&lt;br/&gt;Kevin Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;U of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to request support
for the organization of two workshops on the Science of Design. The first
workshop will be held October 12-14, 2003. It is planned for Airlie Center near
Warrenton, Virginia. The second workshop will be held in the first quarter of
2004, and is also tentatively planned for Airlie Center. The workshops will
support the National Science Foundation.s Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) in formulating and establishing
research priorities for a science of design. The workshops will be organized
based on national calls for position &lt;br/&gt;papers on the formulation and
prioritization of research needs of the field. After a careful selection
process, a diverse group of participants will be invited to each workshop to
refine and develop an initial position synthesized from the contributions of the
invited participants. The final product of each workshop will be a report, which
will be available to National Science Foundation managers to plan and coordinate
their activities, to the broad research community, and to the public. The first
workshop will draw largely on &lt;br/&gt;researchers organized around the CISE
division of Computer-Communications Research (CCR); the second will draw on the
entire CISE research community. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The Science of
Design is perhaps unique among sciences for accommodating normative
&lt;br/&gt;elements, and thus has the potential to create a new bridge between
traditional, purely descriptive natural sciences and the normative realm of
value that is today largely the domain of fields such as humanities, the arts,
and religion. The disciplines of computer and information science and
engineering have both the need and the means to represent norm-driven design,
from the structures of designed artifacts to the behaviors of the human and
organizational processes that create them.ultimately to derive appropriate
design structures and processes from the consideration of explicitly represented
norms.