* 0346316
* SGER:  Study of the Natural Attenuation of Contaminants Derived from a January 2003 Helicopter Fluids Spill at Lake Fryxell (McMurdo Dry Valleys), a LTER Research Site
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Fabien Kenig, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2005
* USD 60,517.00

Taylor Valley in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of East Antarctica is the site of a
long-term ecological research (LTER) project. The pristine Taylor Valley has
three major closed basin perennially ice-covered lakes (Hoare, Fryxell and
Bonney). On January 17th 2003, a Bell 212 helicopter crashed on the 5 m thick
ice cover of Lake Fryxell, resulting in the spill of ~730 liters of diesel fuel
as well as small amounts of synthetic lubricants and hydraulic fluids. An
immediate response from personnel based at McMurdo Station allowed initiation of
clean up efforts within four days of the crash. However, at least half of the
spilled fluids could not be recovered owing to the condition of the ice and the
unavoidable close of the field season in early February, precluding further
access to the lake site. These fluids will remain trapped in the ice until the
next spring (Dec 2003) melt season starts. The site will become accessible in
November 2003 when ice cores and water samples can be collected for detailed
analyses. Members of the McMurdo Dry Valleys LTER research team have submitted
three SGER proposals (0346316, 0346272 and 0347219) to better document the fate
and transport of hydrocarbons within the lake ice and water. The goals of the
coordinated research effort are to understand the physical, chemical and
biological changes that have occurred since the spill and what, if any, the
longer-term impact of the spill will be. Results will also provide important
information for the improvement of accident response policies in the Dry
Valleys.&lt;br/&gt;This component of the project will document the natural
attenuation of helicopter fluids in the lake ice and has two major objectives:
1) Assess the level of disturbance of the lake ecosystem by evaluating changes
in lipid constituents of Lake Fryxell ice caused by this crash. Lipids analyzed
in pre-accident lake water and surface sediments will be compared to the
contaminant source (jet fuel, lubrication oil and transmission fluids) as well
as post-accident ice-cover samples, lake water samples and surface sediments
over a two-year period. 2) Determine the level of natural attenuation
(evaporation and biodegradation) of the spilled fluids in the frozen lake ice
cover will be quantified and evaluate the effect of biodegradation on spilled
fluid composition in the ice cover. Graduate students will participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;