* 0346785
* Neural basis of optimal cue combination: theory and experiments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Jean-Rene Duhamel, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,002.00

&lt;br/&gt;The nervous system can sense the world through a variety of sensory
modalities providing complementary as well as redundant information about
various aspects of the real world. Through a process known as multisensory
integration, these sensory signals are merged and used to perform a variety of
tasks, such as locating objects in space or identifying the words uttered by a
speaker. With NSF funding, Dr. Alexandre Pouget is conducting a strongly theory-
driven research program, combining modeling and human studies to investigate the
neural basis of this process. The experiments involve asking human subjects to
locate their arm in space using multisensory cues. The researchers seek to learn
whether subjects can integrate over time three types of cues: visual, auditory
and proprioceptive. The optimal strategy in this situation is to compute a
weighted sum of those cues, with weights inversely proportional to the
reliability of the cues. Intuitively, this makes sense: The system should put
greater weights on cues that are more reliable. The funded experiments will
determine whether subjects perform this weighted average, and whether those
weights adapt when the reliability of the cues is changed from trial to trial.
The models will be used to predict human performance and to develop a theory of
optimal multisensory integration in neural circuits. The approach relies on a
general theory of computation known as Bayesian inferences. This theory has been
applied to a variety of problems ranging from sensory processing, high level
reasoning (like medical diagnosis), and motor control. Therefore, understanding
the neural basis of Bayesian inferences in the context of multisensory
integration will have wide implications for general theories of how the brain
works, with applications to computer vision and robotics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this project include the
development of a course in computational neuroscience at the University of
Rochester and opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
participate in research. This project will also foster collaboration with a
laboratory in France directed by Dr. Jean-Rene Duhamel.&lt;br/&gt;