* 0346147
* Workshops for Establishing a Stable North American Reference Frame (SNARF) to Enable Geophysical and Geodetic  Studies with EarthScope
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Kristine Larson, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 01/31/2007
* USD 44,136.00

The Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) component of EarthScope will use the
science of geodesy to measure the slow deformations in the Earth's crust that
are driven by plate tectonics and magmatism. Specifically, the Global
Positioning System (GPS) will be used to measure the movements of approximately
1000 points spanning the North America-Pacific plate boundary. These motions
must be defined relative to a terrestrial reference frame. Such a frame requires
the definition of its Cartesian coordinate axes (including origin, orientation,
and scale) and the evolution of these axes in time, as well as precise models of
the dynamic Earth. The motions of the Earth's surface due to tectonic processes
the region spanning the North America-Pacific plate boundary (the focus of the
Plate Boundary Observatory) are most naturally expressed with respect to the
stable interiors of either the North America or Pacific plates. A standard
reference frame will therefore make it easier to interpret the geodetic data in
terms of where the total budget of relative plate motion is being accommodated
and how deeply the plate boundary dynamics penetrate into the plate interior. It
will also provide a common frame by which to compare results from different
analysis groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For these reasons, UNAVCO has formed the
Stable North American Reference Frame (SNARF) working group to define the
reference frame to be used for PBO. A series of three to four small NSF-funded
workshops will be held over a two year period to develop SNARF and to educate
the community about it. The SNARF working group is comprised of approximately a
dozen geodesists with expertise in both developing and testing reference frames.
The SNARF working group has significant links to developers of the International
Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) and the national geodetic surveys of the U.S.
and Canada, who have committed experts to collaborate with the university
research community toward this effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of science
benefits to EarthScope, the accurate realization of the terrestrial reference
frame will add significant interpretive value to measured station motions. SNARF
will enable a more robust determination of changes in strain in the Earth's
crust associated with the earthquake cycle, and will provide a common framework
for comparison of geodetic data and geophysical models. Defining a stable frame
at the sub-millimeter level requires adequate characterization of Earth
deformation processes across the "stable plate interior," a region that by
definition is relatively unaffected by plate boundary process. This plate
interior provides a stable platform from which to view plate boundary
deformation. Despite its name, the stable plate interior actually deforms very
slowly in a complex way due to phenomena such as glacial isostatic adjustment
and other mantle-scale processes, coupled to a heterogeneous lithosphere which
is occasionally host to large intra-plate earthquakes. Until recently, such slow
intra-plate processes have been ignored in the underlying models of reference
frames. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the SNARF workshops will be a
published series of incrementally improved reference frames that accurately
define the precise coordinates and time evolution of a set of stations
representing "stable North America." The SNARF working group will provide tools
and products for performing model calculations and model-data comparisons in the
EarthScope reference frame. The EarthScope initiative will significantly broaden
the community using geodetic techniques to study the Pacific-North American
plate boundary. Therefore the SNARF working group will not only develop an
accurate and stable reference frame, but will also properly describe the use of
that reference frame to this larger scientific community. A special session at
the 2004 Joint Assembly ("Spring AGU") Meeting in Montreal will highlight
research and development into SNARF, and will inform future users of
developments by the working group, and will encourage feedback into that
development from the scientific community. Educational information on using the
frame correctly will also be made available online. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;