* 0346717
* Children's and Adolescents' Racial Biases about Peer Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Melanie Killen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2007
* USD 175,001.00

The goals of this project are to investigate children's intergroup bias
regarding peer relationships in familiar, everyday situations. Using direct
assessments, previous research has shown that children evaluate racial exclusion
as wrong using moral reasons in straightforward situations (Killen, Lee-Kim,
McGlothlin, &amp; Stangor, 2002). In complex or ambiguous situations, children
often use a mixture of reasons, such as group functioning or personal choice to
justify exclusion. The present studies will examine the ways in which children
display implicit and explicit racial biases. Studies with adults have shown that
while explicit biases have diminished dramatically over 50 years, implicit
biases are still quite prevalent (Dovidio &amp; Gaertner, 1986). Most of this
research has not employed measurements that are developmentally appropriate for
children; nor do they assess bias in the context of peer situations. Pilot work
for the present study established the reliability and validity of two
assessments for investigating implicit racial bias in children using ambiguous
pictures cards and perceptions of similarity measurements. These instruments
will be used in the present investigation to assess children's evaluations of
contexts involving cross-race peer relationships. Using the social-cognitive
domain model, this research will investigate whether and how children apply
racial biases to their interpretations of ambiguous picture cards with cross-
race peer dyads, to their perceptions of similarity, and to their judgments
about the potential for cross-race friendships. In this assessment, social
encounters are depicted that reflect everyday, familiar, social contexts for
children, such as situations on the playground, at the park, and in the school
yard. In addition, this research will examine how the ethnic make-up of
children's school environments influences the extent to which children apply
racial biases to decisions about peer relationships. Further, children's
implicit and explicit bias will be examined in order to understand whether
children who do not demonstrate explicit bias, nonetheless, exhibit implicit
biases when asked to make judgments about peer relationships.&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate whether, and how, children take race into account when
making decisions about peer encounters in morally-relevant peer relationship
contexts. One study will focus primarily on implicit biases from children
attending different schools (homogeneous and heterogeneous), and a second study
will use multiple measures to understand the relationships between implicit and
explicit intergroup judgments. Given that previous work has shown that different
forms of social reasoning are used when evaluating peer contexts, this research
will seek to determine if racial biases are brought into consideration when
evaluating peer exchanges, guided by developmental social-cognitive domain
theory. &lt;br/&gt;The knowledge resulting from this project will enable
educators, school psychologists, and school professionals to develop curriculum
and intervention programs to address issues of intergroup tensions, and
diversity in schools in a developmentally meaningful way. Given the
multicultural nature of the workforce and adult world, it is essential to
facilitate children's ability to interact comfortably with individuals from
diverse backgrounds; a first step towards this goal is understanding when and
how children's intergroup biases manifest in various social contexts and
situations, and that is the central aim of this investigation. &lt;br/&gt;