* 0346297
* CAREER:  Droplet Vaporization under Asymmetric Conditions:  Implications for Combustion at Conventional and Reduced Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Herek Clack, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 01/31/2010
* USD 401,409.00

The primary objective of this CAREER project is to assess the impact of
asymmetrical convective and thermal conditions on the fuel-vapor distributions
and ignition characteristics of vaporizing liquid-fuel droplets. The
experimental methodology exposes monodisperse acetone droplet streams to
thermally and convectively asymmetric flow conditions. Two separate flow
reactors, a heated linear plug-flow reactor (LPFR) and a heated circular
Couette-flow reactor (CCFR), provide thermally asymmetric (LPFR), convectively
asymmetric (CCFR), and combined thermal/convective asymmetric (CCFR)
environments for observation of vaporization of acetone droplets. An Nd-YAG
laser sheet illuminates the vaporizing droplet streams, causing the acetone
vapor to fluoresce. An intensified CCD camera captures the fluorescence images.
Analysis of these images reveals the degree to which asymmetric thermofluid
conditions induce nonuniform fuel-vapor distributions, which in turn can impact
adversely droplet ignition, combustion, and pollutant formation. By comparing
the effects of thermal, convective, and combined thermal/convective asymmetric
conditions, individual and collective effects can be exposed, thus providing the
basis for extending classical droplet vaporization theory to include nonuniform
environments. A separate, concurrent numerical modeling effort is being
developed to simulate observed anomalous vaporization behavior and to validate
new vaporization models using parallel processing architectures and micro-scale
transport formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As emission regulations become ever
more restrictive for traditional combustion devices, environmental compliance
may depend increasingly on understanding higher-order effects, such as
asymmetric droplet vaporization phenomena. Further, asymmetric droplet
vaporization phenomena may play a dominant role in combustion processes within
miniature (~ 1 mm) combustors, an emerging technology being developed to provide
power for portable electronics, remote sensors, and remotely piloted vehicles.
Such miniature combustors require liquid fuels in order to allow the long
refueling intervals needed to compete with electric batteries. However,
miniaturization increases the size of liquid fuel droplets relative to the
combustor dimensions and produces stronger and more prominent thermofluid
property gradients within the combustor itself. Thus, successful miniaturization
of combustors depends on identifying and understanding anomalous combustion
phenomena that are nearly insignificant at conventional scales but which
predominate at these reduced scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this CAREER project uses vertically integrated teams ("Engineering
Collectives" or ECs) of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
embark upon guided science and engineering discovery projects. High school
students are recruited from the neighborhoods surrounding the IIT campus, which
are predominantly African-American and Latino, thereby helping to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering and their
representation on the IIT campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;