* 0347440
* CAREER: Computational Methods for the Analysis and Design of Stochastic Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Xenofon Koutsoukos, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 04/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

Recent advances in information and micro-scale technologies are enabling a new
generation of embedded systems that are pervading our daily lives, from
automobiles and aircrafts to manufacturing plants. Such applications consist of
tightly coupled physical and computational processes that dynamically interact
with the environment in the presence of uncertainty and variability. This
project aims at developing a stochastic hybrid system framework that provides
the theories, computational methods, and software tools for analysis and design
of such systems. Stochastic hybrid systems are approximated by locally
consistent Markov decision processes that preserve local mean and covariance.
The project addresses the following critical research challenges: (1) Formal
analysis of system properties expressed using probabilistic temporal logics.
Stochastic bisimulations are employed to provide equivalent minimal models of
the approximating Markov processes and allow the development of scalable
algorithms. (2) Design of embedded control systems with high degree of autonomy
using stochastic optimal control. Efficient algorithms are designed by utilizing
stochastic bisimulations that account for the available controls. Model-based
software design is used for building a suite of supporting tools and
experimental research is conducted to validate the results. The research
advancements are integrated into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum using
a series of realistic challenge problems. Technical results, software tools, and
the education materials will be made available electronically using an open-
source model as well as through publications and conference participation. The
broader goal of the project is to establish solid theoretical foundations and
computational methods that will impact embedded system design in applications
such as mobile sensor networks for homeland security and environmental
monitoring, intelligent transportation systems, and electromechanical systems
and chemical processes in manufacturing.