* 0347595
* CAREER:     Distributed Cooperation in Boundary-Spanning IS Design
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Susan Gasson, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2010
* USD 500,000.00

The IT component of information system development has been radically simplified
in recent years. Many corporations are now attempting to jointly design business
processes and IT systems, to integrate workflows and information flows across
business processes. The majority of these efforts fail, because there is a
fundamental contradiction in the way that we design this type of "boundary-
spanning" information system (IS). Stakeholders need to establish common visions
of design goals and information flows, but can only do this in situations where
the context for doing these things is already well defined and stable - so how
can they do it in rapidly-changing or evolving development contexts?
Understanding why something is done in a specific way is often possible only
within the culture and local knowledge of a specific work-group. We lack ways to
share this understanding across workgroups, or even to determine what knowledge
is significant for an effective IS design.

Most boundary-spanning design projects employ the type of design process used
for IT system development. Goals for change are defined, requirements for a
solution are specified, then the solution is implemented. But this approach is
not appropriate for the design of ill-defined, cross-functional information
systems, where the boundaries and goals for change evolve as the design
proceeds. The PI's prior studies indicate that stakeholders from different areas
of the organization perceive organizational processes and goals in very
different ways and are often unaware that they understand the same concept
differently. Stakeholders' partial and different understandings of
organizational processes are a major obstacle to developing a shared vision of
design problems and solutions. Establishing a common language for people with
different backgrounds and expertise is problematic. Consequently, there is too
little input from IS users and organizational stakeholders to define an
appropriate system.

There are three major challenges in designing that involves stakeholders from
multiple disciplines and backgrounds, which are not resolved by current
research: The need for a common language, that allows participants from a
variety of organizational areas and backgrounds to understand and interpret the
processes and concepts of design in the same way; The need for effective
"boundary objects", to mediate and integrate knowledge that is distributed among
multiple stakeholders; The need to understand the process drivers that permit a
design group to rapidly agree and constantly validate a common vision of their
design. This project will develop a new theory of knowledge integration for
short-term, dynamic cross-disciplinary teams designing information and
communication technologies (ICTs). The PI will propagate this knowledge both to
typical IS practitioners and to new groups of people who are key stakeholders
but not typically first-class participants in critical IS design activities.

Broader Impacts: This research will affect the design-related area of
distributed problem-solving in new contexts, both organizational and
educational. New ways of supporting collaborative, problem-centered learning
will be developed, that will alleviate the disadvantages currently faced by
women, students with disabilities, and ethnic minority individuals because they
do not share the mainstream cultural traditions or genres that drive the
negotiation of outcomes in goal-driven processes. By developing collective
problem-solving techniques and performance-measures that shift the focus from
goal-achievement to inclusive problem-definition, these communities will be
provided with the opportunity to participate more fully in group work and to
exert increased influence, both in business organizations and in the classroom.
Current problem-based learning emphasizes complex, real-world problem
investigation; this emphasis feeds back into the practical, strategic
applications of the current project. Results will be disseminated broadly,
through the Drexel University education initiative, and through the PI's current
affiliations with Philadelphia Knowledge Management industry group, through
industry seminars and workshops in the two collaborating organizations, and
through the AIS Cognitive Research Special Interest Group.