* 0347514
* SGER:            Scalable Cooperative Communications in Adaptive Large Scale Networks Inspired by Natural Swarms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Anna Scaglione, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2004
* USD 75,001.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0347514&lt;br/&gt;Anna Scaglione&lt;br/&gt;Cornell
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic devices become more reliable and can be
integrated at very small scales. Sensors combined with embedded intelligence
meet an increasing number of applications. The value of gathering and processing
information locally is tied to the ability to communicate the information itself
remotely. The scale of the communication devices developed thus far and their
purpose do not meet the requirement of distributed, dynamic, energy limited
networks of gigantic scale. I addition, most of the research at the physical
layer has been focused on channel access. Cellular networks and wireless local
area networks are designed following the principles developed in years of
research on multiple access.&lt;br/&gt;The backbone of these networks is not
wireless and this has clearly polarized the research on mobile communications
towards solving the access problem. Networking large numbers of these devices
with traditional methods requires prohibitive costs that soon become
incompatible with the dynamic nature of the network and the limited capabilities
of each node. Recent results also indicate that as the density of the nodes
increases peer to peer communications become unfeasible, even under the best
multiple access and routing scheme. This results reinforce the need of a
paradigm shift in the design and this is what this project is trying to
pioneer.&lt;br/&gt;The key inspiration in this project stems from the
observation that distributed sensing ability and communications ver large scale
networks are common in nature and are at the basis of any biological
architecture referred to as swarm. Human intelligence is believed to be a
remarkable example of such architecture. The communications within the network
occur in a very different fashion compared to man-made communication networks
and emerge from very simple building blocks. The nodes cooperate and aggregate
their signals operating as distributed sources and receivers, where peer to peer
transmissions are completely lost.