* 0347832
* Polyphilic Fluoroalkyl-Substituted Polythiophenes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* David Collard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 12/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

The polyphilicity of new fluoroalkyl-substituted polythiophenes provides the
means to prepare highly ordered and oriented conjugated organic materials. The
combination of tunable electronic properties, solubility, and supramolecular
assembly of semifluorinated materials allows us to address a number of criteria
in the design of conjugated polymers for use in electronic devices. The study
will establish structure-property relationships for the formation of assemblies
in solution, in liquid crystalline mesophases and in the solid stage. In
addition, the study of polyphilic polymers will provide insight into development
of methods to attain control of the orientation of molecules at surfaces, a
subject which is poorly understood at present but one of great importance in the
development of conjugated organic materials for use in devices. We will also
explore the nature of the polyanions (i.e., delocalization, mobility) formed by
reduction of conjugated polymers substituted by electron withdrawing
perfluoroalkyl groups, and the potential for n-channel conduction. Finally, the
solubility of fluoroalkyl-substituted conjugated polymers in supercritical
carbon dioxide will be investigated to allow for processing of these
technologically important materials in a "green solvent".

The proposed study will lead to new design motifs which may be applied to other
conjugated polymers, a field of intense interest in the development of new
electronic, optical and electrooptical technologies. It provides new materials
for incorporation into prototypical devices, and will provide new physical
insights into the development of ordered and oriented materials. The study
provides exceptional opportunities for training of graduate and undergraduate
students in a variety of techniques and fields: organic synthesis and
characterization, polymerization chemistry, characterization of materials, and
device fabrication of characterization. These students will benefit from
outstanding facilities and the interdisciplinary environment present on the
Georgia Tech campus, as well as the proposed collaboration with Dr. Z. Bao. Both
Georgia Tech and the PI's group have a strong record of training graduates from
underrepresented minority groups. Researchers will be recruited to this project
from the diverse student population present in the School of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Georgia Tech.

