* 0347124
* CAREER:  Understanding Protein Folding Dynamics in the Ultra-Fast Limit
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Stephen Hagen, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2010
* USD 622,892.00

This project will investigate some of the unique phenomena associated with
protein folding and assembly on very fast time scales. Nanosecond and
microsecond events in protein folding can now be probed by experimentalists
using laser spectroscopy, and by theorists using state-of-the-art molecular
dynamics simulation. Because many small, newly-designed proteins and peptides
fold rapidly, ultra-fast folding is the regime where the experimental,
theoretical, and design aspects of protein folding all converge. However, it is
also a regime that strains the assumptions and interpretations behind standard
physical descriptions of the protein folding problem: fast folding is different
from slow folding. This project applies time-resolved laser spectroscopy to
small, designed proteins and peptides in order to examine the limits of standard
barrier-crossing descriptions of folding, and to investigate how the assumptions
behind those descriptions may break down for the very fastest folding molecules.
It focuses on (1) the meaning of reaction friction in Kramers models for
folding, (2) the speed of rapid reorganizations of unfolded polypeptides, and
(3) the deviation from simple barrier-crossing kinetics that is expected for
ultrafast folding.

The broader impact of this project derives in part from its advancement of basic
understanding of the limits of simple physical models for complex biochemical
phenomena, and from the fact that it supports time-resolved spectroscopic
instrumentation that enhances the scientific research infrastructure in
molecular biophysics. A broader impact also derives the educational components
of the plan. The PI will lead a K-12 outreach effort aimed at a local middle
school that has a large minority enrollment and substantial numbers of
disadvantaged students. The project aims to motivate and support the
participation of more of these students in the optional science fair by
providing them with regular mentoring over a period of many weeks as they
undertake their science fair projects. The plan also provides for research
laboratory teaching and training for undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary biological physics: This training initiates physical-science
students into the study of biological systems, and it introduces biologically-
inclined students to physical instrumentation and methodologies. This project is
jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.