* 0347686
* CAREER:      Integrated Multi-hop Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2012
* Hongyi Wu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 06/30/2012
* USD 476,000.00

A ubiquitous and integrated architecture has been envisioned for future wireless
communication. In particular, integrating multi-hop wireless networking
technology with infrastructure-based systems is becoming one of the most
promising trends in building the next generation mobile wireless network.
Developed as an independently-deployed system, however, the multi-hop wireless
network is usually the performance bottleneck in terms of throughput and
reliability in integrated heterogeneous systems. There is an urgent need to
investigate new approaches that exploit the complementary characteristics of
different technologies in order to make integrated communication systems robust
and efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two intimately
interrelated research thrusts: enhanced communication protocols and self-
configurable management schemes. The first thrust aims to achieve superior
system throughput and quality of service (QoS) in integrated multi-hop wireless
networks. In particular, a synchronized MAC protocol is designed based on a
binary countdown scheme tailored for multi-hop wireless networks, and a cluster-
based routing protocol is developed where the cluster size is determined by a
scalability model and the clusters are bridged by existing network
infrastructure. The second research thrust explores several fundamental problems
in three areas: (1) a self-configurable, robust, and highly accurate local
positioning technique, (2) self-healing tractable node management for enhancing
reliability of multi-hop wireless networks, and (3) a self-maintenance
scheduling model generally applicable to various integrated multi-hop wireless
networks. Success of this project will enable researches to gain deep
understanding of the integration of heterogeneous wireless technologies and to
establish a new paradigm for integrating research and education in heterogeneous
wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;