* 0347574
* CAREER: The STU Project: Database Integration of Space, Time, and Uncertainty as a Foundation for the Next Generation of GIS
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Markus Schneider, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 04/30/2010
* USD 512,000.00

The goal of the project is to incorporate the three fundamental features of
space, time, and uncertainty (STU) into the next generation of Geographical
Information Systems (GIS). The STU incorporation greatly increases the
expressive power of GIS and broadens the possible spectrum of future GIS
applications. The STU project is devoted to the design, implementation, and
database integration of new, computational, formal data models (type systems,
algebras), query languages, application programming interfaces, and software
tools for managing and querying space, space-time, space-uncertainty, and space-
time-uncertainty objects. The goal is to create universal, application-neutral,
and versatile tools serving as a basis for numerous GIS applications in which
the inherent features of space, time, and uncertainty play an important role.
These tools will be implemented as extension packages and embedded into
extensible commercial database management systems (DBMS). The approach used in
this project rests on several extensible algebras, which may cooperate with each
other and make it possible to add new types and operations if necessary. The
connection of the algebras to commercial DBMS will have a broad impact on the
many domains that use large volumes of STU data by improving the processing
methods for GIS-related applications. Different and large user groups get the
chance to obtain full-fledged database support enhanced by one or several STU
algebras. The educational component of this project includes creating and using
GIS educational materials and involving students in research by providing
students with an appropriate software and hardware environment for their
research projects and further education. The project Web site
http://www.cise.ufl.edu/research/SpaceTimeUncertainty/STU.html will be used for
dissemination of both research and educational material.