* 0347891
* CAREER: Computer-Aided Design of Mixed ASIC / Reconfigurable Fabrics of the Nanometer Era
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Kia Bazargan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0347891&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bazargan, Kia&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Computer-Aided Design of Mixed ASIC / Reconfigurable Fabrics of the Nanometer
Era&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in the chip
manufacturing technology have brought about astonishing growth of electronic
systems, resulting in multi-gigahertz clock speeds and billion-gate chips.
However, explosive complexities, rising manufacturing costs, shrinking time-to-
market windows, and deep submicron effects are threatening the continuation of
the growth in the electronics technology. New system complexities result in
unreliability (even failure) and unpredictability of system behavior. Employing
FPGA-like (Field Programmable Gate Array) reconfigurable blocks in SoC promotes
flexibility and drives non-recurring engineering (NRE) costs
down.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded FPGA-like reconfigurable fabrics have
emerged as part of todays SoC, and will inevitably be part of future designs
because of the enormous advantages they provide. However, there are many
challenging hurdles in way of employing reconfigurable fabrics within SoC. This
proposal tackles a number of these challenges: 1) Statistical modeling and
optimization at different levels of abstraction are proposed to take on the
reliability and predictability concerns. 2) Architectural features for the
reconfigurable fabrics are also investigated to reduce power and improve thermal
conduction out of the fabric, while optimizing the flexibility, cost and
performance. 3) CAD algorithms for mixed ASIC / reconfigurable fabric are
proposed, and include hierarchical evaluation and estimation of uncertain
designs, low power optimization and technology mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed algorithms and methodologies would consider flexibility, reliability
and productivity as first-class citizens to be optimized along with other design
quality metrics such as area, cost, and performance. We will incorporate some of
the results of this research in the VLSI courses at the University of Minnesota,
as well as an advanced course on reconfigurable computing. Furthermore, a web
page will be developed that would host all course material, reconfigurable
benchmarks and FPGA tools from our group and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;