* 0347903
* CAREER: Evolving and Self-Managing Data Integration Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2004,04/30/2007
* AnHai Doan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 04/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Data integration systems provide a uniform access to a multitude of data
sources. They have the potential to revolutionize the way we access data, and
provide a basis on which to build even more advanced information processing
architectures. However, today such systems are still extremely hard to build and
costly to maintain. They must be told in tedious detail how to interact with
data sources, and must be constantly modified to deal with changes at the
sources. To address this problem, the project envisions building data
integration systems that learn to evolve and self-manage over time, with minimal
human intervention. To make fundamental contributions toward realizing this
vision, the project employs database and artificial intelligence (especially
machine learning) techniques to attack the following central challenges: (a)
effectively automating key labor-intensive tasks, including schema matching,
global schema creation, and duplicate detection, (b) detecting system failures
due to changes at the sources, with minimal human intervention, and (c) further
reducing the tremendous data integration burden of the system administrators by
spreading the burden thinly over the mass of users.

The education plan leverages the research to prepare students and the broader
community for the novel data management challenges raised by the Internet world.
In terms of intellectual merit, the project takes a next logical step in data
integration research. It brings conceptually novel solutions to fundamental
issues underlying virtually any data integration or sharing efforts. The project
results have the potential for autonomic-computing applications. In terms of
broader impacts, the project will facilitate the widespread deployment of data
integration systems, thus resulting in more effective information management and
access for society. It plays an integral part in educating next-generation
professional workers and researchers. The research will also help integrate data
for rural Illinois fire fighters, and train them in access and use of the
integrated information systems. The project information will be disseminated via
publications, workshops, tutorials, and the Web site
http://anhai.cs.uiuc.edu/home/projects/aida.html that will include the resulting
research results, data and system artifacts.