* 0347937
* CAREER:  Development of the Ascidian Peripheral Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Robert Zeller, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 02/28/2010
* USD 595,315.00

A key step in the evolution of vertebrates was the development of a large bony
head containing specialized paired sensory organs that allowed vertebrates to
become active predators. Vertebrate heads and the associated cells of the paired
sensory organs are largely derived from two populations of cells, the neural
crest and cranial placodes. Although research has led to a greater understanding
of how neural crest and placodes are specified during vertebrate development,
very little is known about their evolutionary origins. The proposed research
will investigate the evolutionary and embryological origins of cranial placodes
by examining the development of the ascidian larva peripheral nervous system
(PNS). Ascidians are invertebrate chordates ideally suited for studying the
evolution of chordate characteristics. The larval PNS, consisting of about three
dozen cells that are primarily epidermal sensory neurons, shows similarities
with placode-derived sensory cells both morphologically as well as in the
expression patterns of key regulatory molecules. This research will determine
the cell lineage and function of the PNS, and begin to define the gene-
regulatory network specifying PNS development in the ascidian embryo. Graduate
and undergraduate students will pioneer the use of three technologies to study
marine invertebrate embryo development: (1) transgene-based cell-lineage
analysis, (2) selective cell killing by the intracellular expression of a toxin
and (3) in-vivo assays of gene function using RNA inhibition. Additionally,
comparative-genomics approaches, in-situ hybridization, quantitative real-time
PCR and analysis of transgenic embryos will be employed to decipher the PNS
gene-regulatory network. These experiments will provide insights into the
functional and gene-regulatory similarities between the ascidian larval PNS and
vertebrate cranial placodes.

This project will contribute to the development of the PI as a teacher-scholar.
It incorporates educational programs for undergraduate, graduate, postgraduate
and elementary school students and teachers. The proposed research will be
performed primarily by graduate and undergraduate students. Student research
will be published in scientific journals, and students will be encouraged to
present their findings at scientific meetings. A series of year-long research
opportunities for undergraduates, including a summer program, will provide 4 to
6 students with independent projects and a journal club focused on developmental
biology and experimental techniques. New experimental approaches will be
incorporated into an intense laboratory/lecture section on ascidian development
for advanced graduate and postdoctoral fellows in the Woods Hole Embryology
Course. Finally, an interactive Web site will be created for elementary-school
students, providing them with a feel for biological research. The Web site will
bring the laboratory into the classroom, exposing young students to the
creativity and excitement involved in scientific research. This innovative
program will serve as a model to encourage other laboratories to partner with
elementary-school classrooms to provide improved science education to children.