* 0347305
* CAREER:  Towards a Systems Analysis of the Utilization of Scientific Evidence in the Criminal Law
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2012
* Simon Cole, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2012
* USD 402,806.00

This project has three intertwined research objectives. First, investigators
will engage in systemic analysis of the role of scientific evidence in the
production of criminal justice errors. Second, investigators will develop a
better understanding of the commonalities and differences between various types
of expert knowledge deployed in criminal law and how they are understood by
their practitioner, lawyers, courts, and the public. This better understanding
will, in turn, inform the development of a provisional taxonomy of expert
knowledge that may be useful for better assessing expert knowledge that is
offered in court. &lt;br/&gt; An implicit storyline is already being constructed
around the spate of exposed wrongful convictions in which an idealized "science"
plays the white knight exposing the foibles of incompetent or corrupt humans as
well as obsolete science. Such a storyline belies and obscures the point, well
established in Science and Technology Studies, that fraudulent science does not
look fraudulent except in retrospect. If a more nuanced portrait of the role of
scientific knowledge in law is to be sustained, rigorous and persuasive research
will be needed which documents the ways in which scientific knowledge, human
actors, and legal rules have interacted in actual miscarriages of justice. At
the same time, the debate over scientific evidence has descended into a debate
between naive falsificationist and STS scholars who deny the possibility of ever
saying anything meaningful about the legitimacy of claims to expert knowledge.
This project will move forward the agenda of those scholars who seek to devise
new ways of assessing and better understanding expert knowledge while remaining
true to the insights developed by STS. &lt;br/&gt; DNA-generated exonerations
have created a historic moment in which errors in the criminal justice system
can be attested to with a cultural authority (of science) that is very difficult
to resist. At the same time, legal developments have created great uncertainty
about the use of scientific evidence in the law. Instead, this project seeks to
use this historic moment to promote a better understanding of scientific
evidence itself, rather than merely replacing one mythologized science with
another. &lt;br/&gt; This project will enable the coalescing of a cluster of
faculty around the broad area of science and law and the role of science in
miscarriages of justice, attract graduate students, and facilitate doctoral
research in this area. The project's research will be used to enrich
undergraduate course offerings in the areas of forensic science, law and
society, miscarriages of justice, and the death penalty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;