* 0347202
* CAREER:  Functional Analysis of the Tomato Ca-ATPase Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2011
* Craig Gatto, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2011
* USD 684,954.00

The goal of this project is to understand the functional mechanism of plant
Calcium-ATPases. Ca-ATPases belong to the ubiquitous protein family of P-type
ATPases, which exist in all taxonomic phyla. Although investigations of these
transporters began in the late 1950's, studies of plant members have only
recently begun to appear. This project aims to identify key structural features
involved in nucleotide selectivity and membrane trafficking of the ER-type Ca-
ATPase from Lycopersicon esculentum (LCA, i.e. the tomato plant). Interestingly,
although animal Ca pumps are obligatory for ATP, it appears that plant Ca pumps
have a rather relaxed requirement for nucleoside triphosphates. Since phosphorus
has limited availability in soil (thus the need for adding P-containing
fertilizers to crops), cytoplasmic ATP levels can fluctuate dramatically. Thus,
it is possible that plant pumps have evolved mechanisms to utilize many high-
energy phosphate compounds to combat phosphate starvation. This research will
compare structure-function differences between tomato LCA and animal
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca pump (SERCA) to identify critical contact points
in the catalytic center that provide relaxed nucleotide selection without
altering cation coupling. An important goal of this project is to determine the
structure of the LCA nucleotide-binding domain using X-ray crystallography. This
atomic resolution structure would allow direct comparisons to the recent animal
SERCA structure. Also, the cellular distribution of plant Ca-pumps remains
unresolved. For example, calmodulin-stimulated Ca pumps are not only limited to
the plasma membrane and "ER-type" Ca pumps are not restricted to organelles.
Thus, an additional goal is to identify the membrane pool for LCA and whether
its delivery is regulated via phosphorylation. The goals of this investigation
will be achieved by 1) expressing full-length wild-type and mutant LCA
constructs in yeast, 2) overexpressing and purifying intracellular domains of
LCA from E. coli, and 3) engineering transgenic tomato plants expressing green
fluorescent protein-tagged versions of LCA.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. This project is designed to actively involve undergraduates from
underrepresented groups (principally African-American and Hispanics, but
including Native Americans and Pacific Islanders) to make significant
contributions to the understanding of plant P-type ATPases. This goal includes
enhancing the undergraduate curriculum by developing a two credit hour
Introduction to Undergraduate Research course that will actively recruit
undergraduate minority students from two core sophomore-level courses (i.e.
Genetics and Cell Biology). This laboratory-based course will provide
opportunities for critical thinking and scientific discovery. Student
participation will be directed by the Principle Investigator in conjunction with
doctoral students in the laboratory (also enrolled in the scholar-educator
program). In addition to receiving academic credit, this course will be a
stepping-stone towards entering a thesis-driven undergraduate research project.
To enhance participation, funds are budgeted to support interested students
during the summer. Lastly, the undergraduate participants will synergistically
join a current outreach effort in the department to bring current scientific
investigation to local middle- and high-schools. These activities will enhance
Illinois State University retention of underrepresented students and encourage
diversity for future applicants.&lt;br/&gt;