* 0347328
* SGER: Experimental Determination of Partition Coefficients in Carbonates
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2005
* USD 39,993.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE 0347328&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geochemical
measurements made on the carbonate skeletons of marine invertebrates comprise a
significant portion of the paleo sea surface temperature (SST) data used to
understand and model Earth's climate system. Indeed, the capability of general
circulation models to predict future global warming is tested against proxy
temperature estimates for the Last Ice Age, many of which are based on the
concentrations of trace elements such as Sr and Mg in fossil marine skeletons.
Despite the widespread use of skeletal chemistry as an indicator of
paleoenvironments, the factors that control how trace elements are distributed,
or partitioned, between seawater and a growing skeleton are not well understood.
As a result, few of the proxy SST estimates for crucial periods of Earth's
climate history are in agreement and many remain
controversial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will address a
critical gap in knowledge about how paleotemperature proxies work. They intend
to experimentally determine the partitioning of trace elements between carbonate
minerals and seawater using experimental and analytical approaches that have
been successfully used to study partitioning in high-temperature, magmatic
systems. The objective is to provide the framework within which the trace
element content of low temperature carbonate precipitates can be properly
interpreted in terms of the environmental conditions under which they formed.
They expect to achieve this through an experimental determination of
carbonate/seawater partition coefficients for the important cations (Na, Mg, Sr,
B, Ba) in calcite and aragonite crystals precipitated under laboratory
conditions. Experiments will be carried out over a temperature range of ~100 .'C
in order to accurately determine the temperature dependence of partitioning.
Crystal growth rates will be minimized in order to obtain thermodynamically, as
opposed to kinetically, controlled partition coefficients. Individual grains of
calcite and aragonite grown during an experiment will be identified using UV
fluorescence microscopy and electron back scatter diffraction techniques The
elemental composition of individual grains will then be determined using
Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometric techniques (ion microprobe). The high spatial
resolution provided by SIMS ion microprobe allows for the selective analysis of
aragonite and calcite crystals several microns in diameter. This analytical
approach represents a significant advance over previous studies in which
partition coefficients were determined through bulk analyses of aggregates of
coexisting calcite and aragonite crystals. Once the research team has
demonstrated that the approach provides accurate and unambiguous results for
these cations, the same techniques will be applied to determine baseline
fractionation factors for Ca, B, and Mg isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;