* 0347600
* CAREER: Fast Query Support for Emerging Spatial Database Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Donghui Zhang, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Frank Olken
* 06/30/2009
* USD 506,000.00

Spatial databases and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have many
applications. Examples include environmental systems, corporate decision-support
systems, travel arrangement systems, etc. Typically, such applications have
large volumes of data, with a critical need for fast query response. This
project examines efficient query processing in spatial databases. In particular,
the research focuses on the selection query, the aggregation query and the
proximity query. The selection query finds the objects in a user-specified
region. For instance, find objects in the Washington, DC area. This project
examines novel techniques that are more efficient than existing approaches. The
aggregation query computes some aggregate information in a user-specified
region, for example: find the total number of restaurants in a given region,
find the total precipitation of rainfall in New York State over the past year,
etc. Here enumerating the actual objects is not required for answering the
query. This project designs algorithms with sub-linear query cost. The proximity
query finds interesting results based on the closeness of objects, for example:
find a hotel/library pair which are the closest to each other, find a location
for a potential supermarket which will be close to maximum number of residents,
find an apartment whose weighted total distance to a supermarket and a subway
station is minimal. The project will advance the spatial database technology,
and will have an impact on many fields that deal with spatial data. When systems
in such fields are equipped with more expressive query features and faster query
processing algorithms, the end users will benefit from the research results. The
project also has a strong educational focus, including a modern curriculum which
is based on not only providing the students with textbook knowledge and hands-on
practice, but involving them in research. The project Web site
http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/donghui/research/CAREER_grant will be used to
disseminate the published papers, and the system integration and the
experimental results.