* 0347148
* CAREER: Machine Learning Based Intelligent Image Annotation and Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Michael McNeese, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2011
* USD 533,670.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to develop an interdisciplinary research and
education program for investigating the underlying theoretical and computational
principles of machine-learning-based image annotation and retrieval. The novel
research approach uses an automated learning-based image annotation method using
a 3D-Hidden Markov Model (HDD) stochastic model that directly uses pixel level
data as opposed to using the results of a segmentation algorithm. Using low-
level features to learn high-level semantics is an important step towards
automatic annotation of images. The research of this project focuses on three
areas: (1) developing highly efficient machine learning mechanisms for imagery
data, (2) developing models for high-dimensional imagery, and (3) developing a
learning-based image annotation and retrieval system. This research will
fundamentally improve image annotation technologies. This advance will provide
theoretical understanding to the problem of managing and interpreting imagery
data. The results of this research will also have impacts beyond pattern
recognition for image databases. Many of these results can also be applied to
other machine learning and data mining problems. This research will gain deeper
insights into the principles of image understanding and annotation, and will
ultimately contribute to the creation of intelligent and robust multimedia
information systems. The educational plan includes developing interdisciplinary
curriculum, and promoting diversity in the students' participation in this
project. The scientific results of the research will enhance computer technology
for recognizing objects and scenes with direct applications in online
information management, homeland security, the military, and many scientific
applications, including healthcare. Scientific publications and the project Web
site http://riemann.ist.psu.edu will be used for the research results
dissemination.