* 0347204
* CAREER: Rheology of Materials of Earth's Mantle: High-end Computational/Visualization Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bijaya Karki, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 465,144.00

This proposal aims to systematically apply ideas and techniques of computer and
materials sciences to challenging problems in the theoretical investigation of
fundamental issues of Earth materials. One such issue is to understand the
rheological properties of the component materials of Earth's mantle at
geophysically relevant pressure and temperature conditions that are still
experimentally inaccessible. Rheology is a key factor, which has strong
influence on the complicated mantle dynamics implied by seismological
observations and other sources. Large-scale atomistic simulations will be
performed on massively parallel machines using a combination of first-principles
quantum mechanical (QM), classical molecular dynamics (MD) and hybrid QM/MD
approaches. The simulations will predict several crucial rheology-related
properties and processes in major silicate and oxide mantle minerals, including
point defects, dislocations and associated long-range mechanical phenomena, and
deformation of polycrystalline minerals under anisotropic stresses. The
resulting massive multivariate datasets will be visualized in an immersive and
interactive environment to gain insight into complex mechanical behavior of
minerals. The aforementioned interdisciplinary research activities will be
integrated into teaching/learning/training activities. They include training a
new generation of students with expertise in computational and Earth materials
sciences (through a dual-degree graduate program in computer and geosciences),
developing an Access Grid-based remote teaching/learning environment
(encompassing minority institutions in Louisiana) and organizing computational
science workshop for underrepresented groups and Mardi Gras conference that have
previously been organized at Louisiana State University (LSU). The successful
execution of these activities will have broad substantive involvement of
students and faculty including those from underrepresented groups in research
and education at the interface of geopysics and information technology. The
project will exploit the world-class 1024-processor Linux cluster, Immersadesk
virtual reality, and Access Grid facilities recently acquired by LSU.
&lt;br/&gt;-- &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;