* 0347095
* CAREER:     Robust Thin Film Shape Memory Alloys for Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS)
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Ainissa Ramirez, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 599,299.00

This Career award to Yale University is to study shape memory alloys (such as
NiTi), which have the unique ability of "remembering" their original shape when
heated and can be used as thin film actuators for microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS). Among the actuation modes in MEMS, shape memory alloys produce the
largest actuation force and will benefit applications such as microvalves,
micropumps, and micromanipulators. Despite these potential uses, integration of
shape memory alloys in MEMS is limited, because their behavior is plagued with
an acute compositional sensitivity. In addition, details of their thin film
mechanical behavior, which often departs from bulk, remains largely unexplored.
This award will study the affects of alloying on phase transformation
temperature, hysteresis behavior, microstructure, actuation properties, and
mechanical properties. In addition, the award will explore the behavior of thin
film NiTi shape memory materials; improve their integration into the MEMS
process; and broaden the understanding of thin film mechanical properties, by
examining materials that exhibit elastic non-linearities. Structure-property
relationship will be examined by observing the microstructure of shape memory
alloys with electron microscopy; actuation properties with MEMS cantilevers; and
transformation temperature behavior with differential scanning calorimetry and
wafer curvature techniques. Proposed collaborations with industry, partner
universities, and Brookhaven National Labs (BNL) would provide the fundamental
understanding the properties of thin film shape memory alloys and their
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys and MEMS also provide a
significant educational platform for they are compelling to both students and
lay audiences. In addition to this research, a new undergraduate MEMS class will
be developed as well as an outreach program that will encourage students to
explore science through hands-on activities. A lecture series that showcases
diverse scientists and fun science events will encourage all students,
particularly women and minority students, to consider science. Other educational
mechanisms include a web-based demonstration site, popular science writing, and
collaborations with the National Science Resource Center (an arm of the
Smithsonian Institute and the National Academies).&lt;br/&gt;