* 0347238
* CAREER: Physiological and Molecular Mechanisms of Cadmium and Temperature Action on Mitochondrial Bioenergetics in Marine Mollusks
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Inna Sokolova, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2010
* USD 761,099.00

&lt;br/&gt;In today's world, geological forces have combined with past and
present human activities to cause an extremely rapid environmental change, one
that is often too strong and too fast to permit the long process of evolutionary
adaptation that can require many generations to complete. The population
survival and distribution of many species in this rapidly changing environment
will depend on their abilities to cope with stress and to quickly adjust their
physiology to environmental change. Metabolic regulation plays a key role in
environmental stress tolerance of all organisms. An organism produces ATP, the
main energetic currency of the cell, in its mitochondria to cover its needs for
basal maintenance, growth, activity and reproduction. Impairment of
mitochondrial function will have important consequences for performance and
survival of the organism under stress conditions. This project will uncover
fundamental physiological and molecular mechanisms of action of cadmium and
elevated temperatures on the function of mitochondria in a model marine mollusk,
the eastern oyster Crassostrea virginica. Cadmium and temperature, common
environmental stressors in estuaries and coastal habitats, directly affect
mitochondrial function. Poikilothermic ("cold-blooded") animals, which include
most marine fish and invertebrates, may be especially prone to these stressors
because they are exposed to varying temperatures and levels of cadmium in water
and sediment. This project will use the eastern oyster as a model organism in
order to:&lt;br/&gt;Obtain a comprehensive physiological model of temperature-
dependent action of cadmium and to identify key mitochondrial targets for
cadmium in poikilothermic animals, which are currently
unknown;&lt;br/&gt;Determine how cadmium- and temperature-induced changes in
mitochondrial function affect cellular and whole-organism
metabolism;&lt;br/&gt;Determine whether exposure to one environmental stressor
(e.g., temperature) can make an organism more sensitive to the other (e.g.,
cadmium) and vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;These results will provide important insights
into the effects of multiple environmental stressors on metabolic regulation and
physiological performance of marine poikilotherms and will allow a better
understanding of the factors that limit adaptability of these organisms in the
face of the rapid environmental change. While providing a strong environmental
focus in the interdisciplinary graduate programs in the Department of Biology at
UNC Charlotte, this project increases the quality of education through new Web-
enhanced courses and through active recruitment of undergraduate and graduate
students (including women and under-represented minorities) into research. Also
included are active collaborative programs and student exchange with
international partners in Canada and Germany and with a local minority
undergraduate-level university. &lt;br/&gt;