* 0347370
* CAREER:  The Formation and Repair of Oxidative Damage in Nucleosome Core Particles
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* William Davis, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2010
* USD 562,000.00

Free radicals and even oxygen itself can, under the right conditions, damage
genomic DNA. One major consequence of this assault is the formation of mutagenic
lesions derived from the four native nucleobases of DNA. Therefore, there exists
a critical need to understand the chemical reactions leading to the formation of
these oxidative lesions, the structural consequences of these lesions in duplex
DNA, and the dynamics of repair processes responsible for the removal these
lesions from the genome. Previous work has focused primarily upon analyzing
these processes in isolated DNA duplexes. DNA in the eukaryotic nucleus is not
isolated, but tightly packaged by histone proteins into chromatin. The binding
of DNA to a histone core particle forms a nucleosome, the fundamental building
block of chromatin. Dramatic changes in DNA structure and accessibility to
solvent are induced upon nucleosome formation. Any or all of these structural
changes could impact oxidative damage formation, propagation, and repair in DNA.
The first objective of this project is to define how packaging DNA into a
nucleosome perturbs processes related to the formation of oxidized nucleobase
lesions. Second, this project will quantify the efficiency and rates of DNA
repair at the surface of nucleosome core particles. This project will enhance
both graduate and undergraduate education through laboratory research designed
and carried out predominantly by graduate students and minority summer
undergraduate research associates recruited from selected four-year colleges and
universities.