* 0347613
* CAREER: Advanced Statistical Modeling Approaches for Structured Video Representation and Research Oriented Multidisciplinary Education
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Guoliang Fan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2010
* USD 479,895.00

This research aims to develop a comprehensive structured video representation
via advanced statistical modeling approaches. The goal of research is to enhance
interpretability and manipulability of visual data, leading to effective visual
communications and innovative multimedia applications. The approach consists of
four major research components: (1) joint frame and object video segmentation
that applies advanced statistical clustering methods; (2) object-oriented
structured video representation that integrates extended HMMs and is able to
capture important structures in space and time; (3) the application in visual
communications; (4) the application in the MPEG-7 Multimedia standard. This
research addresses fundamental issues in visual information processing, with
widespread applications in diverse areas, including multimedia, digital library,
security surveillance, entertainment, biomedical imaging, and human-computer
interface, etc. Moreover, the proposed research has significant contribution to
industry standards (MPEG-7). The results of the project will be disseminated by
scientific papers, software, online demos, and prototype video databases, which
can be accessed from the project's website
http://www.vcipl.okstate.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education al component
includes the development of a unique Multidisciplinary Imaging Science &amp;
Technology Program (MISTP). The MISTP will provide students, particularly,
minority and women students, with practical, ``hands-on'', research and
experimental skills to help them succeed in a culturally diverse, cross-
disciplinary research and work environment. The MISTP will impact students at
all levels in multiple Science and Engineering disciplines. Dissemination of
educational components will be implemented in a web-based format and by more
traditional means. Program descriptions and educational materials will be
distributed in professional conferences and made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;