* 0347935
* CAREER: Manipulating Directionality of Electron Transfer Within Type 1 Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Kevin Redding, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2009
* USD 677,450.00

Photosynthetic reaction centers (RCs) are one of life's most ancient and useful
devices, allowing the biosphere to exploit the abundant solar energy
continuously striking our planet and to diversify into a huge number of species
with distinct bioenergetic strategies. All known RCs have symmetric structures,
using two similar or identical integral membrane subunits to form a dimeric
core, which binds the cofactors through which electrons are transferred across
the membrane. This symmetric arrangement gives rise to two similar branches of
cofactors down which light-driven electron transfer could proceed. The first two
members of each branch are chlorins, while the third is a quinone. It is known
that the initial electron transfer occurs almost exclusively along one of the
two branches in the well-characterized type 2 RCs, although the origins of this
strong asymmetry are still debated. Photosystem I (PS1) is still the best-
characterized representative of the type 1 RCs, but many aspects of the
direction of electron transfer in PS1 remain unknown. Recent optical work
clearly suggests that electron transfer can make use of both cofactor branches
of PS1 at ambient temperature, while electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) data
indicate that only one branch is active at low temperature. The purpose of this
project is to explore the nature, origins, and degree of bi-directionality of
electron transfer in PS1. This will be accomplished mainly by genetic
manipulation of the PS1 core polypeptides to bias the partitioning of electrons
between the two pathways. The effect of the manipulations will be assessed by
time-resolved optical and EPR spectroscopy, which should be capable of
distinguishing between the phylloquinone molecules in each branch of PS1, thus
providing an assessment of the relative use of each pathway. Mutations near the
primary electron donor and acceptors may influence the degree to which ET occurs
down the two pathways in predictable ways. The role of external conditions and
temperature in determining the utilization of the two branches will also be
explored. Ultimately, the long-term goal is to deduce the general rules used by
nature to direct light-driven electron transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this work include the training of graduate students and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary science at the interface of chemistry, biology,
and physics. It will strengthen ties between several research groups, especially
the Redding group and that of Fabrice Rappaport and Pierre Joliot at the
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique (IBPC, Paris). Moreover, this particular
international collaboration will be enlarged by the engagement of a postdoctoral
fellow who will spend a considerable amount of time at the IBPC, using their
instruments. This project will help to build up the EPR facilities at the
University of Alabama, which has already attracted collaborative efforts from
several nearby institutes. Finally, the knowledge and expertise gained may have
practical aspects, such as the ability to re-engineer RCs, so that partitioning
between the two branches becomes responsive to external stimuli (e.g. small
ions, binding of hydrophobic ligands, electric field, etc.) and may be directed
in a controlled way.&lt;br/&gt;