* 0347621
* CAREER: Mathematical Models for Querying and Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 05/31/2009
* USD 420,000.00

Wireless sensor networks promise a revolution in information technology, by
providing a high-resolution interface between the physical and virtual worlds.
This research project aims to create a mathematical foundation for analyzing and
designing data gathering protocols in these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops mathematical models of sensor network applications,
environmental conditions, and protocol parameters, in order to quantify and
bound the performance of protocols with respect to key metrics such as energy
efficiency and response latency. It complements other ongoing efforts in the
research community to design and evaluate these protocols via simulations and
experimental studies. The mathematical models of protocols developed in this
project will provide wireless sensor network designers with practical guidelines
and insights on selecting and optimizing protocols for different applications,
and making them adaptive. Fundamental performance bounds will reveal whether
there is room for improvement, and in some cases even suggest new efficient
protocol designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is being carried out in
close collaboration with wireless sensor network systems and applications
researchers in academia and industry, to ensure that the analysis is informed by
and has a significant impact on the design of real-world systems. Such wireless
sensor networks are envisioned to be used in domains ranging widely from
environmental, industrial and structural monitoring to security
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is tightly coupled with an
educational program that includes integration of the research activities into
the undergraduate graduate networks curriculum at the University of Southern
California, as well as outreach to public high school students in Los
Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;