* 0347719
* CAREER:  Optical approaches to Synaptic Learning Rules
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Samuel Wang, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen A. Mesce
* 07/31/2010
* USD 832,000.00

Synaptic learning rules describe the relationship between neural activity
patterns and the resulting changes in synaptic strength. Such persistent
modifications of synaptic strength are widely believed to underlie functional
changes such as learning in the central nervous system. Increases and decreases
in synaptic strength - long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression
(LTD) - are present in a wide variety of excitatory synapses and have been the
focus of thirty years of intensive research. In recent years, whether an
activity pattern induces LTP or LTD has been shown to depend on the exact timing
of single presynaptic and postsynaptic action potentials. But in the most
general case, the rules for how activity is mapped to plasticity are not well
understood. A key issue in the study of LTP and LTD is the lack of a unifying
model that explains synaptic plasticity in terms of individual plasticity
events. Work in this proposal will identify separable components of
bidirectional plasticity. The investigators will then measure the activity
dependent properties of these components, and use these properties to account
for the original rules observed in the entire synaptic ensemble. The model
system to be used is the mammalian hippocampal Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapse,
which has NMDA-type and metabotropic glutamate receptors that evoke postsynaptic
dendritic calcium signals. Calcium is an intermediate bottleneck in synaptic
plasticity, and this fact will be used to divide the project into separate
questions: How is activity mapped to calcium? How is calcium mapped to
plasticity? These questions will be pursued in three stages. First,
bidirectional plasticity will be separated into component mechanisms of
potentiation and depression/depotentiation. Second, rules will be measured by
which activity is transformed into synaptic plasticity and to dendritic calcium
signals, which are known to be necessary and sufficient to induce both
potentiation and depression. Third, calcium signals will be identified that are
optimally tuned to evoke potentiation or depression, and used to create a
general model predicting plasticity for arbitrary patterns of synaptic activity.
Taken together, these experiments will test the idea that calcium signals can be
used to predict the type and amount of plasticity resulting from an arbitrary
pattern of synaptic neural activity. Experimental tools include patch clamp
recording, multiphoton laser scanning microscopy, and focal photolysis of caged
neurotransmitters and second messengers. Particular use will be made of an
instrument for uncaging at many sites at once (up to 100,000 locations per
second). The proposed experiments may help provide a general framework for
learning rules not only at hippocampal synapses, but in the rest of the
vertebrate central nervous system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will support
the continued development of the institutions program in neurobiology through
course development and graduate and postdoctoral training. Further, the work
should result in continued development of experimental tools useful to the
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;