* 0347327
* CAREER: Next-Generation High-Sensitivity Damage Detection and Sensing Based on Enhancing Nonlinear Dynamics and Phase Space Pattern Recognition
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Bogdan Epureanu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2010
* USD 400,000.00

CAREER: Next-Generation High-Sensitivity Damage Detection and Sensing Based
&lt;br/&gt;on Enhancing Nonlinear Dynamics and Phase Space Pattern Recognition
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Most vibration-based damage detection methods are
designed for linear &lt;br/&gt;vibrations while far fewer apply to nonlinear
systems. Many of the &lt;br/&gt;current nonlinear methods have important
limitations, e.g. difficulty &lt;br/&gt;tackling high-dimensional systems. This
integrated research and &lt;br/&gt;educational program eliminates several of
these limitations by using &lt;br/&gt;a radically different approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main research goal is to develop robust and highly
sensitive &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear vibration-based techniques for sensing and
detecting &lt;br/&gt;the location and level of multiple simultaneous damages in
&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional systems such as complex fluid-structural
&lt;br/&gt;systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main educational goal is the
development of a program focused on &lt;br/&gt;enhancing engineering intuition
with emphasis on nonlinear dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;The educational effort
integrates research with a broad spectrum of &lt;br/&gt;educational and outreach
activities, and includes: (a) integrating &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear dynamics into
undergraduate courses in engineering, &lt;br/&gt;(b) developing advanced
undergraduate and graduate courses on &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear dynamics, (c)
implementing outreach activities for K-12 &lt;br/&gt;students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This integrated research and educational program will
provide a new &lt;br/&gt;and comprehensive methodology for damage detection in
&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional nonlinear complex systems. This research will make
&lt;br/&gt;significant contributions to the fields of structural dynamics,
&lt;br/&gt;fluid-structure interactions, and sensing, and it has immediate
&lt;br/&gt;potential to impact industry because it addresses important
&lt;br/&gt;practical engineering problems in, for instance, aerospace, civil
&lt;br/&gt;and sensing technologies. Also, this research represents a potential
&lt;br/&gt;benefit to society at large, and it is strengthened by a broad
&lt;br/&gt;dissemination to enhance scientific understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;