* 0347339
* CAREER:     Cooperative System Support for Robust High Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Emery Berger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2010
* USD 471,145.00

Modern software systems are brittle. Today's systems fall over a performance
cliff once load crosses a certain threshold due to the ever-steeper memory
hierarchy. After this point, if there is any service, it is provided in a
haphazard manner that is both unpredictable and uncontrollable. The latency
between processors and memory - the memory wall - is large and growing, but even
greater latency now exists between main memory and disk - the disk wall. As load
increases, the combined working sets of processes can exceed main memory
capacity. The resulting paging activity can render a system unresponsive. When
paging occurs, the virtual memory manager becomes the de facto scheduler,
thwarting load management. Technology trends are conspiring to make this problem
more severe in the future. High-quality, high-performance RAM is increasingly
expensive. Disk latency is millions of CPU cycles and growing, requiring larger
filesystem caches. Garbage-collected languages lika Java and C# lead to larger
working sets and worse locality. Finally, data-hungry applications such as
multimedia and data mining are placing growing demands on memory.

An integrated attack on this problem is proposed by developing cooperative
system support that intelligently manages the memory hierarchy. Enabling high
performance and providing robustness under load. This approach involves novel
adaptive algorithms and cooperation between the compiler, operating system, and
run-time systems. The work will develop two synergistic new research areas: 1.
Cooperative memory management between the operating system and run-time systems,
including coarse-grained and fine-grained garbage collectors, to reduce or
eliminate paging. 2. Scheduler-aware virtual memory management to provide
predictable scheduling under load.

The coarse-grained collector will react to memory load information by reducing
application footprint. Models will be developed (using VM information) to allow
garbage collectors to perform cost-benefit analyses to choose the best possible
heap size. The fine-grained collector will cooperate closely with the virtual
memory, selecting appropriate victim pages for eviction by relocating objects to
create empty pages, and preventing paging during garbage collection. Compiler
programs will be adapted and developed. The analyses will be used to group
objects with similar lifetimes onto the same pages. The scheduler-aware virtual
memory manager will maintain detailed reference behavior tracking the utility of
possible main memory allocations to each process. The scheduler will communicate
its intended schedule to the virtual memory manager, which will weigh the
utility of each allocation by the proportion of CPU time that the scheduler
requests. A utility metric system will enable memory to be provided to each
process so that it can run for its CPU proportion and then inform the scheduler
when processes cannot be scheduled, so that the scheduler can decide which ones
should be deactivated.