* 0348986
* CAREER: Urban Land-Use Change in Asia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Karen Seto, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 430,000.00

The conversion of Earth's land surface to urban uses is one of the most profound
human impacts on the global biosphere and the functioning of Earth as a system.
Understanding the underlying structure, causal relationship, and feedback
interactions between society and urban land-use change is critical for
sustainability and human well-being. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will fund research that seeks to advance our understanding of the
spatial and temporal patterns of urbanization, the demographic, social-
institutional, and economic-political causes of urban land-use change, and the
feedbacks of urban land-use change on these processes. Building on a comparative
framework already established by the PI, this project will use multiple study
sites in China and Vietnam as observational laboratories. Recent political and
economic reforms in both countries have spurred impressive rates of economic
growth which, in only a few decades, have transformed to new urban areas land
that had been dedicated to agriculture for centuries. The research will evaluate
urban land-use change in contemporary Chinese and Vietnamese cities as an
outcome of the dynamic interaction among government policies, population
changes, economic factors, investments and local institutions. First, place-
based case studies in both countries will be used to test long-held hypotheses
about the fundamental causes of urban land conversion. Second, these studies
will be used to develop cross-cutting themes and more general theories regarding
the interaction among socioeconomic, political, and economic process and urban
land-use change. Third, the strength of these interactions across time and space
will be evaluated with the ultimate goal of offering a new paradigm about the
human drivers of land-use change that addresses the complexities and feedbacks
of social and biophysical processes. The spatial and temporal patterns of urban
land-use change will be investigated through satellite remote sensing analysis
combined with in-depth interviews and archival research to construct land-use
histories. The causes, consequences, and feedbacks of urban land-use change will
be explored by examining population migration, economic factors, property
rights, and policy reforms. The research will analyze census data, household
information, in-depth interviews, and economic data from national compendiums at
multiple administrative units. The primary significance of these objectives lies
in identifying trends and impacts of multiple social processes and their roles
in urban land conversion; developing a cross-scale understanding of the social
and biophysical transitions underway and the points at which they interact; and
developing theories of land-use change processes beyond individual case studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three educational objectives of the project are to
initiate an outreach program with a local school through summer research
opportunities, to develop a teaching module on urbanization in Asia that can be
used in conjunction with a documentary film that the PI already has created, and
to develop and implement a new cross-campus GIS course. The project will offer
unique learning and research opportunities for students who are traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences across multiple academic levels. The
participation of these student communities will be broadened through an outreach
and mentorship program with a local school that serves low-income and
disadvantaged youths and through active student recruitment at Stanford.
&lt;br/&gt;