* 0348939
* CAREER:    Photoinduced Nanostructures in Manganese Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2012
* Vera Smolyaninova, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/29/2012
* USD 447,904.00

This CAREER project addresses fundamental materials science issues in writable
and erasable photonic crystal materials. The approach is based on the high
sensitivity of manganite materials to external fields, such as magnetic field,
temperature, and optical illumination. A number of such materials exhibit unique
photosensitivity properties. As a result, nanostructuring of these materials may
be performed using well known optical holography techniques. It is proposed to
overcome inherently weak refractive index contrast of holograms by using extreme
sensitivity of the properties of manganites to external magnetic field and
temperature. This sensitivity will be used to develop the holograms: application
of the external fields is expected to result in substan-tial enhancement of the
weak initial refractive index contrast of the holograms, resulting in the
potential appearance of photonic band gaps. On the other hand, such photoinduced
photonic crystal structures may be easily annealed using, for example, intense
light of a CO2 laser, so that new structures can be written in the same region
of the sample. Greater understanding of fundamental materials science processes
and the ability to create unique writable and erasable photonic crystal
materials are potential research outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues in electronic materials science having
technological relevance. The research project will advance broad areas of
materials science and optical technology while simultaneously promote teaching
and training via development of novel undergraduate courses at the Towson
University, which is primarily an undergraduate institution. Physics majors will
have access to state-of-the-art equipment during their Intermediate Physics
Laboratory course and undergraduate research. Additionally, research will be
brought to the classrooms of non-physics majors in a General Physics course.
This research will promote further involvement of women and underrepresented
minorities in a forefront research area. It is anticipated that this research
and teaching program will provide Towson University students (who are more than
61% women and more than 16% minorities) with unique high technology skills.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;