* 0348603
* CAREER:     A Micro SPR (Surface Plasmon Resonance) Sensor with Integrated Microfluidic Components for In-Situ Monitoring of Biomolecular Activities
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Hyoung Jin Cho, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2010
* USD 399,898.00

&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the proposed CAREER program is to engage and
educate undergraduate and graduate students in the field of highly
multidisciplinary BioMEMS research through integration of course development and
experimental investigation stemming from micro SPR (Surface Plasmon Resonance)
sensor with integrated microfluidic components of which application is in-situ
monitoring of biomolecular activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPR sensor has
been emerging as a powerful tool to characterize various biomolecular
interactions including antibody-antigen binding, DNA hybridization, protein-DNA
and protein-protein interactions. The proposed work will provide: (a) knowledge
and tools for understanding design parameters in microoptics/ microfluidics and
process variables in micromachining for the micro SPR sensor and (b) research
experience to students who will explore interdisciplinary BioMEMS subjects. The
micro SPR sensor will open new possibilities for miniaturized array type SPR
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER program, interdisciplinary subjects
will be covered and disseminated through course development and outreach.
Educational outreach for K-12 students, teachers and underrepresented groups is
planned with a non-profit organization (Orlando Science Center), a local high
school (University High School) and an on-campus organization (UCF Society for
Women Engineers). Flash-animation based online content will be developed for
younger audiences to overcome geographical limitations and to maximize
educational impact.&lt;br/&gt;