* 0348280
* CAREER:Three Dimensional Nano-Optical Elements \(3DNOES\): An integrated approach to research and education
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Eric Johnson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2007
* USD 399,605.00

We introduce a revolutionary micro-optical device combining the bulk properties
of Photonic Crystals with the wave-optics features of Micro and Diffractive
Optics, called 3D Nano-Optical Elements (3DNOES); thereby combining the optical
functions of lenses with the spectral properties of filters required for
photonics and display applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is aimed at the creation of the infrastructure necessary to realize the
unlimited potential of 3DNOE technology. In order to achieve this, the PI,
graduate students, and undergraduates will establish advanced design
methodologies for the 3DNOES; create novel fabrication methods based on an
additive lithography process utilizing both conventional and holographic
lithography, develop advanced etching methods for fabricating high contrast PC
elements, and demonstrate the hybrid integration of 3DNOES. All of these
developments will substantially impact the micro-optics by drastically changing
the paradigm from conventional optics to optics fabricated with customized
dispersion properties. Examples include biologically inspired optics, novel
optical elements based on the ihsuper-prismln concept, super-luminescent diodes
for display applications, and wavelength multiplexing devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program has a broad impact on the photonics industry
as a whole, since it serves to cross the chasm, which exists between the
training of our students at all levels and the future needs of the photonics
industry. This is addressed through an integrated plan involving undergraduate
and graduate students for core research and development in the design and
fabrication of wafer based micro-optics based on 3DNOES. An innovative high
school program is proposed to introduce the students to IC based fabrication of
micro-optics and expose educators to these advanced concepts of photonics
integration with a high school logo competition. Additionally, an internship
program with Morehouse College will be established to reach out to those
underrepresented in the sciences today and provide them with training for the
next century as optical engineers and scientists. In order to further address
the workforce training issue, a micro-fabrication course will be developed and
integrated into the BSEET program. A brief version of this course will be given
to high school teachers and REU students for an introduction to micro and nano-
fabrication. Actual ichands-onla training and demonstrations will be focus of
the training, with the hopes that it will inspire a new generation of optical
engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;