* 0348001
* A Genomics-enabled Microbial Observatory in the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Paul Richardson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,202,493.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Edward F. DeLong of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology to develop and apply genomic technologies for characterizing the
biology, ecology, and population dynamics of planktonic microbes in the Monterey
Bay National Marine Sanctuary. Characterization of native microbial species, and
monitoring their spatial and temporal variability represents a challenging
enterprise for microbiologists. To address this challenge, this project will
employ genomic technologies to study natural marine microbial populations, and
will design DNA microarrays (aka DNA "chips") that can simultaneously detect
hundreds of specific microbial species. In one component of the project, large
fragments of indigenous planktonic microbial genomes will be recovered, their
DNA sequenced, and the functional properties of the associated microorganisms
will be determined. In addition, the genome sequence data will be used to design
DNA-based microarrays (DNA chips), to track the spatial and temporal variability
of hundreds of microbial species simultaneously, in Monterey Bay. The
microarrays will enable study of the population dynamics of coastal plankton,
and assist in determining the physical, chemical, biotic, and anthropogenic
factors that influence their variability.

The broader impacts of this project include the development and application of
advanced technologies to track ecologically relevant microbes in the
environment. These new methods will be generically useful for oceanographers,
microbiologists, and ecologists alike. The genome sequence data produced will
add significantly to general knowledge of microbial life on Earth. Graduate,
undergraduate and postdoctoral students will be trained in the course of this
project. Websites, maintained at MIT and the Monterey Bay National Marine
Sanctuary, will help to educate a broader public about microbial processes in
the coastal oceans, and their influences on oceanic ecosystems. All the tools,
analyses, and data generated in this project will be made freely accessible to
the scientific community and public at large.