* 0348809
* RUI:     Gas Phase Studies of Organic Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Scott Gronert, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 10/31/2007
* USD 245,000.00

This research will use a combination of experimental and computational
techniques to study fundamental organic reactions in the gas phase. While it has
long been recognized that investigations of gas phase organic reactions using
mass spectrometric techniques yield valuable information, studies have often
been hampered by the fact that the organic products are not charged and hence
invisible in a mass spectrometer. Professor Gronert will circumvent this problem
by employing dianions as reactants to study two of the most important reactions
in organic chemistry, SN2 substitutions and E2 eliminations. These studies will
be extended to systems designed to probe the effect of ion pairs in these
reactions. In this way, an important bridge between gas phase and solution
reactions will be constructed.

With this Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) Award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research of Scott Gronert of San
Francisco State University. Professor Gronert is investigating reactions of
organic compounds in the gas phase. Since these studies are carried out in the
absence of complicating solvent molecules, they have the potential to reveal the
nature of the fundamental interactions governing these reactions. The data
obtained in these studies will be compared to that resulting from computational
models allowing an assessment of the reliability of such computational models.
The involvement and training of undergraduate and masters students is an
integral part of this project, which has been designed to give these students
experience in modern chemical techniques.