* 0348144
* CAREER:  Substructure Damage Characterization for Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Tara Hutchinson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2007
* USD 272,179.00

CAREER: SUBSTRUCTURE DAMAGE CHARACTERIZATION FOR PERFORMANCE-BASED EARTHQUAKE
ENGINEERING Tara C. Hutchinson Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of California, Irvine An extremely important yet largely unanswered
question in foundation design is what constitutes satisfactory performance of
the below ground portion of the foundation when subjected to earthquake loading.
Observation of substructure elements following an earthquake is likely only
performed if substantial movement above ground is observed, neighboring
structures have unveiled foundation damage, or there are particularly vulnerable
soil conditions at a site. Therefore, a thorough understanding of the severity,
extent, and evolution of damage to these below ground elements is critical in
the design process. In this research, I seek to better our understanding of the
damage characteristics of pile foundations, with the particular application of
piles embedded in liquefiable soils. While many studies have focused on
characterizing the nonlinear behavior of soils, few research programs have
included the nonlinear behavior of both soil and structure. My first objective
is to develop the necessary experimental tools to conduct detailed damage
assessment. This initial work will provide a roadmap for proper experimental
procedures and thus assist me with my second objective, which is to carry out a
series of experimental studies on large-scale soil-pile systems at a fundamental
level. In these experiments, a phased approach is proposed, whereby the free-
field soil condition is first modeled, then the pile embedded in the soil
(kinematic 'test'), and finally the pile embedded in the soil supporting its
mass (inertial and kinematic 'test'). This phased approach will assist in
determining the relative contribution of each mode of interaction to the damage
accumulated in the pile. Dense arrays of both conventional and advanced
instrumentation will provide an abundance of detailed dynamic data, and allow me
to carry out my third objective, which is to develop a methodology for
interpreting and back-calculating soil resistance curves from these experiments.
This will in turn help fulfill my fourth objective, which is to develop and
evaluate a suitable numerical model of the experimental specimens and expand
this model to perform sensitivity studies, thus gaining insight into the
performance of a broader spectrum of soil-pile systems embedded in liquefiable
soils. The results of this research will fill a vital gap in performance-based
earthquake engineering of foundation systems. It will also provide sorely needed
improved soil resistance functions that can be used in design practice for a
refined evaluation of the performance of piles embedded in liquefiable soils.
The research and educational components of this career-development plan are
designed to complement and enhance each other. The education plan includes two
primary approaches towards the objective of continued interaction, growth and
enrichment: (1) educating the public and (2) bridging the gap between
geotechnical and structural engineering. Educating the public is pursued through
hands-on laboratories, interactive workshops, and web-based dissemination and
outreach. Bridging the gap between geotechnical and structural engineering
disciplines is pursued through curriculum enhancement, using new learning models
(active learning), introducing research results into course lessons, and
involving undergraduates in research projects. Bridging this gap is critical to
developing a broader based understanding of the systems of civil infrastructure
and its relationship with the environment, ethical and political issues. The
integration of experimental and analytical work is an ideal way to ensure this
research and education plan is effective in keeping students excited and
promoting life long learning, thus preparing them as structural and geotechnical
engineers with the fundamental knowledge to face the exciting challenges of the
21st century. This career-development plan reflects the PI's long-term goal of
synthesizing geotechnical and structural engineering into performance-based
engineering tangible objectives and thus reducing life and economic losses due
to earthquakes. Project Summary