* 0348097
* CAREER: Modeling the Unsaturated Flow During Fiber Wetting in the Manufacture of Composite Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Krishna Pillai, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2011
* USD 436,967.00

The PI proposes to develop and validate a new theory for reactive nonisothermal
flows in fibrous dual-scale porous media. The research plan will begin with and
investigation of the conditions under which the directional mats, used in the
manufacture of composite materials, behave like a dual-scale porous medium. Then
the "sink'' theory, based on the principle of delayed tow impregnation, will be
developed further for the reactive flows in dual-scale media. Using the
mathematically rigorous phase-averaging technique, a new set of temperature and
cure equations are proposed to account for the absorption and retention of resin
by the tows through additional sink terms. The crucial conductivity and
dispersivity tensors in these convection-diffusion equations will be measured
for steady-state saturated flows in dual-scale media through 1-D flow
experiments involving the temperature and concentration of reactants. Later
these tensors will be extrapolated to the unsaturated flows through flow
simulations in the unit-cells of the dual-scale fiber mats to estimate
fluctuations in the velocity and temperature fields. Then a 1-D mold-filling
validation experiment involving a reactive resin will be carried out where the
measured temperatures in the unsaturated flow regime will be compared with the
prediction of the new equation-set. The equations for both the gap and tow
regions will be solved simultaneously using the finite element/control volume
scheme in an iterative manner. &lt;br/&gt; Implication of research: Apart from
disseminating research findings through journal and conference publications, the
PI will be collaborating with Moldflow, a leading American mold-filling
simulation company, to upgrade the physics of their code. The research will lead
to the development of research infrastructure through facility enhancement at
the PI's lab and training of graduate and undergraduate students in the area of
composites processing. Later the PI plans to couple the unsaturated flow
phenomena with the formation and migration of bubbles, a leading cause of
property-degrading voids in composites, and thus create a unified theory capable
of predicting both bubble migration and flow variables. The unsaturated flow
theory developed for LCMs in polymer composites will also be used for developing
similar physics for LCMs in metal-matrix and ceramic-matrix composites.
&lt;br/&gt;Education: The PI proposes to develop a multi-pronged strategy to
promote education in plastics and polymer composites. First, he plans to develop
recently introduced courses in this area under his Career Development Plan such
as a lab-based elective, "Processing of Plastics", and two graduate courses,
"Flow of Materials" (based on polymer rheology) and "Transport in Porous Media"
(with emphasis in composites manufacturing). The PI will also promote
undergraduate participation in plastics research through exciting new
experiments in the high-tech areas of polymer composites research. &lt;br/&gt;