* 0348512
* CAREER:      Active Capping for Contaminated Sediment Remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Karl Rockne, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 01/31/2010
* USD 406,931.00

0348512&lt;br/&gt;Rockne&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to
investigate how clean sediment caps, together with organic matter and/or
anaerobic electron acceptor (EA) amendment affect the fate of contaminants in
situ through the stimulation of microbial biodegradation and benthic animal
activity in low energy (non-scouring) sediments. The combined activity of a
stimulated microbial consortium able to degrade pollutants, along with the
mixing action of bioturbation may facilitate mass transfer of the EAs (or oxygen
through burrow structures) to the microbes where they are needed. In addition,
the placement of a thin cap will allow mitigation of existing surface toxicity,
potentially to levels acceptable to regulatory agencies. Key questions of this
proposed treatment that will be answered by this proposal are how capping and
amendments will affect the contaminant biodegradation activity and potential re-
mobilization, as well as the microbial and benthic animal community structure in
situ. These questions will be answered through a multi-phase investigation
utilizing flume studies in conjunction with laboratory and field studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study classes of common organic sediment
contaminants that we have shown to be degraded anaerobically: polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), petroleum hydrocarbons (PHs), and halogenated
aromatics (HAs). Biological, chemical, and physical parameters affecting the
bioavailability of these compounds will be investigated using sediment from
sites with different characteristics obtained from sources spanning fresh to
near marine conditions: Indiana Harbor Ship Canal (IN), the Grand Calumet River
(IN and IL), Waukegan Harbor (IL), and the NY/NJ Harbor Estuary (NJ and NY). The
PI has extensive experience working with sediments from these sites. These
sediments will be incubated in microcosms in environmental chambers in the PIs
laboratory, as well as the annular flume assemblies at the Institute of Marine
and Coastal Sciences at Rutgers University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will aid in the determination of whether this treatment approach
is feasible and may represent a low cost, low maintenance remedial alternative
without many of the deleterious environmental impacts of dredging. The practical
aspects of this sediment remediation project make it an ideal conceptual
platform for introducing and reinforcing the connection between fundamental
science and applied engineering. This will strengthen the PIs educational goals
of enhancing coursework at UIC in both undergraduate and graduate programs in
environmental biotechnology and engineering education to explore the dynamic
interactions within and among environmental systems and to provide enrichment
opportunities for pre-college science teachers of inner-city students in the
Perspectives Charter school in the UIC area through a teaching internship/module
program.