* 0348970
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer System for the University of California, Davis
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Isabel Montanez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 03/31/2007
* USD 208,223.00

0348970&lt;br/&gt;Spero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grants supports acquisition of
a new stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS) in the Department of
Geology at the University of California Davis. A ThermoElectron Corp. (formerly
ThermoFinnigan) Delta Plus XP SIRMS will be equipped with a continuous flow
interface device, automated sample introduction capability, high temperature
elemental analyzer system and headspace gas equilibration system. The new SIRMS
will complement existing SIRMS within the department including a Micromass
Optima, Finnegan MAT 251 and Micromass Isoprime stable isotope mass
spectrometers. At present, none of these mass spectrometers is configured for
continuous flow operation nor are they equipped with a high temperature
pyrolysis system. The continuous flow interface and high temperature pyrolysis
systems on the new SIRMS will allow the PI's to analyze the Oxygen isotopic
composition of nitrate, phosphate and sulfate in very small water samples (100's
of micro liters), the Oxygen and Hydrogen isotopic composition of micro gram
samples of organics and the Oxygen isotopic composition of bioapatite from
fossil skeletal materials, thereby affording this group new research directions
in paleoenvironmental and paleoceanographic research that relies on stable
isotopic proxies of past environmental and ecological conditions. The new SIRMS
will serve eight faculty and research scientists and their students, The
continuous flow capabilities of this gas source mass spectrometer will allow the
faculty to train students on the newest and most advanced instrumentation
available today. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;