* 0348175
* CAREER:    Dynamics of Confined Colloidal Suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Jerzy Blawzdziewicz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2010
* USD 406,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0348175&lt;br/&gt;J. Blawzdziewicz, Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of my career-development plan
is to establish a strong complex-fluids research program focused on macroscopic
and particle-scale dynamical phenomena. Due to its technological importance
(discussed below) and development of new experimental techniques (optical
tweezers, scanning confocal microscopy) the dynamics of complex fluids is a
rapidly growing field. The research conducted in my group will be primarily
theoretical and computational. However, I plan to have close collaborations with
experimental groups; two such collaborations have already been established for
some of my projects. My research program is well integrated with the overall
needs of the Yale Mechanical Engineering Department which aims at expanding its
program in colloids and complex fluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The
objective of my research project is to provide fundamental understanding of the
dynamics of colloidal suspensions in confined geometries. This project provides
a basis for advanced technological applications of colloidal systems, e.g.,
using colloidal crystals to producephotonic frequency-gap materials, designing
new particle-fractionation methods for microfluidic devices, and development of
efficient micro-filtration techniques. My career-development plan has also a
significant educational component. Through research in my group and the courses
I will teach, my graduate and undergraduate students will learn about physical
phenomena that are crucial in emerging technologies. I also plan to reach high-
school students through a series of lectures in a Frontiers of Science and
Technology program at Yale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit My goal is
to describe the role of hydrodynamic interactions and structural forces in
colloidal suspensions bounded by confining walls or fluid interfaces. The
interplay of the hydrodynamic and structural phenomena (e.g., particle ordering)
is particularly pronounced when the smallest dimension associated with the
confinement geometry (e.g., film thickness) is comparable to the particle size.
I propose investigations of nonequilibrium hydrodynamic and structural
confinement effects in the following colloidal
systems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles adsorbed at a fluid interface Such
particles are often used to stabilize or destabilize emulsions and foams. Our
aim is to provide a macroscopic description for the dynamics of a monolayer of
adsorbed particles and to evaluate the corresponding macroscopic transport
coefficients in terms of the structural evolution on the particle
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle-stabilized thin liquid films Our goal is to
develop a nonequilibrium-thermodynamics&lt;br/&gt;formalism for description of
the process of the stepwise thinning of such films. The microscopic mechanisms
of the effective thermodynamic forces and the corresponding transport phenomena
will be investigated, and quantitative results for the transport coefficients
will be obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal suspensions in slit pores We
will study the dynamics of colloidal particles confined in pores and
microfluidic channels of the width comparable to the particle diameter. We will
explore the coupling of the microscopic suspension structure with the
macroscopic lateral motion. A theory for suspension dynamics in pores with
varying width will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle deposition on a
planar wall We will investigate the effect of many-particle hydrodynamic
interactions on the structure of colloidal crystals produced by particle
deposition on uniform and chemically patterned walls. The removal of adsorbed
particles from a surface by an applied flow will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My project involves numerical and theoretical
components. To perform the proposed numerical investigations we will develop
fast Stokesian-dynamics algorithms for colloidal suspensions confined in spaces
bounded by planar or nearly-planar surfaces. The applicability of our proposed
theoretical and numerical methods will go beyond the research problems outlined
above. In future studies we will use these methods to study interactions between
particle clusters, filtration processes, thermocapillary phenomena, and
bacterial motions. The proposed project will also provide a preliminary basis
for launching a new research program for molecular fluids adsorbed in
micropores. &lt;br/&gt;