* 0348724
* CAREER:    Tailoring the Nanostructure and Morphology of Hydrogen-Bonded Supramolecular Liquid Crystals Using Immiscible Polymer Side Chains
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Lei Zhu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 450,000.00

This CAREER development plan seeks to achieve fundamental understanding of novel
nanostructure and morphology in supramolecular columnar liquid crystals (LCs)
with immiscible polymer side chains, and to manipulate spontaneous curvature in
a microphase-separated single LC column on nanometer length scales. Rational
material design and precise engineering of the spontaneous self-assembly of the
supramolecular columnar LCs have become increasingly important in the
development of a new generation of nanomaterials for nanotechnology. In order to
achieve these goals, specific objectives are proposed. (1) Design and synthesize
novel non-mesogenic molecules with an amide core and multiple immiscible polymer
side chains at each end. (2) Understand the columnar LC phases determined by the
interrelationship and interdependence between hierarchical intermolecular
interactions, such as liquid crystal formation and microphase separation, on
different length scales. (3) Achieve novel helical coil morphology in single LC
nanofiber using the principle of spontaneous curvature. The spontaneous
curvature will be systematically investigated based upon the effects from
molecular weight and selective&lt;br/&gt;solvent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific merits of this proposal are several. First, attaching immiscible
polymer side chains&lt;br/&gt;onto supramolecular columnar liquid crystals
generates a new type of LC material. The new LC&lt;br/&gt;polymers will bridge
the gap in our understanding of structure-property relationship between small
molecules and polymers. Second, the unique physical property of intra-columnar
microphase separation will induce novel helical coil morphology in self-
assembled columnar LCs, which may mimic the coiling instability in bio-related
lipid tubules. Third, the proposed helical morphology may have potential
technological applications such as environment-responsive
nanoactuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve broader impact, an integrated
research and education plan is proposed to combine&lt;br/&gt;outreach to local
high school teachers and students with the development of novel
polymer&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology component in a graduate course on Polymer
Structure and Morphology. First, such an effort is going to improve the local
community's awareness of technologically important polymer nanomaterials, while
creating substantive ties to high school teachers and underrepresented young
students who otherwise would have no exposure to polymer concepts and
applications. The planned outreach effort will feature two major components:
education and research. In the education part, the PI will collaborate with
local high school science teachers to develop a new curriculum for
underrepresented students to learn basic science and engineering concepts
related to everyday polymeric materials. Regular visits to the local high school
are planned with well-designed polymer experiments and projects to stimulate
student interest in science and engineering. In the research program, the PI
will initiate a summer internship for high school teachers and students to team
with polymer research faculty to develop hands-on laboratory experiments in
polymer morphology research for the use in high school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;The
polymer nanostructure and morphology course will help bridge the existing gap
between different levels of research and education in polymer nanotechnology.
The research results will be widely disseminated through publications in
scientific journals, presentations at national meetings, and collaborations with
industries.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;