* 0348858
* Theoretical Studies of Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Hua Guo, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 03/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Hua Guo of the University of New Mexico is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop accurate and efficient methods to
study highly excited spectroscopy and reaction dynamics of small molecular
systems. Methods to be employed are based on recursive generation of the Krylov
subspace in which the eigenproblem is partially solved. Since the major
computational task involves matrix-vector multiplications, such methods have
favorable scaling laws. With prudently chosen discretization schemes, recursive
methods such as the Lanczos algorithm or the Chebyshev propagation allow
efficient computation of highly excited ro-vibrational levels as well as
reaction probabilities, cross sections, and rates of systems affected by long-
lived resonances. The prototypical system methylene, of interest due to the
presence of Renner-Teller coupling and several conical intersections, will be
studied using high level at initio calculations including a new strategy. The
other system to be investigated is acetylene and its higher energy vinylidene
isomer. To characterize this fundamental isomerization in full dimension, a new
scheme will be applied to converge all vibrational levels below the
isomerization barrier.

This research is at the cutting edge of theoretical chemical physics, with
outcomes expected to provide valuable insights into experimental observations of
important molecular systems and associated chemical processes. As well,
computational methodologies will be advanced in general, with computer codes
resulting from the research to be made freely accessible to interested
researchers. Since this project deals with large eigen or linear equation
solvers, outcomes may benefit other fields in science and engineering where
similar problems emerge. Examples include but are not limited to high-resolution
imaging, nanomaterials, photonic crystals, and biophysics.