* 0348746
* CAREER:      Stochastic Control Problems in Financial Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2012
* Andrew Lim, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Russell Barton
* 01/31/2012
* USD 398,975.00

The objective of this Early Faculty Career Development (CAREER)research is to
understand and solve stochastic control problems of contemporary interest in
finance. There are two broad directions of research. The first concerns the
analysis of structural properties of optimal investment and hedging portfolios
when there are stochastic parameters and discontinuities in the underlying asset
price models. This issue will be studied using methods from stochastic control,
stochastic differential equations, and stochastic analysis. Numerical methods,
possibly using simulation together with a finite dimensional approximation that
exploits the structure of the optimal solution, will be explored. The second
objective concerns the analysis of multi-period investment policies that are
robust with respect to errors in the underlying financial model. This analysis
will be carried out using results from convex optimization and stochastic
control. The primary goal of this research is to understand the structural
properties of robust portfolios, that is, investment portfolios that perform
well in the real world even when there are errors in the underlying model being
used to make decisions, and to develop numerical methods for computing them.
More generally, the objective is to develop analytical methods for understanding
the structural properties of robust decisions for general dynamic optimization
problems.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to an improved
understanding of the structural properties of optimal investment and hedging
decisions associated with financial models involving stochastic parameters,
jumps, and default risk. Empirical results indicate that these are significant
sources of risk that should not be ignored, and successful completion of this
research will lead to a more complete understanding of the appropriate response
to such sources of risk, and efficient numerical methods for computing these
decisions. For the problem of robust investment, this research will lead, if
successful, to a better understanding of the structure of investment portfolios
that perform well in the real world, even when there are errors in the
underlying mathematical model, and more generally, to greater insight into the
impact of model uncertainty and modeling errors on decision making for general
multi-period problems. The proposed research will also contribute to numerical
methods for computing robust optimal decision policies.

