* 0348286
* CAREER:     Advanced Temperature Compensation Techniques for Integrated Bulk-Mode Micro and Nano Mechanical Resonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Farrokh Ayazi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER proposal is aimed at the investigation and implementation of novel
integrated temperature compensation techniques for high frequency (1-50GHz) and
high quality factor (Q) bulk-mode micro and nano mechanical resonators with
integrated nanoscale transducers. The intellectual merits of the proposed
activity are:&lt;br/&gt;1. To develop integrated self-compensation techniques
(oven-less) for temperature sensitivity of high-Q micro and nano mechanical
resonators, without deteriorating the Q of the resonator.&lt;br/&gt;2. To
implement high-Q bulk-mode nano-electromechanical resonators with integrated
nanoscale transducers, and resonant frequencies deep into the Gigahertz range
(1-50GHz);&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activity
are:&lt;br/&gt;- For the first time, it will result in the realization of
temperature-compensated integrated micro/nanomechanical resonators with near
zero temperature coefficient of frequency (zero-TCF), making it possible to
replace the quartz crystals in numerous clocking, time keeping and frequency
referencing applications with on-chip silicon electromechanical resonators.
&lt;br/&gt;- The development of high performance GHz-frequency integrated
resonators will make the integration of temperature-stable high frequency
filters with RF circuits possible. Such filters currently present a bottleneck
to the integration of high performance RF systems on a chip.&lt;br/&gt;- Bulk-
mode nanomechanical resonators will have high Q (in the 1000's) in air and in
liquid, while having high frequencies and very small mass. This will lead to the
realization of precision resonant biochemical and biological sensor arrays at
the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this proposal will not only bring
about significant scientific discoveries in the area of nano-electromechanical
devices and systems, but will also enable realization of new low-cost, single-
chip, precision RF-sensory micro-nodes by developing integrated solutions for
nanoscale electromechanical building blocks of such systems.&lt;br/&gt;