* 0348028
* Functional Genomics of the Protein Disulfide Isomerase Family:  Unraveling Protein Folding and Redox-Regulatory Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* L. Andrew Staehelin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,229,649.00

This project will systematically define the functions and regulatory networks
mediated by the protein disulfide isomerase gene family in the model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana. In the endoplasmic reticulum, protein disulfide isomerases
catalyze the reversible formation and isomerization of disulfide bonds necessary
for the proper folding, assembly, activity, and secretion of numerous enzymes
and structural proteins. Protein disulfide isomerases have also evolved to adapt
to novel cellular functions, as single enzymes and as subunits of protein
complexes, in chloroplasts, mitochondria, nuclei, and vacuoles. Through redox-
based mechanisms involving their thioredoxin domains, they are implicated in
regulating transcription, translation, organelle biogenesis, photosynthetic
efficiency, and cell differentiation in a variety of tissues and stages of
development. This research will elucidate the function of all 11 members of the
protein disulfide isomerase family by determining the subcellular locations and
tissue-specific expression levels of each protein disulfide isomerase isoform
and by identifying a wide range of substrates and partners with which each
protein disulfide isomerase interacts. The project is also analyzing the T-DNA
mutants available for nine different pdi genes and is constructing double and
triple mutants and pdi over- and under-expresser lines. These plants are being
examined for cellular and developmental alterations associated with modified
protein disulfide isomerase levels. A systems biology model of metabolic
networks and cellular functions that are impacted by protein disulfide
isomerases will be produced. The resources from this project will be distributed
via websites, The Arabidopsis Information Resource and partnering with small
colleges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide a
comprehensive understanding of the cellular function of each PDI in plants and
will give critical insights into fundamental aspects of protein disulfide
isomerase metabolism, enzyme folding and thermostability, redox networks and
molecular evolution in eukaryotes. The post-doctoral exchange between Colorado
and Hawaii will facilitate interdisciplinary training in molecular genetics and
cell biology, problem solving and the transfer of research ideas for project
advancement. Central to the mission of this project is to integrate the
resulting technologies with learning experiences that will inspire faculty and
student development from small colleges lacking research programs. Faculty will
obtain certificates of professional training, while students will obtain
mentoring, research credit and training. Participants will become aware of the
fascinating array of activities and career choices in modern life science
research. Hands-on training in genomics, bioinformatics and cellular biological
research coupled with synergistic interactions, partnerships and collaboratively
developed teaching resources (CD-ROM, web-based, lecture material) will have
far-reaching educational impacts on faculty and students far beyond the project
period.