* 0348161
* CAREER: Uncertainty Analysis and Modeling of the Biodegradation of Synthetic Organic Compounds in Activated Sludge Biotreatment Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2011
* Benjamin Magbanua, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Debra Reinhart
* 03/31/2011
* USD 400,102.00

0348161 Magbanua Intellectual merit. The activated sludge (AS) process was
originally developed for the removal of oxygen demanding material and suspended
solids, and later applied also to nutrient removal, from wastewater. More
recently, effluent limits have been placed on specific chemicals of industrial
and environmental significance, referred to as priority pollutants. Biotreatment
has been designated the best available treatment technology, against which
alternative treatment options are measured, for priority pollutants that are
potentially biodegradable synthetic organic chemicals (SOCs). Consequently, the
development of approaches to accurately predict SOC degradation in activated
sludge systems has become a major research focus in environmental engineering.
The current modeling approach combines traditional microbial growth kinetics
with reactor engineering principles to derive a deterministic model of SOC
degradation. Experience has shown, however, that bio kinetic parameters derived
from laboratory experiments are poor predictors of SOC removal performance, even
in controlled laboratory reactors. Therefore, a modeling approach that accounts
for process uncertainties would be more appropriate. The PI further suggests
that an understanding of the sources of uncertainty in wastewater bio treatment
would facilitate the design of more efficient and reliable bioprocesses for
priority pollutant removal. The PI hypothesizes that uncertainty in wastewater
bio treatment, and the disparity between field performance and laboratory-
derived kinetics, arises principally from the concentration and activity of the
competent biomass, the diversity of the microbial community, and the size
distribution of the microbial flocs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Priority
pollutants have been identified as imminent threats to public health and the
environment. Strict limits have consequently been established for effluent
concentrations of priority pollutant. The kinetics of SOC removal are poorly
understood, however, so engineers tend to use very conservative safety factors
and grossly over design treatment systems to ensure that SOC removal goals are
met. A better understanding of the uncertainties related to SOC bio treatment,
and models incorporating uncertainty, would permit more realistic assessment of
uncertainty risk, and facilitate the development of design and operational
strategies that minimize such risk. In addition to the usual scientific
channels, The PI plans to disseminate these models and other project results
through an interactive web site, which will be promoted to practitioners through
professional associations. The PI is also committed to enhancing science and
engineering education at all levels, particularly by providing opportunities for
research. Mississippi is a state in which research expenditures have
traditionally lagged the rest of the country, so availability of research
experiences at the undergraduate and secondary levels has been severely limited.
The PI is committed to providing such opportunities, particularly to persons
from groups traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;