* 0348412
* CAREER:     Study of Novel Interfacial Biocatalysis of Multienzyme Systems Self-Assembled at Organic-Aqueous Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Ping Wang, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 12/31/2006
* USD 244,851.00

Ping Wang&lt;br/&gt;BES-0348412&lt;br/&gt;Biocatalysis is facing a new wave of
revitalization in embracing the growing demands for environmentally-benign
industries and the heightened interest in enantiopure compounds. Even though
more capable enzymes are becoming available through the latest advances in
genetic engineering and protein science, the water-insolubility of organic
compounds remains greatly restraining to the efficiency of many promising
biotransformations. This research seeks to develop and investigate a
breakthrough strategy to conduct interfacial biocatalysis in a way mimicking
biological membrane-binding mechanisms of proteins. Specifically, native water-
soluble protein enzymes and cofactors will be conjugated with hydrophobic
polymers to form surfactant-like structures, thus enabling self-assembling of
the catalysts at O/A interfaces. Research objectives are to: (1) Enable the
self-assembling of multienzyme systems at O/A interfaces, (2) Investigate
fundamental aspects of the interfacial catalysis of multienzyme systems, and (3)
Evaluate the potentials of the interfacial biocatalysis for commodity chemical
production, especially the multiple enzyme pathway for the production of
p-hydroxybenzoic acid (pHBA), which is used for the production of liquid crystal
polymers, dyes, pesticides and pharmaceuticals. The education plan seeks to (1)
Facilitate the integration and eventually form a core foundation of
biotechnology into the chemical engineering curriculum, and (2) Promote public
awareness and interests in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;