* 0348145
* CAREER:     Intellectual Infrastructure and Critical Enabling Technology Development for Advanced Neural Engineering Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Patrick Rousche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

0348145&lt;br/&gt;Rousche&lt;br/&gt;The field of neural engineering is standing
at the brink of another technological revolution in health care. Single
microelectrodes implanted into the brain of severely compromised neurological
patients have been used to create a direct link between human nerve cells and
computers in the external world, providing a means for a brainstem stroke
patient to crudely communicate with health care attendants and family.
Conversely, implanted microelectrodes may also be used to transfer information
from the external world directly into the brain, thus benefiting patients with
disorders such as deafness or blindness. Targeted multichannel electrical
stimulation of visual or auditory centers of the brain could induce usable
sensory perceptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed
investigation is to simultaneously nurture the country's intellectual neural
engineering infrastructure while developing the critical enabling technologies
that will result in the design, testing, and eventual routine clinical
implementation of cortical neuroprosthetic implant systems to assist people with
a variety of neurological dysfunctions. The plan has 5 major objectives: 1) to
engineer a novel three-dimensional neural interface architecture utilizing a
mechanically-flexible, neurocompatible substrate with multiple electrode sites;
2) to apply and quantify neurotrophic tissue engineering techniques towards
improvements in performance and longevity of implanted electrodes; 3) to
quantify spatiotemporal dynamics of receptive field reorganization (plasticity)
in cortex; 4) to introduce concepts of neural engineering to traditionally
under-represented Chicago high-school students via a Bioengineering summer camp
followed by after-school internships and 5) to introduce Bioengineering students
to clinical neural engineering via for-credit .shadowing. programs in clinical
neurology, audiology, ophthalmology and neurosurgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful completion of these objectives will result in the demonstration of
high-channel count, batch-fabricated, implantable neurotrophic electrode systems
essential for advanced neural interfaces for clinical and basic neuroscience use
and will expand the boundaries of in vitro and in vivo (rat model) neural
applications. The proposal brings a multi-disciplinary and systems approach to
solving critical problems in neural engineering and brain interfacing.
&lt;br/&gt;