* 0349718
* SBIR Phase II:  The Accessible Semantic Web
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Edward Sims, VCOM3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 02/28/2007
* USD 871,133.00

This Small Busees Innovation Research Phase II Project proposes to develop an
Accessibility Markup Language (AML) that annotates digital representations of
English text with linguistic information needed for proper translation into
other modalities, as required by persons with physical or cognitive
disabilities. As an exemplar of the technology, VCom3D will develop,
demonstrate, and evaluate the application of AML to making Web content
accessible in American Sign Language (ASL). This development will entail the
implementation of an Encoder to create AML from English text, and a Decoder to
generate grammatical ASL from AML.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinational
corporations and institutions have recognized the economic and social need to
make information and instruction accessible to persons around the world for whom
English is, at best, a second language. To address this issue, international
organizations, including the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) are defining
methodologies for using Controlled Languages, systems of annotation and, in the
future, the Semantic Web to increase accessibility in other languages. These
same emerging technologies and infrastructure can provide an unprecedented
opportunity to make information available to underserved Americans with sensory,
cognitive, and cultural differences. This project will demonstrate the
application of emerging information technology to make information accessible to
Deaf persons, and will provide resources for further research into ASL
linguistics. The initial commercial product based on this technology will be a
translation and authoring tool that substantially automates the creation of
grammatical, animated ASL from English text. This product will be used to
increase access by Deaf and Hard of Hearing children and adults to digital
information and to promote inclusive education and employment in accordance with
the New Freedom Initiative, recent amendments to Section 508 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and
Section 255 of the Telecommunications Act. &lt;br/&gt;