* 0349981
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Conservation Organizations on the Cultural Model of Swidden Agriculture in Eastern Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* James Boster, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 5,852.00

Swidden agriculture is of particular interest to scientists and conservation
groups because of its adverse effect on the endemic flora and fauna, but also
because, as practiced with current human population densities in contemporary
Madagascar, it is both ecologically and economically unsustainable. The Malagasy
Government is trying to limit the practice of swidden agriculture by introducing
wet field rice agriculture as well as non- indigenous conservation practices.
However, the rituals associated with swidden agriculture in Eastern Madagascar
may not be compatible with the subsistence pattern proposed by conservation
groups and this incompatibility may result in resistance to the introduced
subsistence practices. This dissertation research will test the hypothesis that
as knowledge of non- indigenous conservation practices increases, knowledge of
swidden decreases. The hypothesis tests whether the information conservation
organizations are giving to the local populations on non-indigenous agricultural
practices displaces knowledge of indigenous agricultural practices. By comparing
the cultural knowledge of agriculture and conservation practices of communities
with and without western conservation influences, the influences of western
conservation efforts will be better understood so as to guide future programs.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is that it addresses a problem
that has significant influence to both anthropological theory (cultural models
and sharedness of knowledge) and the Malagasy people (socio-cultural change) by
providing a better understanding to the conservation groups in the area. In
addition, the results of this project will be useful in other regions of
biodiversity conservation concern where indigenous knowledge, rituals,
agricultural practices and beliefs may not be compatible with non-indigenous
conservation practices.