* 0349278
* CAREER: Market Design and the Limits of Markets
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Jonathan Levin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2010
* USD 402,949.00

This CAREER project will focus on the design and limitations of markets. The
broad aims of the research are to understand how specific market institutions,
such as the design of auction or matching markets, affect economic outcomes,
&lt;br/&gt;as well the limits to what designed markets can accomplish. There are
three components. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first focuses on matching markets,
such as labor markets or multi-unit auctions. Motivated by a recent antitrust
case against the National Residency Matching Program, the research studies how
the absence of individualized prices might affect matching market outcomes. The
second project considers how auction rules, in particular the choice between
sealed and open bidding, affects market participation, bidding behavior and
resource allocation. The project develops new theoretical hypotheses and will
test them using data from U.S. Forest Service timber sales. The final project
studies service provision by local governments. The question is why and when
governments provide&lt;br/&gt;services internally rather than through the market
via contracts with private sector&lt;br/&gt;firms. This decision is political,
but also relates to the classic question of when markets can provide services
more efficiently than a centralized organization. The project will examine the
predictive power of different theories of privatization using a dataset on local
government service provision that is currently being constructed. Each component
includes an educational plan that integrates the research into classroom
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the performance of auction and
matching mechanisms is of crucial importance in allocating natural resources, in
labor markets and financial markets, and in dozens of other settings. The first
two projects will shed light the functioning of alternative matching market
institutions and on the relative merits of two ubiquitous auction designs, the
open ascending auction and sealed bidding. The third line of research addresses
a fundamental social science problem - where to draw the line between the public
and private sectors - and will gather new data to investigate this problem in
the context of local government service provision. All three research projects
have direct policy implications - for natural resource allocation and other
auction settings, for the provision of local government services, and for
assessing the competitiveness of matching markets and the role of centralized
market-clearing mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;