* 0349656
* CAREER:  Investigation of Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy for Analysis of Airborne Particulate Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Steven Buckley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 01/31/2006
* USD 224,999.00

Recent and pending Federal air pollution regulations for particulate matter (PM)
require the development of continuous emissions monitors to measure the size and
composition of airborne particles. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS)
is a promising method for real-time measurement of joint size and composition of
primarily inorganic airborne aerosol particles in the size range 100 nm - 10 nm.
These nanoparticles have been shown to be linked to a series of significant
health effects, including decreased lung function, increased incidence of
asthma, alterations in lung tissue and structure, increased hospital admissions,
and premature death. In LIBS, a high-energy pulsed laser is utilized to create a
spark, or breakdown, in the sample media. Recent field trials of this technique
on incinerators and thermal treatment units show that LIBS measurements follow
trends of emissions well and can capture transient events that are not observed
by extractive, integrating type samplers. Due to the possibility of joint
particle composition and sizing, LIBS also is attractive forsource
apportionment, that is, determination of the source of particular particles in
an airshed by compositional fingerprinting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of the proposal are:&lt;br/&gt;1) to understand the joint influences
of the particle matrix, of the gas matrix, and of plasma size and temperature on
the LIBS measurement,&lt;br/&gt;2) to determine the upper and lower size limits
for particle measurements using LIBS, and the variation in optimal laser power,
optimum spark size and temperature, and optimum detector gate delay and width
for various particle sizes,&lt;br/&gt;3) to model the particle / plasma
interaction for typical particle compositions, as enabled by the previous two
objectives,&lt;br/&gt;4) to perform real-time, accurate, full-spectrum LIBS
measurements of ambient aerosol, as enabled by the previous three
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The career development plan includes a strong
educational component involving both high school students, high school teachers,
and college students. It is suggested that some of the attrition among promising
young science students is due to a perceived lack of connection between current
scientific problems and the basic science classes that dominate high school /
early college years. The proposed educational plan involves the creation of
interactive, web-based teaching tools that use illustrations from familiar
atmospheric phenomena such as photochemical smog, the ozone hole, acid rain, and
migration of airborne aerosol particles to teach basic science concepts linked
to real problems. Undergraduate engineering and science students from the
University of Maryland with an interest in teaching would be recruited to assist
AP Chemistry and AP Environmental Science teachers from local high schools in
curriculum development and computer/web programming to develop interactive
learning modules for the AP classes. It is hoped that these efforts promote
promising high school students to remain motivated to study science, while some
college students with a teaching aptitude may have a rewarding experience that
stimulates interest in science education. We plan to tie the education plan with
the research plan by bringing the LIBS unit to schools to make ambient aerosol
measurements as part of an aerosol curriculum module in the 4th and 5th years of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;