* 0349862
* Spring Topology and Dynamical Systems Conference 2004
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* John Mayer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 03/31/2005
* USD 37,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0349862&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Lex G. Oversteegen, &lt;br/&gt;Alexander M. Blokh, John C.
Mayer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Mathematics of the University of
Alabama at&lt;br/&gt;Birmingham proposes to host the Spring Topology and
Dynamical&lt;br/&gt;Systems Conference (STDC), March 25-27, 2004. The
STDC&lt;br/&gt;encompasses most of the areas of topology and of
topological&lt;br/&gt;approaches to dynamical systems. We expect the conference
to&lt;br/&gt;attract over 200 participants, nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity lies
in the broad&lt;br/&gt;and deep interaction among the participants. To ensure
strong&lt;br/&gt;and balanced representation in each of the areas central to
the&lt;br/&gt;conference, we propose to have four special sessions running
in&lt;br/&gt;parallel: Continuum Theory, Dynamical Systems, General
and&lt;br/&gt;Set-Theoretic Topology, and Geometric Topology. To promote
unity&lt;br/&gt;and interaction, there will be 12 invited talks of 25-minutes
in&lt;br/&gt;two parallel sessions, and 7 plenary talks of 50 minutes.
Ample&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for formal and informal interaction
among&lt;br/&gt;participants will be provided. This will include a
session&lt;br/&gt;devoted to the state of the arts in the conference areas,
current&lt;br/&gt;fruitful directions, and new
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STDC conference brings together
mathematicians and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics students working in two core areas of
mathematics:&lt;br/&gt;topology and dynamical systems. The broader impact of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed activity lies in the advancement of knowledge,
including&lt;br/&gt;education of students, through communication of recent
results in&lt;br/&gt;these two core areas. We expect that many of the invited
talks&lt;br/&gt;will emphasize interaction of the research agendas of the
central&lt;br/&gt;conference areas. Successful conferences in core areas are
an&lt;br/&gt;important part of mathematical infrastructure,
supporting&lt;br/&gt;research, training new mathematicians, and developing
a&lt;br/&gt;foundation for applications in related fields of mathematics
and&lt;br/&gt;science. Every effort will be made to provide for the
substantial&lt;br/&gt;participation of under-represented groups, graduate
students, and&lt;br/&gt;active researchers in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;