* 0349982
* Workshop on Modeling and Simulation for Design of Large Software-Intensive Systems: Challenges and New Research Directions; Tucson, Arizona; October 2003
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Bernard Zeigler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,375.00

Fueled by Moore.s law of exponentially expanding computational and networking
infrastructure, we are witnessing a trend toward ever-larger software structures
to drive business, science, and military systems on such infrastructure.
Unfortunately, the science of system design has lagged behind to guide the
development of such software-intensive systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many
issues arise in the design of such large, highly decentralized, collections of
interacting parts. The increased connectivity and capability create new
complexity that is difficult to control and dynamics that are difficult to
predict. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Computer-based modeling and simulation (M&amp;S)
methodology is required to address these issues since the scale is well beyond
what analytical tools alone can handle and there is limited ability to do
controlled experiments. Traditional M&amp;S approaches have focused on the
micro-level components rather than the macro level integration of these
components. However, large software-intensive systems demand new M&amp;S
approaches for understanding the dynamic behaviors of very large inter-connected
networks with very few loci of control and many interacting components.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed workshop is to explore
directions for a science of M&amp;S-based design for large software-intensive
systems. To do this researchers in the theory and formalisms of M&amp;S will be
brought together with researchers in software development concepts and
methodologies. Among software elements to be considered for their contribution
to a science of design are: &lt;br/&gt;o Spiral development, a normative,
flexible, risk-driven process model that is used to guide multiple stakeholders
through concurrent engineering of software-intensive systems. &lt;br/&gt;o
Formal method including the possibilities of .lightweight. variants that allow
for inclusion of informal elements trading rigor for expressibility.
&lt;br/&gt;o Architectural principles that provide uniform structures with known
properties to organize the complexity of large systems. Architectural styles,
design patterns and Unified Modeling Language constructs provide instances of
such principles