* 0349881
* Quantum Transport in Strongly Correlated Metals and Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Dmitri Khveshchenko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2009
* USD 255,000.00

This award supports fundamental condensed matter theory. The goal of the project
is to develop new, and advance existing, theoretical and computational tools for
analyzing the non-Fermi-liquid (NFL) properties and quantum-critical behaviors
of strongly correlated electron systems characterized by the presence of Dirac-
like excitations near isolated Fermi points and singular
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of singular interactions (which
are often due to a nearby quantum-critical point) become even more pronounced in
lower dimensions or restricted geometries, i.e., the situation often encountered
in nanostructures. The research aims at: developing an adequate description of,
and gaining new insights into, the nature and classification of the observed
anomalous behaviors in a variety of strongly correlated electron systems with
(nominally) point-like Fermi surfaces; Linking the NFL properties of novel
superconducting, magnetic, and carbon-based materials to their structure and
assessing the feasibility of their practical applications; Utilizing strong
many-body correlations in nanostructures as a possible means of controlling
coherent charge and spin transport for possible device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this unifying framework, the following
specific topics will be considered: Emergent behaviors and incipient orders in
the pseudogap phase of high Tc cuprates, pyrolytic graphite, dichalcogenides,
and other layered strongly correlated systems with the Dirac-like quasiparticle
dispersion; Construction and systematic analysis of physical observables in
effective gauge theories of strongly correlated electron systems, including
those describing the pseudogap, Meissner and disordered vortex states of the
d-wave superconductors; Many-body effects on entanglement and decoherence in
multi-qubit (spin-1/2) arrays that support Direac-and Majorana-like elementary
excitations, also in the presence of dissipative
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have a strong
educational component and achieve a broader impact through: Recruitment and
individual training of graduate students and postdocs with the focus on
combining theoretical research of a broad range of interdisciplinary topics with
possible practical applications; Development of improved and updated graduate
and undergraduate curricula and design of new courses, including the
undergraduate seminar on quantum solid state and nanoscale physics that the PI
started.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental condensed
matter theory. The goal of the project is to develop new, and advance existing,
theoretical and computational tools for analyzing the properties of strongly
interacting electron systems in confined geometries such as found in
nanostructures. The behavior of these systems will also be linked to other
problems of current interest such as high-temperature superconductors. This
research has possible practical applications. Results will be discussed in an
undergraduate seminar organized by the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;