* 0349882
* Stereochemistry and Chiroptics in Complex Organized Media:   From Dyeing Crystals to Dyeing Crystalline Tissues
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Bart Kahr, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2009
* USD 674,400.00

With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support for the work of Professor Bart Kahr of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Washington in Seattle, WA. The research will
build on the PI's construction of the first successful visible light, circular
extinction imaging microscope (CEIM) during the previously funded grant period.
This instrument will be rebuilt and refined with components of high optical
quality for the detection of weak dichroism and scattering. With this
instrument, images of mixed crystals will be made via two mechanisms, intrinsic
circular dichroism and a new effect, discovered by the PI, called optical
rotatory scattering. Using this technique, the PI will collect data to determine
the mechanisms of crystal growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new CIEM instrument
will be applicable to a vast array of problems in cell biology and materials
science. The interactions of adsorbates with chiral crystal surfaces will be
investigated by collecting direct spectroscopic evidence of enantioselectivity
at interfaces using the CIEM. The PI's experience, gained in studies of single
crystals, will be extended to the areas of pathology and cell biology using dyed
polycrystalline materials. In addition, the research will provide valuable
training for students in the area of crystal fabrication, a skill that has been
lacking in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;