* 0349778
* SBIR Phase II:   Adaptive Personalization and  Context Management for Location-Based Mobile Devices (AdaptTribe)
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Daniel Greening, BIGTRIBE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2007
* USD 1,052,001.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II research project develops
personalized user-interfaces for location-based services. This adaptive
proximity-based personalization algorithm recommends nearby venues based on
predicted user interest and distance. It will further develop a highly
distributed algorithm that allows handsets to perform part of the calculation,
dramatically reducing computation costs that central servers would otherwise
bear. This context-based user-interface allows users to chain operations,
concentrating activities by proximity, and avoiding retyping. This project will
expand the user- interface advancements to include personalizing categories, and
a user-interface approach that mixes categories with individual venues. In
addition it will explore algorithms that mix different types of venues on the
same screen. Identity federation will help retailers and portals more readily
deal with intermediary services. Self-service retail interfaces can allow
traditional "brick-and-mortar" retailers to cost-effectively provide "click-and-
mortar" services to consumers. A SOAP-based web-service will allow portals to
filter data and configure look-and-feel more precisely. However, the proposed
<object> tag mechanism will likely be good enough for most portals, as the
output format can be configured easily through CSS, and filtering can be
performed through the company's self-service portal interface

The end result of this project is a product that can be incorporated in
enterprise logistics applications that help field personnel find, reserve, use
and store resources while being able to improve the speed that consumers
navigate user-interfaces, even when location is irrelevant. The in-handset
personalization may ensure better privacy and security, even in non-location
based applications. The product will use proximity to maximize value: building
business-consumer relationships, enhancing social harmony and strengthening
communities, as a result.