* 0349668
* The Domestic Economy of El Palmillo
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Gary Feinman, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 72,569.00

&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gary Feinman and
collaborators will continue their decade-long effort to unravel the nature of
economic relations and social stratification for the Classic-period (ca. A.D.
200-800) Monte Alban state in the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico through the
excavation and in-depth study of ancient houses. Two seasons of fieldwork and
analysis are planned for the hilltop terrace site of El Palmillo, where a cross-
section of houses and their immediate surrounds, positioned on human-made
residential terraces, have previously been examined. Prior excavations have
illustrated how this elevated site was a long-occupied town (and not a fortress)
and how specific households varied in their economic activities and access to a
range of local and exotic goods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six-year
investigation at El Palmillo began near the base of the site, exposing domestic
units at the lower end of the societal pyramid. Subsequently, the Field Museum
team has worked its way up the hill excavating houses in several locations. In
2003, an elaborate palace-like residence was partially exposed at the top of the
hill. This long-inhabited and frequently rebuilt residence was associated with a
well-made, subsurface, masonry tomb that included individuals who bore the
physical manifestations (dental mutilations) of high status. This tomb was one
of the most elaborate, intact tombs discovered and excavated outside of the
regional center of Monte Alban. Yet the artifactual assemblage from the tomb and
this elaborate residence was different, although not markedly so, from what was
observed in association with more modest houses below. In addition, unlike lower
terraces where stone and fiber working were evidenced, there were no clear
vestiges of economic/craft activities in association with this palace-like
structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project is aimed at completing the
excavation of this palace structure. By exposing a second patio and adjacent
rooms of this residence, the excavation endeavors to gain a better understanding
of how this household made a living, and also more completely gauge the kinds
and quantities of goods and materials that the occupants of this residence had
access to. The gathering of these data will permit a fuller and more accurate
assessment of similarities and differences in production, consumption, and
economic stratification between the residents who lived in this dwelling at the
apex of the hill and the inhabitants of other domestic units at the site. At the
same time, these data will be compared to house excavations that have been
conducted at Monte Alban and other contemporaneous settlements in the Valley of
Oaxaca to assess the nature of economic activities and variations in wealth and
well-being across the Classic-period Monte Alban
polity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will sharpen our understanding
of the economic and status relations that underpinned ancient Monte Alban, one
of Mesoamerica's earliest urban centers and longest standing capitals. Extant
arguments postulate two- and three-class divisions for Classic-period Oaxaca.
Yet socioeconomic distinctions also may have been more multi-dimensional and
continuous (rather than stepped). More broadly, this investigation also will
help re-focus the archaeological study of ancient states on economic relations,
and specifically domestic economies where most pre-industrial production
occurred. At the same time, this project will continue its commitment to the
training and integration of qualified graduate and undergraduate students. Key
findings will be disseminated through a range of public and scientific venues in
English and Spanish, including several museum programs that bring science
directly and personally from the field to diverse public audiences. &lt;br/&gt;