* 0349111
* CAREER:    Default Bayesian Methods for Nonparametric Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Subhashis Ghoshal, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

DEFAULT BAYESIAN METHODS FOR NONPARAMETRIC PROBLEMS

Statistical models for complex data often contain one or more infinite-
dimensional parameters such as a probability density, a regression function, or
the transition density of a Markov process. The rapid development of innovative
Monte-Carlo schemes in the last decade makes it possible to compute Bayes
procedures in these complex problems. However, because of the high
dimensionality, it is seldom possible to completely elicit a prior subjectively
from the available information. What is needed is a general strategy for
constructing priors for infinite-dimensional parameters that incorporates
available prior information, such as smoothness (differentiability) or shape
(monotonicity, convexity, unimodality) of a regression function or density
function. Ideally, the constructed prior should be tested in the given problem
to avoid possible pitfalls in estimation. Large-sample properties such as
consistency and rate of convergence are well-respected benchmark test criteria.
In this research the investigator constructs prior distributions for select
problems using a default approach, devises suitable algorithms for computation
of the posterior, develops software for computation, investigates the large
sample behavior of the resulting procedures, supports the theory and methods via
simulation studies with moderately large samples, and applies the new methods to
several interesting data sets. The research provides Bayesian methodologists
with a catalog of priors with known performance properties, thereby facilitating
the application of Bayes methods in other models with high-dimensional
parameters.

Modern statistical models for data in a wide variety of applications, such as
data mining, image analysis, biometrics, biostatistics, bioinformatics, signal
processing, and finance, often depend on high- or infinite-dimensional
parameters such as survival distributions, probability densities, regression
functions, transition densities of Markov chains, and so on. Successful analysis
of such data presents challenges not found in the analysis of finite-parameter
models, and requires the development of new statistical theory, methods and
software. A non-subjective Bayesian method retains the advantages of the
Bayesian paradigm without requiring a subjective prior elicitation. In this
research the investigator develops the theory, methods, and computational
algorithms for implementing default Bayesian analyses of complex statistical
models depending on infinite-dimensional parameters. The research is
disseminated through the teaching of advanced courses and via the usual
scientific channels of publications and seminars. The research provides new
data-analytic tools for solving problems arising in diverse fields. Useful
priors with known performance are cataloged and user friendly software is
developed for ready applications to diverse fields. Thus the research has a
major impact on the conduct of science in a number of highly-relevant
application areas.