* 0349108
* CAREER:  Towards an Atomic Scale Understanding of Spin Polarized Electron Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Vincent LaBella, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,239.00

This CAREER project addresses fundamental materials science issues to advance
understanding of spin polarized electron transport through materials and
material interfaces at an atomic level. Semiconductor devices which utilize the
spin of the electron will have potential to achieve higher speeds, with lower
power consumption than conventional devices. The objectives of this research are
to understand the role of temperature, materials, and material interface
properties on both spin-flip and spin-dependent scattering. The ultimate goal is
to develop a knowledge base that enables the development of high efficiency spin
injection and detection methods for semiconduc-tor based spintronic devices. The
approach utilizes two scanning tunneling microscopy based techniques for
quantification and tagging of defect type to assess scattering mechanisms with
atomic resolution. In situ molecular beam epitaxy will be utilized for material
synthesis and inter-face preparation. %%% The project addresses fundamental
research issues in electronic materials science having technological relevance.
This research will be conducted in tandem with a strong educational component
that develops an integrated lecture laboratory course, which utilizes a wireless
audi-ence response system to immediately ascertain student comprehension. The
response system will allow every student to participate and communicate with the
instructor in a private manner. In addition, the research project will provide
opportunities for students to work with state-of-the-art scientific equipment in
a hands-on manner for both graduate and undergraduate studies as well as
augmenting the University at Albany's outreach programs with local K-12 schools.
***