* 0349986
* Baseline Methods for Reconstructing United States 19th Century Climatic Extremes from Historical Data
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Cary Mock, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2007
* USD 99,999.00

Baseline Methods for Reconstructing United States 19th Century Climatic Extremes
from Historical Data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide a methodological baseline for reconstructing large-scale historical
climatic extremes for North America and the adjacent oceans by integrating early
instrumental and documentary climate data together. Daily nineteenth century air
temperatures, precipitation frequencies, and precipitation magnitude will be
corrected to make them directly comparable with data practices of the modern
instrumental record. These methods, aided by calibration methods from modern
hourly weather data, will be directly applicable to reconstructing the pre-
modern climate for any year in the nineteenth century and enable the
construction of daily weather maps. The methods will be specifically applied to
weather data from November 1848-November 1849 at the national scale; and the
winter of 1861-1862 and the warm-season of 1860 at subregional scales. Newly
discovered historical data will be extracted from overland diaries, records from
permanent settlements, and maritime archives. These climatic extremes provide
ideal climatic contrasts for testing these methods for historical climate
reconstruction. The project will also contribute valuable information as it
concerns prominent climatic impacts on westward emigration, the myth of the
desert, linkages to cholera, whaling activity in the Arctic, agricultural
impacts on the Plains and American South, and unprecedented flooding and cold
waves. &lt;br/&gt;