* 0349110
* CAREER: Interplay Between Thermal, Electric and Mechanical Properties of Atomic-Sized Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Alexei Marchenkov, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 09/30/2009
* USD 450,000.00

Scanning tunnelling microscopy techniques can be used to fabricate and study
atomic-sized wires and contacts. At this size scale, quantum effects dominate
the thermal, electric and mechanical properties. The goal of this Faculty Early
Career Development project at the Georgia Institute of Technology is to
investigate experimentally the strong interrelation between the thermal
transport, electronic transport and mechanical properties in such atomic-sized
metallic conductors. Electronic properties of conductors in the quantum regime
can be fully characterized by a set of a few transmission coefficients. This is
called ``the mesoscopic PIN-code. Measuring, manipulating, and studying the
dependence of non-electric properties on this PIN-code is the unifying theme of
this project. To achieve this research goal, a novel experimental capability
will be developed which will enable us to investigate mechanical properties of
atomic-sized conductors simultaneously with their electric and thermal
properties. Such a capability will open numerous opportunities for studying the
fundamental limitations of practical electronic elements and circuits. The
project will bring relevant physics and technologies into the educational
experience of graduate, undergraduate, and regional high-school students by
involving them directly in cutting-edge scientific research.

Modern scientific devices like the scanning tunneling microscope and the atomic
force microscope facilitate investigation and precise manipulation of matter at
the atomic scale. Using these tools, it is possible to fabricate electrical
wires containing only a few atoms and single-atom electric contacts. Quantum
laws become dominant at the atomic scale, so the physical properties of
microscopic objects differ drastically from their macroscopic counterparts. The
goal of this Faculty Early Career Development project at the Georgia Institute
of Technology is to investigate experimentally the strong interrelation between
the thermal, electric and mechanical properties of atomic-sized metallic
conductors. This program will also develop novel experimental tools and methods
for studying and manipulating matter at the atomic scale. At the intersection of
electronic transport, thermal transport, and mechanics, this project will link
several distinct research directions. This project addresses the question of
fundamental limits for practical electronic circuits. This is important because
relentless miniaturization (which presently yields electronic devices in the
nanometer size range) will undoubtedly make atomic-sized devices routinely
available in the future. The project will bring relevant physics and
technologies into the educational experience of graduate, undergraduate, and
regional high-school students by involving them directly in cutting-edge
scientific research.

