* 0349671
* From Pheromone Receptor to Complex Mating Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Hubert Amrein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/2007
* USD 367,722.00

One of the most fundamental processes in biology is the establishment of the
male and female gender. Gender choice is generally determined by regulatory
genes controlling sexual differentiation, physiology and behavior. Sexual
behaviors are of particular interest: first, they can vary widely between the
two sexes within a species or/and between same-sex individuals from closely
related species. Consequently, these behaviors play a central role in the
fitness and evolutionary success of a species. Second, sexual behaviors are
robust, innate and in general complex, involving many sensory modalities.
Therefore, they can serve as model behaviors for investigations into complex
neural circuits. &lt;br/&gt; Drosophila represents one of the best-characterized
higher animals at the genetic and behavioral level. Moreover, the involvement of
vision, chemoreception and audition offers ample opportunity to study this
behavior from a variety of different angles. Recently, direct evidence for a
pheromone receptor in male courtship was provided through the identification of
a male-specific gustatory receptor gene, Gr68a. This gene is essential for the
identification of a female partner during the male mating ritual. The goal of
the presented study is to identify and characterize other pheromone receptors
involved in male courtship; these receptors are likely to be found among the
seven additional Gr genes closely related to GR68a and are proposed to control
other aspects of male courtship. The proposed research will establish a
framework of structural and molecular components that mediate an essential
behavior common to most animals. Moreover, it will provide novel insights into
how chemosensory inputs are transduced to the brain and integrated with other
sensory inputs to generate a complex neuronal circuit.&lt;br/&gt; Efforts to
recruit graduate and undergraduate are very successful (two undergrads, Meister
and McNealy, co-authored a paper in 2001). Currently, a postdoc, three graduate
and five undergraduate students are working in the PI's lab. Findings are
disseminated through publications in international journals and scientific
conferences. Moreover, they have also been reported in mainstream media,
including BBC (Leading Edge, radio science news program). &lt;br/&gt;