* 0349917
* Dissertation Research:  Technology and Postcolonial Belonging: A Study of Information Technology and the Indian Nation-State in the Context of Globalization
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Adriana Petryna, The New School
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 11,470.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
project is an examination of the socio-cultural implications of the recent
growth of Information Technology (IT) in India in the context of global
capitalism. Funds from the grant will support some equipment purchases and
expenses related to travel and housing in Bangalore and New Delhi. The
researcher will explore how IT as a form of technological rationality is in a
dialectical relationship with its agents (professionals and entrepreneurs) and
the Indian state and its implications. The research is expected to show how
western technological rationality and a traditional way of life constitute each
other. The project will be based on an ethnographic fieldwork over 12 months
conducted at two locations in the city of Bangalore situated in the southern
state of Karnataka: Infosys Technologies Limited, a software development and
consultation company and the IT Ministry of the Government of Karnataka. Part of
this research also involves work with the headquarters of the National
Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM) located in New Delhi.
The research methods involved are participant observation at the levels of
business transactions and technical work, following political debates framing
state policies on the IT sector, open-ended interviews, archival work, and
analyses of published and internal official documents of Infosys Technologies
Limited, the IT Ministry and NASSCOM. This project will provide valuable
information on a specific case of socio-cultural constitution of technology that
will be important to understand similar socio-historical formations and the role
of the postcolonial state.