* 0349015
* CAREER: Toward an Understanding of the Indirect Climatic Effect of Organic Aerosol: Quantitative Assessments Using Experimental Characterization and Model Integration
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Athanasios Nenes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2011
* USD 647,633.00

The overall goal of this project is to improve the community's understanding of
the aerosol indirect (or secondary aerosol) effect through examination of the
role of carbonaceous material. Laboratory and field experimental activities will
be combined with numerical modeling exercises. A new method for characterizing
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) will be developed that combines size resolved
measurements of surface tension, critical supersaturation and chemical
composition, which will allow determination of the effects of organic species on
CCN properties in near real time. The observations made with the new technique
will be incorporated into a numerical module designed to simulate aerosol-cloud
interactions which when incorporated into global climate models can be used to
assess indirect forcing.

The project will expose undergraduate engineers and scientists to atmospheric
research. The PI will expose gifted high school students to atmospheric science
with the goal to inspire them to a career in science and engineering. Two Ph.D.
students will be given experimental and numerical modeling experiences. There
are a number of formal education and outreach programs (e.g. SURE and STEP) at
the PI's home institution that will be exploited in this project. Societal
benefits are likely with improved understanding of the atmospheric chemical-
climate system. The results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
presented at national and international scientific conferences.