* 0349736
* SBIR Phase II: Discovery Analyst:    A Data Mining System for Image Databases
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Stuart Blundell, VISUAL LEARNING SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase II project will
develop a highly innovative data mining software tool that is capable of mining
imagery and spatial information stored in a database management system (DBMS).
Billions of dollars have been spent in converting the world's vast supply of
paper maps into digital, geographically referenced, data for geographic
information systems (GIS) applications because location matters in almost every
instance of decision-making for both government agencies and private sector
businesses. The proliferation of relational, spatial, and now visual data from
high-resolution satellites, all stored in a common DBMS architecture, offers
organizations the opportunity for knowledge discovery in databases; however, the
technical challenges of maintaining, navigating, and mining these data are
formidable. Current workflow approaches are disjointed and exclusive of image
data. The product resulting from this project will allow all of the data to be
queried and mined in a holistic workflow approach yielding potential useful
discoveries through its primary innovations not presently available in data
mining software; 1) Seamless integration of data mining and feature extraction
workflows, 2) Mining content of high-resolution earth imagery stored in spatial
databases, 3) Cleanup of GIS databases, and 4) Advanced query generation and
data mining technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Market research confirms that
companies are investing in data mining software and high- resolution commercial
satellite imagery. The proposed product will have commercial applications in
both traditional GIS application areas (forestry, defense, civil government,
agriculture) and emerging vertical markets for GIS applications (banking and
financial, telecommunications, security, manufacturing, retail and healthcare.
There is a powerful demand for the knowledge acquisition vital to all location-
based government decision-making processes. This significantly impacts the
quality of management in our national security, resource handling, and the
quality of our environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;