* 0349407
* Networking Education: How to Educate the Educators?; Karlsruhe, Germany
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Shawn Ostermann, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

The ACM Special Interest Group in Data Communications (SIGCOMM) will sponsor a
one-day workshop on "Networking Education: How to Educate the Educators?" on
August 25, 2003, preceding the annual ACM SIGCOMM conference in Karlsruhe,
Germany. The goal of the workshop is to bring together faculty from a broad
spectrum of academic institutions, industry engineers and scientists, and others
with an interest in education to discuss curriculum design and teaching
practices in the field of computer networks. This workshop is the successor of
the very successful workshop "Workshop on Computer Networking: Curriculum
Designs and Educational Challenges" held in conjunction with SIGCOMM 2002.

This workshop will focus on (i) tips and advice for new computer networking
instructors, (ii) the refinement of the model curricula for a first
(undergraduate) course in networking, (iii) the continuing evolution of
graduate-level curricula in the area, and (iv) variations in the way that
computer networking is taught around the world. The workshop will provide an
opportunity to discuss these and other related issues; to share viewpoints,
experiences, and materials; and to learn what others are doing, and considering
doing in the area. The workshop will produce a report detailing the attendees'
discussions and will serve as a springboard for future activity in the area.

The intellectual merit of this request is clear. The goal is to improve the way
that Computer Networking is taught to the next generation of Information
Technology experts. The students that we are teaching now will support the
infrastructure that drives our economy and allows rapid advances in all of the
other areas of science, engineering, and technology.

One of the direst results from the incredible expansion of the IT industry in
the 1990s was that many students who would otherwise have gone on to earn a PhD
in Computer Networking-related fields went to industry instead. This left the
Computer Networking field with a large 5 to 10 year void in the production of
new professors for academia in the IT area. We see this workshop as an
opportunity to regroup and make up for lost opportunities in assisting the
newest group of networking educators in training the next generation of IT
professionals.

This proposal requests funding to assist up to 16 United States-based faculty
members to attend and participate in this workshop. The awards will be primarily
targeted at faculty from 4-year colleges and universities who would not
otherwise have the funds to attend the workshop or ACM SIGCOMM 2003. Given that
the workshop is targeted broadly at all faculty in the computer networking area
(not just those with the research funds to attend SIGCOMM), the grant will help
broaden the base of participants, and serve to make the workshop a truly
community-wide event.

