* 0350266
* Collaborative Research: Westerly Wind Bursts: El Nino Southern Oscillation's (ENSO) Driver or Slave?
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Lisan Yu, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2007
* USD 59,209.00

Westerly wind burst (WWB) events are known to play an important role in El Nino
Southern Oscillation's (ENSO) dynamics. The events are usually viewed as
stochastic forcing that is independent of and external to the large scale ENSO
dynamics. There are indications, however, that the occurrence of these events,
and their characteristics, are influenced by the large scale SST structure, and
hence by ENSO. This study will explore the dynamical consequences of the
possibility that the timing and other characteristics of WWB events are
partially regulated and controlled by the large scale SST distribution. That is,
the study will examine the extreme possibility that these events occur only when
the large scale SST structure is at a certain configuration. For example, when
the warm pool is extended eastward beyond the dateline. In this scenario the WWB
events will be treated as an inherent part of the deterministic ENSO dynamics
rather than as external stochastic forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
first analyze observations in order to try and establish the characteristics of
such a possible regulation of the timing or characteristics of WWB events by the
large scale SST field. Next, the implications of such regulated switching of WWB
events by the large scale ENSO dynamics will be studied using a hierarchy of
models. The model hierarchy will include a hybrid coupled model (ocean general
circulation model coupled to a statistical atmosphere), an intermediate coupled
model, and a conceptual delayed oscillator model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the research include possible improvement of ENSO's prediction skill,
should the proposed research find a way to include a representation of WWB
regulation by the large scale SST field in current ENSO prediction models. A
graduate student (under Mark Cane) and a post-doc (under Eli Tziperman) will be
educated, mentored and trained under this grant.