* 0350422
* Conference:   Annual Meeting of the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) to be held December 2003 in San Francisco, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Suzanne Pfeffer, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/2004
* USD 38,000.00

This award provides partial support for the Annual meeting of the American
Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) meeting December 13 - 18, 2003 in San Francisco.
Activities and events sponsored by the National Science foundation
include:&lt;br/&gt;A] The opening Keynote Symposium entitled, "A Vision for the
Future of Science".&lt;br/&gt;B] A Science Education Session for K- 12 Educators
&lt;br/&gt;C] Travel awards for student attendance at the ASCB annual
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological research is undergoing a revolution in
terms of the amount of information that has become available due to the
sequencing of the genomes of many species. The National Science Foundation has
been a major player in these efforts, sponsoring, for example, the Arabidopsis,
rice and maize genome mapping and sequencing efforts. By comparing the genomes
of related species, biologists are more readily able to identify genes and their
regulatory elements, as well as define genes that contribute to disease
resistance and/or susceptibility. In order for these vast data sets to be
useful, biologists must team with information technologists to find ways to tap
into the data and cull out useful information. Information technology experts
need to understand how the data might best be analyzed and what the biologists
might be looking for. A challenge for the future is to train students to think
about how to analyze data sets in ways that may reveal entirely unexpected
findings. Biologists need to learn more about (1) what questions they should be
asking in this post-genome era and (2) what tools are available or could be
created, from areas outside biology: specifically, information technology, to
help them address their questions of interest. These issues will be the focus of
the 2003 ASCB Keynote Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Society for
Cell Biology's K-12 Education Symposium provides Annual Meeting attendees an
opportunity to find out more about the efforts of colleagues and friends to
bridge the gap between K-12 science education and cell biology research
throughout the nation, and how they might go about becoming involved. The K-12
program will be on "Teaching with Controversy." This will be a complement to the
Saturday Education Committee Workshop on the same topic. Scientific
controversies are an excellent tool for motivating students of all ages to learn
about scientific issues and to practice their skills in evidence-based decision
making. Eugenie Scott, 1999 ASCB Bruce Alberts Awardee and Executive Director of
the National Center for Science Education, will share her expertise on the
challenges of teaching evolution. Following her remarks, a hands-on workshop
activity will model evolution instruction, and educators interested in K-12
education will have the opportunity to discuss effective ways to establish
partnerships between scientists and K-12 teachers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third area enables graduate students to attend the
ASCB Annual Meeting. For young researchers in training, the ASCB Annual Meeting
provides them with what is often their first opportunity to present their
findings to a national scientific audience. Such experiences are an important
component in the training of predoctoral research scientists.&lt;br/&gt;