* 0350683
* Collaborative Research:  Microbial Ecology of Nitrogen Cycling in the Oxygen Minimum Zone of the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2007
* USD 41,717.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0350720 / OCE- 0350683&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the
Arabian Sea covers only 2 % of the area of the world ocean, it's well developed
Oxygen Minimum Zone (OMZ) accounts for 20 % of the water column denitrification,
a disproportionate and significant contribution to the marine nitrogen budget.
The distribution of in situ denitrification activity in the OMZ is usually
inferred from the correlation among indicator chemical variables, most
importantly nitrate deficit, nitrite, oxygen, and suspended particulate
material. The potential for oxygen, nitrate and organic carbon availability to
regulate denitrifying bacteria is well known and easily demonstrated in culture
and in sediment environments. Direct measurements of denitrification rates have
been very difficult in the water column of the OMZ, and the factors that
actually regulate the activity of denitrifying bacteria in this environment are
therefore known only by inference. The recently recognized potential for
anaerobic ammonia oxidation to account for part of the denitrification signal
(in loss of fixed N) makes it abundantly clear that the scientific community
lacks predictive understanding of factors controlling the N cycle of the OMZ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers at Princeton University and the
University of Washington will investigate the community structure of the
bacterial assemblage in the OMZ in order to evaluate the possible relationships
between diversity and biogeochemistry. The team of scientists will assay gene
expression for the gene that encodes the key enzyme in denitrification (nitrite
reductase) as an indicator of denitrifying activity. Gene abundance and
expression data will be compared with the distribution of the chemical variables
that are used by convention to infer denitrification rates to investigate
regulation of denitrifying activity. In addition to the usual chemical
indicators, trace metal speciation such as copper bioavailability will be
involved to regulate the denitrifying bacterial community composition and
activity. Previous studies have demonstrated that denitrifying bacteria can be
limited by copper in culture, and suggest that the tight complexation of copper
with sulfides in the OMZ will lead to the accumulation of nitrous oxide that is
characteristically observed in the OMZ. This copper hypothesis will be tested by
comparing the denitrification rates and gene expression in treatments with and
without copper additions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, it
is clear that this project that will build upon strong international
collaboration among some of the premier marine nitrogen experts. &lt;br/&gt;