* 0350121
* Site Isolated Polymeric Metal Complexes: From Modular Synthesis to Responsive Nanoscale Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Cassandra Fraser, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/29/2008
* USD 387,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Cassandra L. Fraser at the University of Virginia
to prepare and study polymeric metal complexes (PMCs), which are metal centers
with different numbers and types of pendant polymer chains including block
copolymers capable of nanoscale self-assembly, to appropriately model the finely
tuned metal reaction centers in proteins. Stimuli responsive polymeric Fe, Pt,
Ru, and Ln bipyridine complexes will be prepared by controlled polymerization
and modular metal template synthesis to develop tunable molecular probes,
imaging agents, and sensors for biological and photonic applications. Initial
targets are biocompatible ruthenium-containing polyesters prepared by
metalloinitiation of lactones with alcohol initiators. Such hydrophobic, glassy
polymers could serve as a protective shell for the luminophore, minimizing self-
quenching and water-mediated non-radiative decay pathways, important for both
biological and photonic applications. A second block can be added to Ru bpy-
polylactic acids via the hydroxyl chain ends for water solubility or to produce
materials that self-assemble. These block copolymers can be designed to form pH
sensitive micelles, vesicles, and hydrogels with built-in fluorescent tags,
useful for monitoring location and degradation in biological contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New polymers containing metal ions are targeted for
synthesis and study as biocompatible and photonic materials. Interdisciplinary
collaborations in this research and participation in programs crossing the
sciences, engineering, medicine, and the humanities will be undertaken to
enhance the scientific infrastructure and aid in the progress of women and
underrepresented minorities in science. &lt;br/&gt;