* 0350435
*  Anger and approach motivation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Eddie Harmon-Jones, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 11/30/2005
* USD 316,999.00

Past research has pointed to the importance of the left and right frontal brain
regions in emotion and motivation. Research has suggested that left frontal
brain activity is associated with positive emotions and approach behavior and
right frontal brain activity is associated with negative emotions and withdrawal
behavior. This research has created an impression that relatively greater left
frontal brain activity is psychologically and physically healthier than
relatively less left frontal brain activity. However, recent research has
indicated that the findings associating greater left frontal brain activity and
positive emotion resulted because the past research confounded approach
motivation with positive emotional valence. Approach motivations and behaviors
are not always associated positive affective valence and positive outcomes.
Anger, greed, lust, and mania are some examples of approach motivations that are
negative in valence and may have deleterious consequences. The PI, E. Harmon-
Jones, has already conducted preliminary research suggesting that increased left
frontal cortical activity is associated with both trait and state anger. In the
current grant application, he proposes three experiments that are designed to
directly test the relationship between anger and approach motivation and also
examine whether manipulation of brain activity will affect anger. Study 1 will
examine how individuals who differ in levels of trait approach motivation
respond to situations designed to evoke a response of anger or fear.
Additionally, approach motivation will be experimentally manipulated by asking
some participants to write about a goal they intend to accomplish or about a
typical day in their life, to examine if the increase in approach motivation
will increase anger responses to the situation designed to evoke anger. Study 2
will manipulate anger by having some participants form facial expressions of
anger. Others will form neutral, sad or fearful expressions. The effects of the
emotion induced on approach motivation will be examined through persistence on
an insolvable puzzle task while brain activity is monitored. Study 3 will
manipulate asymmetrical frontal cortical activity using biofeedback, and assess
whether this manipulation affects anger and fear responses. All studies will
include appropriate comparison conditions (e.g., anger vs. fear) and include
multiple assessments of anger (e.g., behavioral, self-reports, brain measures,
cardiovascular measures). The proposed research will challenge contemporary
views of emotion, which posit not only that greater left frontal activity is
beneficial but also posit that approach motivation is involved only in positive
emotions/affects. In addition, the proposed research will assist in better
understanding anger, an emotion that can have harmful consequences to
individuals (e.g., cardiovascular disease, personal relationships) and societies
(e.g., aggression). Finally, the proposed research will lead to a better
understanding of the emotional and motivational functions of frontal cortical
regions, the role of approach motivation in anger and aggression, and brain
mechanisms involved in anger and aggression. The proposed research will promote
teaching, training, and learning, as undergraduate and graduate students will
participate in all portions of the research process. As in his past research,
the PI will work closely with students from both underrepresented and well-
represented groups. The results of the research are likely to be disseminated
widely, as the PI often delivers addresses at conferences and publishes in
psychology's most widely-read journals.