* 0350817
* Collaborative Research on Institutions and Land-Use Politics
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Mark Lubell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2009
* USD 104,042.00

The research examines institutional change in the context of local land-use
politics. Conceptualizing land-use policy choices in terms of institutional
change allows us to bring insights from institutional theory to bear on the
broader topic of policy change. The main hypothesis is that local government
structures, as crucial institutional mediators of political and economic forces,
will influence policy dynamics in predictable ways. The focus on the structure
of political institutions is a significant departure from property rights and
interest group models that treat political institutions as largely transparent
to the underlying economic or political forces driving land-use change. To
emphasize institutions, the researchers offer a "political market" theory of
institutional change that combines political economy theories of property rights
with work on local government structure. The resulting framework conceptualizes
institutional change as the result of a dynamic contracting process between the
suppliers and demanders of change in a community. Political institutions combine
with the structure of interest organization to determine outcomes. Different
types of political institutions will favor different types of interests, either
enhancing or reducing the ability of interests to influence land-use policy.
&lt;br/&gt;The debate whether form of government makes a difference for local
policies remains unsettled because much of the work has focused only on fiscal
outputs and has emphasized additive rather then interactive effects of
government structure. The investigators' political market approach focuses not
only on how the structure of local institutions directly influences land-use
decisions, but also on how forces and interests identified in property rights
and interest group models are mediated by local institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because land use institutions are central to the system of
property rights at the local level this work has important implications for
land-use governance. An enhanced understanding of the dynamics of land-use
decisions will assist policy makers at all levels of government in the design of
land use polices. By investigating the role executive and legislative
structures, we can better understand the conditions under which local
institutions are responsive to broad public interests and citizen participation.
This also furthers education objectives by involving graduate and undergraduate
students directly in the research process, and thus provides an alternative
learning perspective to the traditional lecture format class. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;