* 0350539
* A Study of Moist Deep Convection: Generation of Multiple Updrafts in Association with Mesoscale Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Charles Doswell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 429,992.00

This research seeks to investigate the interaction of moist deep convection with
mesoscale processes via new methods of initiating convection. The intent of this
work is to investigate more realistic forcing from mesoscale processes on time
scales that are much longer than the convective time scale with the goal of
capturing the interaction between mesoscale forcing and convection.
Specifically, the project team will investigate and observe the effects of
several key environmental factors on the updraft and convective regeneration
cycle of numerically simulated convection. The project team will apply, within a
three-dimensional numerical cloud model, two initiating mechanisms, a constant
near surface heat source and a momentum flux source within a non-dimensional
parameter range study. These methods provide a continuous source of vertical
motion that is consistent with environmental conditions commonly observed with
organized convection. The results will be used to further classify and
understand isolated multicellular
thunderstorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: With the aid of powerful
parallel computers and a sophisticated efficient parallel numerical cloud model,
the project team will enhance the state of knowledge associated with isolated
multicell thunderstorm behavior. The team will apply the model in a novel way,
using simplified momentum and heat flux sources to simulate mesoscale forcing,
to reveal basic convective updraft characteristics such as updraft regeneration
and the interaction with the persistent mesoscale forcing as a function of
environmental factors. Another key innovation is the application of the model
with and without complicating precipitation physics, allowing the project team
to isolate the interaction between persistent mesoscale ascent and the cumulus
cloud updrafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Relatively isolated
multicell storms are an important element in the spectrum of deep, moist
convection and can produce severe weather, including strong winds, large hail
and heavy rainfall. This work will simulate such storms, in an idealized
fashion, using a persistent mesoscale source for ascent, which is hypothesized
to interact with the convection to produce isolated multicellular storms. With
an understanding of the causes for such storm organization and an exploration of
the parameters governing their behavior, the project team can fill a large gap
in the understanding of deep, moist convective storms. The results could later
be applied to improve thunderstorm prediction. The research team provides a
unique mix of theoretical, observational, numerical and computational experience
for use in structuring the graduate student's exposure to convective storm
research. The results of the effort will be translated into the research
community via formal publications and presentations and into the educational
community through a graduate level course taught by the principal investigator.