* 0350713
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Theory and Practice of Reverse Share Tenancy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Christopher Barrett, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2005
* USD 17,662.00

The aim of this project is to collect and analyze field data regarding land
tenancy contracts in rural Madagascar in order to test hypotheses emerging from
new theoretical insights on sharecropping contracts in poor communities. In
Madagascar and other low-income countries, landlords party to sharecropping
agreements are often poorer than their sharecropper tenants, a phenomenon
referred to as "reverse share tenancy" in a small, purely empirical literature
on such phenomena in the developing world. Even though many studies have been
conducted on sharecropping, the few published references there are on reverse
share tenancy are purely of a descriptive nature and do not offer a sound
theoretical framework to explain why such contracts emerge at all. This research
project aims to confront a few theoretical explanations we have recently
developed for reverse share tenancy with field data in order to determine which
posited mechanisms best explain the existence of reverse share tenancy in
Madagascar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant would finance a survey of 400
randomly selected households from five provinces in rural Madagascar that have a
high density of share tenancy. It will use standard cluster sampling techniques,
with oversampling of households suspected of entering sharecropping agreements.
For each household, individual-, household- and plot-specific variables will be
collected along with data on inputs, landlord supervision, cost- and output-
sharing, contract choice and conditions. The field data will then be used to
estimate microeconometric models that would first test the hypotheses derived
from the theoretical models and then discriminate between competing explanations
using a likelihood-based test for non-nested
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Sharecropping is
pervasive throughout the world. A much clearer understanding of reverse share
tenancy would emerge from this research that could then be used to guide
economic policy, especially in countries like Madagascar where sharecropping
remains banned and property rights in land are often insecure. A better
understanding of this sharecropping is needed to inform land policies intended
to increase the welfare of poor rural households. Moreover, by explaining
sharecropping in a way that accommodates reverse tenancy, this work will
contribute more broadly to the longstanding, important literature on agrarian
contracts.&lt;br/&gt;