* 0350070
* Novel Mechanisms Controlling Caspase-9 Processing and Activation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Ameeta Kelekar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 02/29/2008
* USD 386,116.00

Apoptosis, an essential component of normal development in higher organisms, is
a quick and neat form of cell suicide that causes minimal disruption to the
surrounding tissue. Once activated, apoptosis is amplified by the controlled
activation of a number of proteolytic enzymes, known as caspases. Two major
pathways of caspase activation have been described - one involves the release of
polypeptides, including cytochrome c, from mitochondria, and the other involves
cell surface 'death' receptor activation by ligand binding. It has been widely
accepted that the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c into the cytoplasm is
essential for the activation of caspase-9, the 'initiator' caspase in the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Death receptor activated apoptosis, on the
other hand, can follow either an extra-mitochondrial route, when large amounts
of the initiator caspase-8 cleave and directly activate downstream 'effector'
caspases in the cytosol, or a mitochondrial path, when low levels of active
caspase-8 promote the release of mitochondrial cytochrome c by cleaving and
activating a protein from the Bcl-2 family known as Bid. The pro-apoptotic
effects of Bid are effectively neutralized in cells expressing high levels of
survival proteins of the same family, such as the Bcl-xL protein, which can
prevent cytochrome c release. However, some cell types that utilize the
mitochondrial route in their primary response to ligand receptor-activated
apoptosis die a rapid death despite the presence of high levels of the Bcl-xL
protein. The research is directed towards understanding the mechanisms
underlying this novel pathway to cell death. Early studies indicate that
caspase-9 can be processed, by caspase-8, into an active form prior to
cytochrome c release during death receptor-induced apoptosis. Preliminary
observations also suggest that the processing site on caspase-9 is protected
from mistimed or inappropriate cleavage by phosphorylation. The project is
designed to test the hypothesis that the apoptosis initiator protein, caspase-9,
can be processed and activated in a cytochrome c-independent manner by caspase-8
at a cleavage site that is regulated by phosphorylation. A variety of molecular,
cellular and biochemical approaches will be utilized to dissect the two novel
regulatory mechanisms i.e. the mechanism underlying cytochrome c-independent
processing and activation of caspase-9 by active caspase-8, and the mechanism
underlying the modulation of caspase-9 cleavage and activation by casein kinase
2, a ubiquitous cellular protein kinase. The research, in addition to providing
a postdoctoral fellow and graduate student with crucial training, will expose
undergraduate students of diverse backgrounds to state-of-the-art basic science
techniques in an exciting research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;