* 0350359
* Collaborative Research--Investigation of the Phsysiological Function of Alkenones in the Coccolithophore Emiliania Huxleyi
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Gordon Wolfe, California State University-Chico
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2008
* USD 116,326.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0350409 / OCE-0350359

Emiliania huxleyi (Ehux) is a cosmopolitan coccolithophorid species that can
form spectacular blooms, sometimes with profound food-web impacts. Ehux plays a
central role in the ocean's carbon and sulfur biogeochemistry, and ratios of its
long-chain, unsaturated methyl ketone (alkenone) isomers preserved in marine
sediments are now used widely as paleotemperature proxies (UK'37). However, the
mechanism of these blooms is still poorly understood, as is the consequence of
such events on the sedimentary record and the role of these unusual lipids in
Ehux ecology. The preliminary batch culture work with Ehux shows major cellular
buildup of alkenones and related lipids (collectively termed 'PULCA') under
well-illuminated, nutrient-depleted stationary growth conditions in all strains
examined so far. And, in strain CCMP1742 whose UK'37 versus growth temperature
response is identical with the global UK'37 observed in cells exposed to
prolonged, continuous darkness. At 15'C, the only growth temperature yet studied
extensively, such non-thermal physiological impacts on UK'37 correspond to a
possibly quite significant 3'C uncertainty in paleotemperature estimates.

In this study, researchers from Oregon State University and California State
University - Chico will investigate the specific physiological role that these
quantitatively dominant neutral lipids play in Ehux, as well as to provide
additional understanding of non-thermal impacts on UK'37. Specifically, CCMP1742
will be examined at the extremes of its growth temperature range to test whether
or not the physiological stress imposed by the nutrient depletion and darkness
has a quantitative impact on the UK'37 set by Ehux that is growth temperature
dependent. In addition, the team of scientists will conduct batch culture
experiments with CCMP1742 to examine whether or not the exposure of healthy,
exponentially-growing Ehux cells to prolonged, continuous darkness under
nitrate-replete conditions will result in biosynthesis of amino acids from
nitrogen obtained externally by nitrate uptake and carbon obtained from stored
PULCA reserves. Samples from these experiments will be examined on a
comprehensive biochemical basis for PULCA, organic carbon and TN, as well as
total hydrolysable amino acids and carbohydrates and a detailed amino acid
composition. As an integral part of this work, innovative batch culture
experiments will be conducted using concerted 13C and 15N tracers to define
unequivocally the cellular fate of PULCA carbon and nitrate-N. Identically
executed comparative experiments will be conducted with other Ehux strains to
determine the extent that CCMP1742 is a physiologically unique PULCA-producing
isolate from today's ocean. Finally, the team of scientists will investigate the
cellular location(s) of PULCA by several types of microscopy.