* 0350702
* Collaborative Research: Westerly Wind Bursts: El Nino Southern Oscillation's (ENSO) Driver or Slave?
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2007
* USD 187,765.00

Westerly wind burst (WWB) events are known to play an important role in El Nino
Southern Oscillation's (ENSO) dynamics. The events are usually viewed as
stochastic forcing that is independent of and external to the large scale ENSO
dynamics. There are indications, however, that the occurrence of these events,
and their characteristics, are influenced by the large scale SST structure, and
hence by ENSO. This study will explore the dynamical consequences of the
possibility that the timing and other characteristics of WWB events are
partially regulated and controlled by the large scale SST distribution. That is,
the study will examine the extreme possibility that these events occur only when
the large scale SST structure is at a certain configuration. For example, when
the warm pool is extended eastward beyond the dateline. In this scenario the WWB
events will be treated as an inherent part of the deterministic ENSO dynamics
rather than as external stochastic forcing.

The study will first analyze observations in order to try and establish the
characteristics of such a possible regulation of the timing or characteristics
of WWB events by the large scale SST field. Next, the implications of such
regulated switching of WWB events by the large scale ENSO dynamics will be
studied using a hierarchy of models. The model hierarchy will include a hybrid
coupled model (ocean general circulation model coupled to a statistical
atmosphere), an intermediate coupled model, and a conceptual delayed oscillator
model.

Broader impacts of the research include possible improvement of ENSO's
prediction skill, should the proposed research find a way to include a
representation of WWB regulation by the large scale SST field in current ENSO
prediction models. A graduate student (under Mark Cane) and a post-doc (under
Eli Tziperman) will be educated, mentored and trained under this grant.