* 0350201
* SLC Catalyst: South Florida Research Consortium on the Development of Attention, Perception, Learning, and Memory
* SBE,SBE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Lorraine Bahrick, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2008
* USD 210,343.00

The South Florida Research Consortium on the Development of Attention,
Perception, Learning, and Memory will apply a developmental framework to foster
the integration of biological, psychological, and social levels of analysis to
the understanding of selective attention, perceptual processing, learning and
memory during infancy and early childhood. The consortium will integrate
research across species (utilizing both animal and human subjects), across
developmental stages (from prenatal through early childhood), and across levels
(neural, psychobiological, psychological, and social). A primary theme of the
project is a focus on making research, theory, and application more ecologically
relevant to multimodal natural learning contexts. Additional themes include:
addressing the nature and basis of developmental change and growth from infancy
to early childhood and investigating the mechanisms of early learning and
generalization.

At the catalyst stage, this project will initiate and support workshops,
planning meetings, and pilot research collaborations that can address a range of
content areas including: the development of object and event perception,
biological bases of early learning and memory, the development of language and
communicative functioning, social and emotional development, and early cognitive
development. This collaborative effort will contribute to theory construction
and the development of an integrated knowledge base in the science of learning
that can be easily translated to applications in education. Core and affiliated
faculty concentrated at three universities in South Florida that will provide a
rich and diverse set of resources and a critical intellectual mass for
collaborative interdisciplinary research and for creating an infrastructure
necessary for a future SLC proposal.

Broader impacts that will result from this proposed activity include applying
newly discovered fundamental principles of learning and development from
interdisciplinary efforts to education. The consortium will promote unique
opportunities for training of investigators and students through the cross-
fertilization of traditionally separate domains of knowledge and expertise,
thereby fostering a synergistic effect on the growth of a science of learning.
Further, the project's focus on the theme of ecological validity will facilitate
easy translation between theory and application of findings to naturalistic
learning contexts such as the social environment or the classroom setting.