* 0350486
* RUI: Student Decisions and Outcomes in Higher Education
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Ralph Stinebrickner, Berea College
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 216,630.00

Abstract

PROPOSAL NO: 0350486 INSTITUTION: Berea College NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS P: Ralph
Stinebrickner TITLE: RUI: Student Decisions and Outcomes in Higer Education

There exists considerable interest in issues related to post-secondary
education. This interest arises, in part, because there is a large disparity
between the earnings of college graduates and the earnings of non-graduates. At
the same time, it is well-known that a large amount of earnings variation exists
even among individuals with the same level of educational attainment. The
reality that variation in earnings between workers is both indicative of
differences in productivity and central to the issue of income inequality
highlights the importance of understanding how students make important decisions
after entering college and how these decisions influence future labor market
outcomes. While the importance of understanding issues related to higher
education has been recognized, in practice many important questions and issues
remain unresolved. The process by which students make decisions while in college
is complex. Decisions about whether to leave school, how to allocate available
time during school, and what college major to pursue are likely to be made
jointly and to depend on the interaction of a large number of factors including
a person's academic background and beliefs at the time of college entrance as
well as what he learns about his/her ability and interests after arriving at
school. As such, the data demands necessary to thoroughly investigate the
decision-making process of college students are extremely high. The absence of
currently available data that are detailed enough to permit the study of many
fundamental issues has seriously constrained researchers who are attempting to
provide a better understanding of the higher education process. This project
involves the collection of a longitudinal survey of college students that is
unequaled in its depth and detail and uses state-of-the-art analysis methods to
investigate the decision-making processes of college students and the manner in
which college decisions translate into future outcomes. The survey component of
the project builds on recent advances in survey methodology. At the culmination
of the project period, two cohorts of college students will have been surveyed
approximately ten times each year from the date of college matriculation through
their transitions to (at least) their first job or graduate-school position. The
innovative survey collection efforts allow a strong interconnect between
economic theory and the choice of econometric methods. The analysis component of
the project will make methodological contributions of direct importance for
researchers interested in estimating models that help policymakers understand
human behavior. A wide range of new information will be of direct interest to
policymakers who are currently faced with the task of designing effective
policies with an incomplete understanding of many fundamental issues in higher
education.