* 0350207
* Planning Visit: Collaboration in Precision Manufacturing Research in China
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Albert Shih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 04/30/2005
* USD 4,600.00

OISE-0350207&lt;br/&gt;Shih&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
a planning trip by Professor Albert Shih of the University of Michigan to
develop international collaboration in precision manufacturing processes with
two Asian partners. He will visit with Professor Zhongqin Lin and others at the
School of Mechanical Engineering of Shanghai Jiao Tong University in Shanghai,
China, and also Professor Sheng-Jye Jim Hwang of the Mechanical Engineering
Department of National Cheng Kung University in Tainan, Taiwan. These
investigators intend to develop cooperative research and educational activities
focused on the processes of grinding and slicing semiconductor wafers, micro
electrical discharge machining (EDM) and nano-scale spark erosion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision
manufacturing, including new techniques involving nanotechnology, has
experienced rapid growth with the demand for increasingly complex and
miniaturized electronics in industries and products ranging from aerospace to
medical implants to audio-visual equipment. Imaginative fundamental research and
constantly updating education and training are necessary to continue improving
the accuracy and cost-effectiveness of manufacturing techniques. The explosive
growth of electronic manufacturing in East Asia has made this region a highly
attractive and worthwhile source of partners for leading-edge research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number
of innovative products to improve human welfare that can already be attributed
to increasingly precise manufacturing processes attest to the value of this area
of research to the general public. The amazing results of semiconductor
miniaturization can be seen in communication devices, medical implants,
laparoscopic surgery, home electronics, and many other areas of everyday life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ine to aud ranging from minitu techniques, have made this
collaboration and planning trip essential. &lt;br/&gt;Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, the National Cheng Kong University,&lt;br/&gt; Hosts of the visits
are Their endorsement letters are included in this proposal. This planning visit
is expected to take 15 days: 10 days in China, 3 days in Taiwan, and 2 traveling
days. The estimated budget is $4,400. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;