* 0350572
* SGER: Hydrogen Sensor with High Selectivity and Sensitivity at Room Temperature
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 87,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER: Hydrogen Sensor
with High Selectivity at Room Temperature&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0350572&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sudipta
Seal&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Central
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to develop a novel thin-film inorganic membrane to enhance the selectivity of
a room temperature hydrogen sensor. Tin oxide-based gas sensors have been
synthesized in various forms but their sensitivity at room temperature has been
poor. In this project a nanocrystalline porous thin film of proton-conducting
ceramic membranes will be fabricated on the tin oxide sensor. Candidate
materials include oxides of barium, cerium, and strontium. This membrane is
expected to increase the sensitivity of the device by increasing the selectivity
for hydrogen. Sol-gel and carbothermal synthesis techniques will be used for
fabricating nanocrystalline, dense, porous, doped tin oxide sensors in thin film
and wire form. Gold and platinum catalysts will be introduced in the thin film
by sputtering. Nanowires will provide a higher surface area than particulates. A
prototype sensor will be exposed to ultraviolet radiation to enhance the amount
of surface adsorbed oxygen ions and to enhance the catalytic decomposition of
the hydrogen gas over the sensor surface. In terms of the broader impacts, this
work could lead to a more sensitive, robust sensor for the detection of
hydrogen, which is currently being considered as a source of energy in several
applications. Such a device would be used to detect hydrogen leaks and avoid
potential fires and explosions.&lt;br/&gt;