* 0350672
* "What Controls the Surface Ocean Iron Distribution? A Modeling Study".
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2008
* USD 452,672.00

ABSTRACT OCE- 0350672

There is an increasing awareness of the key role of iron in ocean
biogeochemical cycles, limiting primary production and potentially limiting
export and nitrogen fixation. Due to increasing knowledge of distribution and
speciation of oceanic iron, and of the processes that control it, it is timely
to develop and examine numerical models of the ocean iron cycle. Numerical
models provide one means by which to encapsulate the communities understanding
of biogeochemical cycles and examine if this understanding is consistent with
the available data (i.e. can the model reproduce the key features of the data).
Such models may also be used to explore the sensitivities of the system to
changes in forcing, parameterizations or parameter values.

In this study, researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will
continue the preliminary model studies by further developing, constraining, and
exploring numerical models of the ocean iron cycle with the framework of a
three-dimensional ocean GCM. The team of scientists will perform sensitivity
tests to determine which are the most significant processes and how they respond
to changing physical and biogeochemical forcing. Specifically, five chemical,
physical and biological questions will be addressed: what are the optimal
conditional stability constants and scavenging rates which bring the
complexation based iron model into consistency with observed data; can the
effects of surface photochemistry, the formation of colloids, and precipitation
of iron be parameterized; do these processes have a significant role in setting
the distribution and availability of iron; what is the impact of regionally
varying availability (or solubility) of iron of aeolian origin; how sensitive is
the surface distribution of iron and phosphorus to the veracity of the modeled
ocean circulation; is the distribution of iron sensitive to details of the
interactions of the ecosystem and multiple potentially limiting nutrients. As
the culmination of this study a "best-shot" circulation and iron biogeochemistry
model will be used to examine the role of time-varying physical and
biogeochemical forcing and boundary conditions in modulating the ocean iron
cycle. Finally, the team of scientists will examine the consequences for ocean
biogeochemistry and air-sea gas fluxes.

