* 0350630
* GOALI:  The Effects of Heterogeneities on Surface Forces and Colloidal Stability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* John Walz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 09/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0350630&lt;br/&gt;J. Walz, Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI proposal will be a
collaborative effort between researchers at Yale &lt;br/&gt;University and
NexPress Solutions LLC aimed at developing improved models for predicting the
effect of heterogeneities on both the long-range and adhesive forces between
particles and surfaces. NexPress is a joint venture between Kodak and
Heidelberger Druckmaschinen AG that develops and produces digital printing
equipment. Understanding the effects of heterogeneities, in the form of either
surface roughness or surface charge heterogeneity, is important in any process
concerned with the deposition or adhesion of particles, or the stability of a
particle dispersion. It is especially critical in the electrophotographic
process, where toner particles, which are both rough and nonuniformly charged,
must be transferred via an applied electric field from a conductive substrate,
to which they are adhered, to the receiving surface. While various researchers
have addressed the specific problems of either surface roughness or charge
nonuniformity, this work will be the first that includes both effects in a
rigorous manner. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Project
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consist of both modeling and
experimental components. First, a model will be developed for calculating the
electrostatic and van der Waals forces between a planar substrate and a particle
of arbitrary roughness and charge distribution. This work will build upon prior
work by one of the PI's in which a boundary element model was developed for
calculating the electrostatic interaction between two charged particles of
arbitrary morphology. In addition, &lt;br/&gt;the electric field strength needed
to detach an adhered particle, which is a critical parameter in the
electrophotographic process, will be calculated. The models will be valid in
both air and aqueous environments. The experimental work, which will be designed
to validate the model predictions, will consist of direct measurements of both
the adhesion force and the force-vs-distance profile using techniques such as
atomic force microscopy (single particle measurements) and centrifugal
detachment (detachment of many particles). The degree of roughness on the
particles will be varied using controlled deposition of nanoparticles. The
project will also address the effects of heterogeneities on the stability of a
particle dispersion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be four primary outcomes
of this work: (1) a rigorous boundary element model capable of predicting the
electrostatic and van der Waals forces between a substrate and particle having
both surface roughness and charge heterogeneity will be developed, (2) an
improved, approximate model for calculating the adhesion force between a rough,
elastic particle and planar substrate will be developed, (3) a simple method for
producing particles with controlled degrees of roughness will be tested, and (4)
a thorough analysis of the effect of both surface roughness and charge
heterogeneity on the stability of a colloidal dispersion will be performed.
These outcomes will significantly advance our ability to predict and control the
deposition and adhesion of particles, as well as the stability of a colloidal
dispersion. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Project
&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote a collaborative relationship between Yale
and NexPress. It will provide direct support for a post-doctoral research and
Ph.D. graduate student. In addition, the graduate student will spend up to one
year at NexPress laboratories in Rochester, NY, gaining experience with an
industrial research environment. Finally, the project will contribute new
material to a series of courses in colloids and complex fluids that are
currently offered in Yale's chemical engineering department, which will enhance
our graduate program in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;