* 0350632
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Study of Hydrogen Absorption in a Metal-Hydride Reactor
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2008
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2008
* USD 20,000.00

0350632&lt;br/&gt;Veziroglu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research project between Dr. T. N. Veziroglu, Director of
the Clean Energy Research Institute, Miami University, Miami, Florida and Dr.
Yuksel Kaplan, Mechanical Engineering Department, Nigde University in Nigde,
Turkey. The PIs plan a combined experimental and theoretical study. In the
experimental program, a reactor will be designed and manufactured and the
parameters such as materials, reactor geometry and processing conditions
affecting the hydrogen storage will be investigated over a wide range of
parameter space. Data obtained from the experiments will be used to validate and
further improve the mathematical model and design the optimum hydrogen reactors.
In the theoretical part of project, a mathematical model which considers complex
heat and mass transfer and fluid flow during the hydriding process will be
developed. The mathematical model will serve understanding the basic mechanism
of hydriding process. The coupled differential equations will be solved with a
numerical method based on integrations of governing equation over finite control
volumes. The driving force for fluid flow will be considered to be pressure
difference due to temperature gradients in the system. The experimental part of
the project will be performed at Nigde University and theoretical study will be
performed at Nigde University and University of Miami. The ultimate goal of this
project is to improve the knowledge and substructure on the methods of hydrogen
storage methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Hydrogen is a unique synthetic fuel
with unusual properties and characteristics, which are not shared, by other
fuels. It is the lightest and cleanest fuel, and environmentally most
compatible. It has very favorable combustion characteristics. It can be
converted to other forms of energy, such as thermal, mechanical and electrical,
with higher efficiencies than other fuels. The research would contribute to the
knowledge we have that is necessary to move this potential alternative fuel
towards wide economical utilization with enormous environmental and societal
benefits. The project will involve one U.S. undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;