* 0350400
* Dismantling the Patriarchal State:  Women's Rights Activism, Nineteenth-Century Married Women's Property Acts, and Twentieth-Century Jury Rights Laws
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Holly McCammon, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2006
* USD 149,296.00

Women's activism played a role in bringing about expansions in two key forms of
women's legal rights in the United States: the married women's property acts of
the 19th century and laws granting women the right to sit on juries in roughly
the first half of the 20th century. Much existing research argues that movement
characteristics or opportunities in the larger environment lead to favorable
political and legal outcomes for movement actors. The current project, however,
posits that a combination of movement and contextual factors resulted in a
successful outcome for movement activists. Specifically, I investigate how
political and gendered opportunities mediated the impact of women's activism on
expansions in women's legal rights. I argue that the gendered political context
influenced which movement strategies were likely to succeed in winning legal
reforms for women. I explore this argument by comparing two very different
gendered political contexts: in the 19th century when women possessed little
formal political power and in the 20th century when they had gained a
substantial political voice. The hypotheses examined in this research posit that
these two different gendered political contexts offered different opportunities
for activism and these different opportunities markedly influenced which
movement strategies resulted in expanded legal rights. The research will be
based on archival evidence from women's property and jury rights campaigns and
their contexts in 9 U.S. states. Qualitative historical investigation combined
with Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) will be utilized to discern the
factors that resulted in these legal rights reforms. The research will have
several broader impacts: it will expand our knowledge of women's public roles,
it will offer a number of scholarly training opportunities for graduate
students, and it will provide a unique data set concerning the circumstances
leading to expansions in women's property rights and jury rights.