* 0350345
* SLC Catalyst: Florida Alliance for the Study of Expertise
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Eduardo Salas, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Maria Kozhevnikov
* 03/31/2007
* USD 219,980.00

The "Florida Alliance for the Study of Expertise" (FASE) is designed to advance
a science of Expertise Studies throughout the United States and throughout the
world. FASE leverages the capabilities of world leaders in the study of
expertise who are affiliated with Florida Universities with the overarching goal
of understanding the nature and development of expertise. This funding will
support the creation of a technical and collaborative infrastructure that will
unite a multi-university and multi-disciplinary research partnership for the
purposes of understanding and encouraging the scientific study of expertise. To
understand learning at a fundamental level one must examine learning phenomena
up to the level of expert achievement and theories of learning must take such
phenomena into account. To address this need, FASE will integrate differing
scientific methodologies to enhance the necessary complementarity of laboratory
and field research. FASE will support collaboration across universities and
across methodologies with the goal of fostering a synergistic combination of
methods where the benefits of scientific approaches can be leveraged to improve
hypothesis generation and testing along with theory development in a broader
context. FASE focuses on the entire human system and how experience alters this
system to produce meaningful learning that leads to the highest levels of
achievement. FASE will facilitate the understanding of how it is that expert
knowledge is acquired in order to determine both how it can be preserved and how
others may be taught to engage in the requisite activities to similarly acquire
such knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FASE contributes to the goals of
developing a science of learning by connecting learning research to scientific
challenges and developing research communities that can capitalize on new
opportunities. Further, the cross-section of scientific experience within this
alliance allows FASE to address fundamental questions in learning by focusing on
the physical, mental, and organizational capabilities associated with
exceptional performance. As such, FASE is designed to benefit not only K-12
educational settings, but also workforce development for adult learning in
government and industry. FASE is designed to support, not only basic science on
how the human system achieves levels of exceptional performance, but also a
unique cooperation between science and practice in order to ensure the rapid
transition of new knowledge to education, industry, and to government. Last,
FASE broadens the participation of underrepresented groups first, by
establishing an association with Florida International University, an official
minority-serving university so as to develop the capacity to support research
and education for minority populations in science. Second, FASE develops the
general educational infrastructure to support Webcasts and other distributable
media for courses that can be offered for broad dissemination. In short, FASE
will significantly contribute to national needs by elucidating how it is that
experts achieve exceptional levels of performance while at the same time
pursuing this on a pedagogical level. &lt;br/&gt;