* 0350131
* Dissertation Research: Cultural Models, Landscapes, and Large Dams: A Cognitive and Historical Approach to Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,288.00

Massive landscape changes affect how people relate to the environment. This
dissertation research investigates the cultural perceptions of the large-scale
development of the Santee Cooper hydroelectric system in South Carolina. This
construction of dams and lakes in the years 1938-1942 greatly altered the local
landscape and displaced many long-time residents. During this time, the
promoters of the dams and the local people employed particular cognitive models
with regard to the development. This project analyzes what these cognitive
models were and how they were related. By combining a cultural models approach
with environmental history, the study describes and analyzes how people - the
promoters on one hand, and ordinary local "folks" on the other - thought the
landscape, both cultural and physical, was affected by the building of the large
dams. The research will show how modernization, wrought by political and
economic goals, is reflected in humans' cognitive and cultural associations with
the local landscape as shaped by their cultural ideals and personal experience.
The research contributes to cognitive anthropology by extending its domain to
historical developments and by comparing cultural models elicited from primary
historical documents with contemporary ethnographic data. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the research include the interest society has in new knowledge about
the impact of large-scale environmental projects, which will be useful to
planners and administrators as well as to the public. In addition the project
advances the education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;