* 0351025
* Collaborative Research: Coherence Based Decision Making: A Theoretical Framework and Practical Applications
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Stephen Read, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2007
* USD 207,732.00

The objective of this proposal is to study the cognitive processes that enable
effective decision making in a category of tasks that require discrete choices
in the face of variables that are numerous, contradictory, ambiguous and
incommensurate. Decisions of this kind are encountered in everyday life when we
choose a job, purchase a house, or condemn a person to prison. The proposed
theoretical framework, termed "coherence-based decision making," posits that
throughout the decision making process, the mental representation of the task
undergoes gradual change, ultimately shifting towards a state of coherence with
either one of the decision alternatives. At the culmination of the process, the
decision maker's mental model is skewed towards a state of coherence, with one
alternative dominating its rival; the decision follows easily and confidently
from this perception of the task. &lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the Investigators
plan to buttress and extend their previous work on this theory. The fourteen
studies included in this proposal are intended to examine theoretical questions
and to provide prescriptions with respect to improving people's ability to
respond appropriately to incoming information; better understanding failures to
ignore information; reducing the effects of group polarization; improving the
process of group deliberation; reducing self-serving biases; taking into
consideration the influence of need states on biased judgments; and more. The
project is intended also to provide specific prescriptions for decision making
in a number of legal contexts, including suggesting ways to better structure
legal tasks; better handle exposure to impermissible evidence; reduce jury
polarization and improve jury deliberation; provide means for gauging and
reducing pre-trial optimistic overconfidence; and provide critical insight into
policy questions regarding the regulation of gambling.