* 0351451
* Credit without Commitment: The Implications of the Bankruptcy Law and the Determination of Public Debt
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 226,053.00

This project is about credit from the point of view of limited commitment. The
main themes that inform the work are that while there are limited means to
induce debtors to act as they promised, the amount of credit issued is quite
large, and the instances of default are pervasive. These themes unite the two
parts of this project. The first part deals with private credit and the explicit
consideration of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code that grants protection from creditors
essentially on demand. The proposal includes the development of theory to
analyze an environment where the legal system is that of the U.S., and where all
agents (households, firms) act rationally. Two features are noteworthy:
unobservable consumer heterogeneity ("good" and "bad" borrowers) and contracts
designed to limit the harm from taking on bad loans; and those who default here
are mainly consumers with bad income shocks, in contrast with existing limited-
commitment theory. This theory is applied to analyze policy changes
quantitatively which in turn requires that the model is capable of accounting
simultaneously for the observed amounts of credit and of default. The other part
of the project deals with public debt, analyzing an environment where
governments cannot commit to future policies. The work yields predictions over
policy choices given a constitutional framework. The answers from both projects
are very important from the point of view of the design of economic policy. In
the first part alternative designs of the Bankruptcy Code are analyzed,
including some reforms that have been recently discussed in the U.S. Congress,
while the second part will help understand the interactions between consecutive
governments and hence the implications of Constitutional limits on budget
deficits and public debt.

In the U.S. the Bankruptcy Code guarantees the right of citizens (recognized in
Article I, section 8, of the Constitution) to file for protection against
creditors. This right is mostly ignored in Economics, yet it is exercised very
frequently as more than one million people file for bankruptcy in the U.S. each
year. The proposed work studies, theoretically and quantitatively, an
environment with an unsecured consumer credit industry with the following
features: Credit-suppliers take deposits at a given interest rate and offer
loans to households via a menu of credit levels and associated interest rates.
The loan industry is competitive, with free entry, and borrowers have a default
option that resembles, in process and consequence, a bankruptcy filing under
Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Of special importance is the analysis of
the credit rating that households have and that is updated when households take
savings and default actions. The credit score or credit rating of households is
an increasingly important feature as it is used for a variety of reasons such as
assessing insurance risks.



The study of debt management has been centered around notions of optimality
which assume the commitment of governments to future policies. In the absence of
such commitment, fiscal policy is not well understood since optimal policy is
not time-consistent. In particular, a canonical model shows that under
commitment, the government always increases its debt in the first period,
suggesting ever-increasing debt levels when there is no commitment. However, the
present project is uncovering a general mechanism underlying debt management
without commitment which implies that although government debt will tend to
increase initially, there must be a limit to debt expansion. The reason is a
non-convexity that arises endogenously and naturally in these contexts.

The Broader Impacts Understanding credit within the framework of the U.S. legal
system is a crucial ingredient for various questions such as how credit crunches
operate in recessions and how differential access to credit shape people's life-
long opportunities. Moreover, Congress is considering the revision of the
Bankruptcy Code. The implications of the alternatives to the current Code can be
analyzed with this model, including regulations of how the system of credit
scores of people operate. The analysis of public debt may shape the discussions
over such issues as balanced-budget amendments.