* 0351048
* Collaborative Research on Competition, Dynamism and Endogenity in Agenda Setting: An Analysis of Public Attention to Disease
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Daniel Carpenter, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2009
* USD 137,312.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal offers a radically different approach to
studying how and why attention is allocated to problems, an approach that
overcomes the limitations of many studies of agenda setting and social problem
construction. It both builds and marks an advance on decades of important study
devoted to the question of why some social problems draw a great deal of
attention from government officials, the public, and the media while other
problems receive little notice (Baumgartner and Jones 1993; Best 1990; Blumer
1971; Cobb and Ross 1997; Gusfield 1981; Hilgartner and Bosk 1988; Kingdon 1995;
Schattschneider 1975; Schneider and Ingram 1993; Spector and Kitsuse 1973;
Walker 1977). One body of work emphasizes the characteristics of problems
themselves as important determinants of attention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has helped to underscore how the groups in society who are burdened by
problems and the organized advocates who take an interest in problems affect the
attention those problems receive; problems are constructed through a ihsocial
process.le Other work on agenda-setting, however, focuses on aspects of the
attention allocation process that help determine which problems receive
attention. This research has demonstrated how temporal dynamics as well as the
interplay between various sub-agendas (e.g., Congress, the media) affect which
problems make their way into the public arena. Despite the evidence that aspects
of both process and problem are integral to the phenomenon of attention
allocation, researchers have tended to focus solely on one of these dimensions.
Thus, empirical generalizations tend to emerge from incomplete or misspecified
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project proceeds theoretically from
the idea that the phenomenon of allocating attention to problems is a complex
function both of problem characteristics (such as problem burden, the size and
nature of organized communities associated with a problem, and a problem's
cultural valence), and of process-oriented dynamics (such as the relationships
that exist among the agendas of different institutions; the temporal dynamics of
agenda setting, and the relationships between different problems jockeying for
agenda space). Empirically, the project proposes to compare the attention given
to multiple problems over time in different arenas in order to discriminate
between the process-oriented and problem-oriented determinants of the attention
allocation process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is accomplished by studying
attention to 37 different diseases by the media, by government, and by the
scientific community across 25 years. Disease offers a powerful lens to view the
problem-specific and process-related dynamics of the attention generating
process because diseases are both medical facts and social constructions, and
because diseases have clearly defined outcomes, like hospitalization or death,
so that their severity can be gauged with a common
metric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study of the problem- and process-oriented
determinants of agenda setting offers both scholarly and practical rewards. The
research design promises to advance the theoretical and empirical understanding
of both social problem construction and agenda setting. Moreover, because of the
specific focus on disease, the findings will address major policy issues: how
the government responds to public health priorities, as reflected in the media
and via organized interest groups; how disparities in disease burden by
race/ethnicity, sex and age shape priorities; how these priorities inform the
complex decisions made by pharmaceutical companies, both in their research and
development of new drugs and in their marketing of existing ones; and how
government budgetary decisions might reflect (if not magnify) these priorities.
More broadly, the proposed project speaks to how societal resources are
selectively allocated across a field of seemingly equally attention-worthy
social problems.&lt;br/&gt;