* 0351860
* Collaborative Research: Tracking Larval Invertebrate Dispersal Trajectories Using Calcified Structures
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Danielle Zacherl, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 232,778.00

Zacherl - 0351860: Collaborative research: Tracking larval invertebrate
dispersal trajectories using calcified structures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many
marine species produce pelagic larvae that can be advected away from their natal
source by oceanic currents. Predicting their destination has been one of the
foremost challenges for marine biologists. The potential interactions among
larval swimming behaviors, complex ocean circulation dynamics, and variability
in pelagic duration make it difficult to predict the sources of larvae settling
into adult habitat. Yet, identification of the natal source of incoming recruits
has tremendous consequences for understanding population dynamics as well as for
the design of effective marine reserve networks. Most attempts to artificially
tag and recapture microscopic larvae to identify potential source populations
have suffered from poor recapture rates. However, fish biologists have
successfully exploited otoliths as environmentally induced natural tags to
examine exchange among fish populations in some systems. Despite pressing needs
to also understand the dispersal trajectories of invertebrate larvae, ecologists
have paid less attention to analogous environmentally induced tags in larval
invertebrate hard parts. Invertebrate ecologists only recently demonstrated the
potential to use the elemental composition of molluscan statoliths and
protoconchs as tags of natal origin. However, to date, no study has effectively
used this tool to identify the natal source of any marine invertebrate recruit.
&lt;br/&gt; This project will use environmentally induced tags in the statoliths
of recently recruited Kelletia kelletii whelks to examine exchange of larvae
among distinct regions of this species range. The natal portions of statoliths
and protoconchs will be isolated and analyzed for their chemical composition
using laser ablation inductively coupled mass spectrometry. Canonical
discriminant analysis and maximum likelihood measures will be parameterized with
larval samples collected at potential source locations and can be used to assign
the recruit samples to likely source locations. The likely accuracy of the natal
assignments can be confirmed with the appropriate validation work that addresses
the extent of spatial and temporal variations in ocean chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual merit: This project will make major contributions to the fields of
marine ecology and conservation while simultaneously promoting the participation
of underrepresented groups in science. Contributions include the advancement of
a new tool to track larval dispersal trajectories of marine invertebrate larvae,
encouraging participation by women and minorities in science (at the
undergraduate, graduate and faculty levels), and fostering collaboration between
a junior faculty member at a masters granting institution (with 63% minority
student body) with well-established professors at a PhD granting institution.
Overall this project will provide valuable research experience to
undergraduates, foster minority participation in science, provide valuable
training for future teachers, and make a significant advancement in the field of
marine ecology. &lt;br/&gt;[edited 21 Jan 04, J. Pawlik]&lt;br/&gt;