* 0351670
* International Dimensions of Civil War
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Kristian Gleditsch, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/29/2008
* USD 126,152.00

Although conflict researchers have tended to regard interstate and civil wars as
separate phenomena, many internal conflicts display clear international
dimensions. The study of civil war has traditionally considered these conflicts
domestic phenomena to be explained by the attributes of the country in which the
conflict is taking place. However, if civil wars display international
dimensions, then attributes of the individual nation state alone may not be
sufficient to account for why civil wars break out and how conflicts evolve.
Thus, studying civil war without consideration of transnational dimensions may
overlook key factors driving behavior. This research project goes beyond what
the investigators believe is an overstated distinction between civil and
interstate wars, and treats both types of conflict as similar phenomena, where
the same causal mechanisms drive behavior, and decisions regarding the use of
force are directly influenced by both international and domestic factors. The
project reorients the study of civil war away from an emphasis on the
characteristics of the nation state and national aggregate measures toward
measures at the level of individual actors and their interactions. They treat
third parties as an important and distinct strategic actor in the outbreak,
duration, and termination of civil wars, and theorize about the ways in which
these actors may influence decisions at each stage of the conflict. They expand
existing data on civil war with additional information on the attributes of non-
state actors, linkages between various types of actors, and linkages to other
conflicts or contentious relations. The new information about non-state actors
and linkages allows the researchers to empirically test many hypotheses about
transnational dimensions of civil war that cannot be assessed directly with
existing data sources, such as whether linkages to a mobilized group or groups
wielding political power in another state increase the risk of conflict and
escalation. With regards to&lt;br/&gt;the intellectual merits of the proposed
activity, the research project advances our understanding of the transnational
dimensions of civil wars, and provides a better basis for understanding the
causes of civil wars as well as what strategies might be conducive to curtailing
civil violence and its effects. &lt;br/&gt;With regards to the broader impact
resulting from the proposed activity, the research project promises to impact
the larger community in five important ways. First, the collected data will
prove useful to many other researchers studying civil wars. Second, the project
to contributes to the development of new methodologies for conflict analysis, in
particular spatial statistical approaches and event data
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;that also may prove useful tools for political science
researchers outside the field of conflict research. Third, the researchers
disseminate the results of the project through publication of articles in peer
reviewed journals as well as at least one academic book. Fourth, this project is
an important part of the cooperation between the University of California, San
Diego (UCSD) and the new Centre for the Study of Civil War (CSCW) at the
International Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO), Norway. The CSCW has been
designated a "Centre of Excellence" with a five-year renewable grant from the
Research Council of Norway. The project provides an important contribution to
the center's research output Finally, the project has important policy
implications as a better understanding of the full range of causes driving civil
conflict can help policymakers design more effective policies for the settlement
and prevention of civil wars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;