* 0351001
* Collaborative Research: Inequality and the Distributional Effects of Macroeconomic Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Fatih Guvenen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 91,382.00

The goal of this project is study the distributional effects of macroeconomic
policy using quantitative general equilibrium models of economic inequality. How
does macroeconomic stabilization policy affect the welfare of different groups
in the economy, such as the rich and the poor, or the employed and the
unemployed? To what extent does stabilization policy provide a substitute for
social insurance programs such as unemployment insurance? Does a reduction in
the tax on dividends benefit those who do not hold stocks as well as those who
do?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common element in each of these policy questions is
the equilibrium interaction between inequality, macroeconomic policy, and
aggregate (or business cycle) risk. This project thus departs sharply from most
existing analyses of the welfare effects of macroeconomic policy. These analyses
typically either rely on the fiction of a representative, or average, consumer-
in which case they are silent on the differential impact of policy on different
groups of consumers-or they do not study macroeconomic fluctuations-in which
case they are silent on the interaction between inequality, macroeconomic
policy, and the business cycle. Although several existing frameworks have shown
considerable success in accounting for the degree of economic inequality
observed in the United States, the use of these models to explore and evaluate
the distributional effects of macroeconomic policy is still in its infancy,
particularly for policy questions concerning the interaction between inequality
and the business cycle. This project aims to make both substantive and
methodological contributions to the analysis of such
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to making
substantive contributions concerning the distributional effects of macroeconomic
policy and the origins of inequality, this project will make a methodological
contribution by continuing the development of fast and accurate computational
tools to study the equilibrium implications of economic models which feature
both realistic business cycles and substantial inequality across consumers.
Furthermore, the project also aims to extend indirect inference techniques to
efficiently estimate large-scale general equilibrium models. These models
should&lt;br/&gt;have wider applicability in other fields of economics as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;