* 0351383
* Mechanisms of Decadal Variability in the North Atlantic: The Thermohaline Circulation, Great Salinity Anomalies, and Gulf Stream Path
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Rong Zhang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2008
* USD 444,253.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0351383&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is to investigate
the physical mechanisms of decadal variability in the North Atlantic ocean.
Particularly, it focuses on exploring the hypothesis that Great Salinity
Anomalies (GSAs) are a significant contributing factor to such variability,
through their effect on the thermohaline circulation, deep western boundary
current (DWBC), northern recirculation gyre (NRG) and the north-south shifts of
the Gulf Stream path. Preliminary numerical experiments indicate that GSA events
have as much if not more effect on decadal ocean variability than do changes in
the wind forcing (e.g., variability in the North Atlantic Oscillation) and, on
decadal timescales, have a much larger effect than do changes in radiative and
surface heat flux changes due to increased greenhouse gases. Furthermore, the
interaction between GSA events and the thermohaline circulation may lead to
decadal variations of the cyclonic NRG, north-south shifts of the Gulf Stream
path and thereby affect the climate of the east coast of the USA. The approach
is to investigate these issues with a combination of numerical experimentation
and theory, using both simplified and comprehensive numerical ocean models,
coupled to slab sea-ice models and a simple model of the atmosphere. These
numerical calculations will be supplemented by theoretical investigations of the
nature of GSAs and how their interaction with the thermohaline circulation may
lead to variations of NGR and north-south shifts of the Gulf Stream path, and
hence decadal changes in the mid-latitude ocean circulation. In addition to
climate variability, the proposed research addresses some physical-oceanographic
problems of long-standing interest, namely the mechanism governing the Gulf
Stream separation, the downstream path and the production of cyclonic NRG, and
the importance (or otherwise) of the GSA events and their effect on the
thermohaline circulation. In addition to an increased understanding of the
fundamental nature and causes of ocean and climate variability, the research
will lead to a better sense of whether and how high-latitude ocean monitoring is
necessary in predicting and detecting decadal climate variability&lt;br/&gt;