* 0351069
* Geochemical Controls on the Composition of Coexisting Vapors and Brines: A Novel Experimental Approach to Assess Aqueous Speciation in Subseafloor Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2010
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 02/28/2010
* USD 344,132.00

Under this funding, the PIs will assess aqueous speciation in coexisting vapors
and brines produced during subcritical boiling and supercritical brine
condensation. The study will use pH and redox sensors together with a computer
controlled Ti-flow reactor, which can maintain constant temperature, pressure
and flow rates, while allowing simultaneous investigation of vapor and brine
phases. Initially, the experimental study will focus on development of an
internally consistent database for aqueous species in the NaCl-H2O system.
Although both the vapor and brine phases will be instrumented, it is the vapor
phase that will be utilized most to constrain the distribution of aqueous
species in the coexisting brine. In effect, the distribution of aqueous species
in the vapor buffers that of the brine and provides a novel experimental
strategy for determining ion activities in the highly concentrated brine phase.
Subsequently, mineral buffers will be added to the system to expand the
compositional complexity necessary to model the chemical evolution of vapors and
brines in subseafloor hydrothermal systems at mid-ocean ridges. The study will
have numerous applications, including the speciation affecting Fe, Cu and Zn
mineral solubility in vapors and brines, vapor-brine partitioning of boron and
other mobile trace elements during phase separation/segregation processes, and
others.