* 0351667
* Collaborative Research: Sediment Transport in Oscillating Turbulent Boundary Layers
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2009
* USD 361,540.00

0351667/0351443&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A closely integrated numerical and
experimental investigation of sediment transport mechanisms within turbulent
oscillatory boundary layer flows will be conducted. The study will complement
and extend the existing knowledge base through a focus on understanding the
micromechanics of the transport process. The idea is to apply to the problem at
hand techniques that have been developed during the last decade in the
engineering community to study turbulent particle laden flows. On the numerical
side, this will be done through the novel use of a combined Eulerian/Lagrangian
Direct Numerical Simulation and Large Eddy Simulation of the fluid/particle
motion using an immersed boundary technique and a two-fluid collisional wall
model for the mobile sediment bed. The numerical modeling for the fluid phase
will be done in conjunction with a Lagrangian based approach for the particulate
phase to study the behavior, at the individual particle level, of the sediment
entrainment mechanisms as well as the modification induced by the particles on
the turbulence of the fluid phase. For the experiments, recent innovations in
two-phase Particle Image Velocimetry techniques, pioneered in our laboratory,
will be applied to provide detailed, instantaneous, spatially resolved
measurements of both the fluid and the sediment phase within an oscillatory
boundary layer water channel. The challenge is to adapt these techniques to the
scales and parameter range encountered in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The motion of sediments
over the continental shelf is an important topic in coastal studies. Examples of
applications include transport of particulate organic matter and man-made
contaminants; prediction of the optical properties of the water column;
evaluation of burial rates of archaeological artifacts; prediction of coastal
flooding and erosion; evaluation of habitat of commercial fisheries; and the
design of intakes and outfalls of sewage treatment plant and cooling systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a state-of-the-art experimental
facility with a wide range of potential applications will open research
possibilities in other areas, and foster further interdisciplinary
collaborations. The development of a numerical tool incorporating the most
advanced numerical techniques for the solution of two-phase wall-bounded
turbulent flows will allow new insight of the process. The graduate students and
a post-doc trained in this project will be exposed to advanced numerical and
experimental techniques, within an exciting interdisciplinary environment.
Finally, The output from model and experiments will be included in the teaching
portfolio of the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;