* 0351475
* Paradoxes of Participation: The Status of 'Groups' in Liberal Democracies in an Age of Genomics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Jennifer Reardon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/2006
* USD 120,000.00

The recent rise of population-based genomic research has led scientists and
policy makers to acknowledge a troubling predicament of the genomic age: despite
the intended goal of underscoring human sameness and producing knowledge that
benefits all individuals, the actual practice of research at this frontier area
of the life sciences entails studying group-level human genetic variation. In
the last decade, scholarship in science and technology studies (S&TS) has begun
to elaborate the dilemmas caused by the focus on groups. When representatives
demand to participate in biomedical research, their claims are made on behalf of
groups whose very biological reality they seek in part to discredit. The
proposed research builds upon this scholarship to demonstrate the new paradoxes
of participation that emerge when the groups who are to be the objects of
research and those who speak for them are not determined in advance, but emerge
simultaneously or, in a word, are co-produced.

In the last five years scientists and policy makers have begun to create
processes that would enable groups to participate meaningfully in the design and
regulation of population-based genomic research. These initiatives confront
researchers, policy makers and potential research subjects with three paradoxes
that the proposed study will investigate: 1) the objects of research do not
predate research projects; instead these projects participate in the very act of
constituting their objects of study; 2) efforts to reconstruct difference by
abandoning race often serve to re-inscribe racial categories in new ways; 3)
biological categories of race conventionally thought to be discriminatory have
in recent years served as powerful resources used by historically disadvantaged
groups to claim wider legal rights. Using semi-structured interviews,
ethnographic field research, and analysis of discourse and texts, the
investigator will look at how these three paradoxes are being addressed at three
different sites, each of which is using a different mechanism for building
public participation and locating authority for defining groups. The three sites
are: 1) the NIH's International Haplotype Map that uses community engagement as
a participatory form and locates the authority to define groups in the state; 2)
the partnership between Howard University and the International HapMap which
uses the concept of a contractual partnership between researchers and
researched; and 3) the Navajo Nation Human Research Review Board that uses a
theory of sovereignty for defining groups and participation.

The intellectual merit of the research lies in collecting new data on these
participatory mechanisms and using this information to contribute to several
scholarly literatures: an emergent literature in S&TS on the co-production of
scientific and social order; S&TS investigations of participation in scientific
research; and social theories on race and difference. The project's broader
impacts will include contributions to science and to policy. A greater
understanding of the conceptual problems that underlie contemporary debates
about the status of groups in liberal democracies and the life sciences has the
potential to influence research design, to strengthen the roles individuals and
communities can play in directing this research for positive human ends, and to
contribute to improving the capacities of institutions of scientific research
and policy to address the dilemmas of race and the paradoxes of group
participation in genomic research. Results will include publications and
presentations for academic and policy audiences as well as a workshop for
scientists, policymakers, and affected communities.