* 0351595
* Principal-Agent Negotiations with Teams of Agents
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Andrew Whitford, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James S. Granato
* 03/31/2005
* USD 45,808.00

&lt;br/&gt;Principal-agency models are widely employed to examine accountability
in hierarchical relationships in politics, business, and other organizational
settings. In this theory, one key finding is that a loss of efficiency arises
when the cost of monitoring renders direct control over the agent unfeasible.
While in political science attention has recently turned to solving the moral
hazard problem by perfecting selection mechanisms, attention in business and
economic theory generally centers on designing contracts to minimize that loss.
However, the information asymmetry between principal and agent requires a
contract that shifts risk to the agent to motivate an efficient level of effort.
A principal cannot determine whether an outcome (good or bad) resulted from the
agent's effort or from circumstances beyond their control. In essence, the
principal can assure that the agent sees high effort as being in his/her best
interest only by crafting a compensation scheme that makes agent pay heavily
dependent upon the outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The heart of principal-agency theory is an apparently inevitable
tradeoff between efficiency in incentives and efficiency in risk-sharing.
Indeed, this tradeoff is inevitable in the absence of trust between principal
and agent; it would disappear if the principal could trust the agent to work at
maximal efficiency even behind the veil of the information asymmetry. This
proposal builds on previous experiments that assessed the use of contingent pay
when monitoring of effort levels was impossible, and offer a research design to
conduct a valid and reliable test of principal-agency theory's predictions in
singe-shot negotiations. The PI extends the design to investigate the effect of
a single principal negotiating with a team of agents who undertake joint effort.
The PI will design an experiment where a principal negotiates with two agents
over a contract's terms, each agent independently chooses an effort level, the
experimenter determines the asset value based on effort levels, and the
principal and the two agents are paid on the basis of the asset value and the
contract. The PI hypothesizes that the principal's ability to obtain high effort
from the team depends on the communication context within which the three
subjects negotiate the contract. The PI will then vary the communication context
to assess the ability of subjects to overcome the tradeoff between efficiency in
incentives and efficiency in risk-sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The concept of a principal incentivizing agents now permeates
economic theory, political studies, and organizational life. It is difficult to
overstate the impact of the "incentives revolution" on public and private
organizations. For example, political scientists have embraced the incentives
revolution, both through leveraging the principal-agency framework for studying
the role of politics in public administration, and perhaps more importantly in
reshaping the public sector through increased use of bonuses and the contracting
out of public services. The evidence for or against this role for trust in team
production will come from experiments, but it will be no less useful for both
advancing our academic understanding of incentives in hierarchical settings and
expanding the range of options that real supervisors have at hand when they seek
solutions to their immediate supervisory problems. &lt;br/&gt;