* 0351116
* Red Sea Outflow Experiment, Data Analysis and Synthesis
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/29/2008
* USD 261,580.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351116&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2001 the Red
Sea Outflow Experiment (REDSOX) obtained the first comprehensive survey of the
outflow of Red Sea water into the Gulf of Aden. The objectives of REDSOX were
(i) to describe the pathways and downstream evolution of the descending outflow
plumes, (ii) to quantify the processes that control the final depth of the
equilibrated Red Sea outflow water, and (iii) to identify the transport
processes and mechanisms that advect Red Sea outflow Water and its properties
through the Gulf of Aden and into the Indian Ocean. The field experiment and the
final data processing have been successfully completed, and first results from
the project have been published. This grant supports the analysis and synthesis
of part of the data collected during the two REDSOX cruises such as high-
resolution hydrographic and direct current surveys and direct measurements of
turbulent mixing. The analysis will focus on the following specific
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;1. Rationalize bulk estimates of entrainment, total stress
and entrainment stress of the&lt;br/&gt;descending plume with corresponding
"direct" estimates based on overturning scales.&lt;br/&gt;2. Explore the three-
dimensional circulation in the two outflow channels with focus on
the&lt;br/&gt;effects of rotation.&lt;br/&gt;3. Analyze Reynolds stress and
turbulence structure above the sea floor and relate the&lt;br/&gt;bottom stress
to the interfacial stress.&lt;br/&gt;4. Compare the properties and dynamics of
the Red Sea plume with other outflows, such&lt;br/&gt;as the outflow from the
Mediterranean, to attempt to generalize the results with respect&lt;br/&gt;to
other plumes and broaden the scope and impact of the synthesis
activities.&lt;br/&gt;The completed synthesis will provide detailed insight into
the Red Sea outflow and related&lt;br/&gt;circulation processes in the Gulf of
Aden. It will improve the understanding of descending&lt;br/&gt;plumes in
general, especially of the critical process of entrainment and mixing. Such
knowledge is crucial for improved parameterizations of these processes in ocean
circulation and climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;