* 0351454
* Discrete Adjustment Costs, Investment Dynamics, and Productivity Growth: Evidence from Chilean Manufacturing Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Simon Gilchrist, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2006
* USD 202,514.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0351454 INSTITUTION: Boston University NSF PROGARM: ECONOMICS PI:
Gilchrist, Simon TITLE: Discrete adjustment costs, investment dynamics, and
productivity growth: Evidence from Chilean manufacturing plants.

Standard models of investment predict gradual responses to policy intervention.
However, in the face of large non-convexities of adjustment costs, the response
of investment to policy intervention may be "lumpy", either because firms
immediately alter capital outlays or because they wait to take any action. Non-
convexities are particularly important for emerging markets, making emerging
market economies respond differently to policy reforms than developed economies.
Understanding these dissimilarities within the context of a structural
econometric framework will provide useful information for reform-oriented policy
makers in a variety of economic settings. For example, whether reforms are
enacted quickly or gradually will depend on the nature of adjustment costs that
firms face.

This research uses Chilean data to contribute to recent research focusing on the
non-convex adjustment costs in the plant-level investment process. It makes
important methodological contribution by estimating a fully specified structural
model of plant-level investment using maximum like-likelihood techniques. It
differs from standard models of adjustment costs by allowing for fixed
adjustment costs. This research characterizes both the decisions of when and how
much to invest as functions of underlying observable state variables such as the
current capital stock and the current productivity parameter that governs plant-
level profitability.

A contribution of this research project is to examine the joint productivity /
investment dynamics for Chilean manufacturing plants over the 1979-2000 period.
Existing studies of Chilean plant-level productivity dynamics use data from
1979-1986 but this research project will extend the existing data set on Chilean
plants to cover the entire 1979-2000. This long data series will for better
evaluation of Chilean trade reforms, reforms that were enacted over a relatively
long period of time and the impact can take many years to express itself.

Because the model is structural, it can be used to conduct policy experiments
(such as changes in tariff or subsidy policy) or may be used as an input into
calibrated general equilibrium models. In addition to policy relevance, the
project will contribute to the infrastructure of academic research by extending
the widely used data set on Chilean manufacturing plants to the year 2000. The
research also makes methodological advances in estimating dynamic structural
models with both continuous and discrete choice variables.