* 0351966
* Workshop: Climate-Disturbance Interactions in Boreal Forest Ecosystems: Pre-Conference Activities of the12th Annual IBFRA Conference, Fairbanks, Alaska, May 2004
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* T. Scott Rupp, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark R.  Walbridge
* 12/31/2004
* USD 54,999.00

The boreal forest, which is the second most extensive terrestrial biome on
earth, represents a wood resource of global significance that is an important
part of the cultural and economic wealth of northern countries. During the
relatively brief (10,000 yr) history of the boreal forest in its current
location, it has experienced radical changes in climate, vegetation, and fauna.
Warming during the last 30 years has been associated with warming and melting of
permafrost, changes in growth rates of dominant trees, increased area burned,
insect outbreaks, and changes in vertebrate populations. The causal links among
these changes and their implications for the functioning of the boreal forest
and the people who inhabit this region are not completely understood. The
structure and functioning of the boreal forest determines and is influenced by
its disturbance regime. Fire, insect outbreaks, timber harvest, and flooding are
important disturbances. The extent and distribution of these disturbances are
changing rapidly as climate warms, human populations grow, and socioeconomic
conditions change. To understand the current and future structure, diversity,
and functioning of the boreal forest, it is important to understand how climate
and disturbance interact and the implications of these interactions for
ecological, economic, and cultural sustainability of the boreal forest. To
promote an understanding of climate-disturbance interactions in the boreal
forest, the Bonanza Creek Long Term Ecological Research Program and the
International Boreal Forest Research Association (IBFRA) have organized an
international science conference on "Climate-Disturbance Interactions in Boreal
Forest Ecosystems" to be held in Fairbanks, Alaska 3 - 7 May 2004 at the
Fairbanks Princess Riverside Lodge. The objectives of the 12th IBFRA Conference
are: (1) to present and discuss the current scientific understanding of climate-
disturbance interactions in the circumboreal region; (2) to discuss the unique
ecological, economic, and social conditions that influence management decisions
regarding disturbance, climate change impacts, and adaptation to climate change
in the boreal region; (3) to bring a circumpolar perspective to research
initiatives; and (4) to foster cooperation and an exchange of ideas among
countries in the circumpolar boreal forest. &lt;br/&gt;