* 0352934
* Developing Extended Wavlength InGaAs Arrays for Ground-based Near-Infrared Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* John Wilson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey R. Pier
* 07/31/2008
* USD 398,662.00

0352934 -- Skrutskie/Univ of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomical
detectors, and ultimately imaging arrays, based on Indium-Gallium-Arsenide
technology will be developed. These detectors will have sufficiently low dark
current to enable background-limited observations from the ground in the 1.2,
1.6, and 2.2 micron wavelength bands. Although Mercury-Cadmium-Telluride and
Indium-Antimonide array technologies already permit background-limited imaging
at these wavelengths, the cost of these detectors prohibits full exploitation of
available focal plane area on large telescopes at near-infrared wavelengths as
well as the widespread development of near-infrared imagers and spectrographs
for moderate- and small-aperture facilities. Indium-Gallium-Aresenide technology
offers the promise of matching or exceeding Mercury-Cadmium-Telluride and
Indium-Antimonide capabilities for ground-based broadband observations at less
than 25% of the cost per pixel. In addition to the direct educational benefits
of this work to graduate and undergraduate students at the University of
Virginia, availability of this inexpensive technology will also: allow gains in
science by enabling greater focal plane coverage at infrared wavelengths;
provide access to moderate-cost instrumentation for small institutions; and
enable modest-cost applications beyond the field of astronomy.