* 0352170
* Dissertation Improvement:  Elucidation of Hominid Vertebropelvic Evolution via Observational and Experimental Analyses of Murine Embryogenetics and Avian Developmental Biology
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Owen Lovejoy, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 12/31/2007
* USD 11,922.00

The embryology and development of the human vertebral column and pelvis are
important in a broad range of contexts, including the etiology and causation of
human birth defects, as well as the normal growth and maturation of the trunk,
pelvis, and lower limb. Other important areas include the identification of
factors that affect overall pelvic form in ways that impact obstetric difficulty
and success. The anatomy of this region is also central to our understanding of
the process of human and primate evolution, especially the appearance and
progressive adaptation of the lower limb to upright walking.&lt;br/&gt; A
complete understanding the vertebral and pelvic embryology ultimately requires
knowledge of their developmental genetics. In this research, three embryological
models of the developmental progress of the sacrum, including a number of its
important special features, such as segmental fusion, will be examined. Each
makes different predictions with respect to the tempo and mode of sacroiliac
change. Resolving which model is most accurate (and therefore most likely to be
correct) requires a more thorough knowledge of this region's developmental
biology. &lt;br/&gt; Given the rarity of specimens and the prolonged
developmental period of primates (and other practical prohibitions as well), the
researchers will perform skeletal analyses of mouse gene "knockouts" and examine
chick embryological manipulations. These are effective alternatives to direct
examination of the embryological processes in primates and humans. &lt;br/&gt;
Recent gene knockouts (i.e., the targeted deactivation of a specific gene's
normal activity) include a number that have a profound effect on normal spine
and pelvis development. These include Pitx1, Emx2, Fgf10, and Fgf4-Fgf8.
Examination of the role of each can potentially illuminate central aspects of
the developmental (and thereby naturally selected) "units" of the pelvic girdle
and lower limb, as well as clarify the developmental relationships between the
pelvic bones and sacrum. &lt;br/&gt; High resolution microCT scans of mice in
which one of these genes has been "deactivated" will be examined. Quantitative
measures will be made of the three dimensional structure of the pelvis and spine
in each mutant using NIH software. Identical procedures will be applied to
normal mice of the same strain. In addition, fate maps of embryological tissues
of the sacrum and pelvis will be examined in chicks in which transplantations of
quail donor cells have been introduced. This technique has not been used
previously to answer questions about vertebropelvic development in
humans.&lt;br/&gt; Combining these data (mouse gene knockouts and avian
embryological manipulation) will enhance our understanding of a crucially
important and relatively new avenue of human evolutionary research, i.e.,
determining the biological effects of key genes (and their downstream targets)
in shaping the human frame. As understanding of the human genome unfolds,
anthropologists must keep pace by improving our understanding of those genes
which are central to human anatomy and evolution. In addition, broader issues of
evolution in limbed animals such as limb loss in snakes and whales, as well as
the evolution of variations of spinal segmentation promise to be further
illuminated by this research.&lt;br/&gt; A substantial proportion of the work to
be conducted involves support and maintenance of the microCT laboratory at the
Northeast Ohio Universities College of Medicine (NEOUCOM). This facility is
vital to a variety of current clinical projects involving bone and cartilage
growth and development. The work will also enhance world-wide scientific
cooperation as a number of the mutant specimens that will be examined have been
developed in Europe, Japan, Canada, as well as the United States. Agreements for
the exchange of data derived from these specimens have already been arranged.
NSF support will allow at least one anthropology graduate student to complete
the Ph.D. Finally, enhancement of our understanding of these fundamental
developmental processes is very likely to prove vital in furthering our capacity
to diagnose and treat serious embryological defects.&lt;br/&gt;