* 0352904
* Workshop: Biocomplexity VI - Complex Behavior in Unicellular Organisms to be held at Notre Dame University, May  2004
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* James Glazier, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2005
* USD 28,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the International Workshop Biocomplexity
VI: Complex&lt;br/&gt;Behavior in Unicellular Organisms, jointly organized by
the Biocomplexity&lt;br/&gt;Institute at Indiana University and the
Interdisciplinary Center for the Study of&lt;br/&gt;Biocomplexity at the
University of Notre Dame. The collective behavior of&lt;br/&gt;bacteria is as a
problem in basic science and is significant in bioengineering, agriculture,
medicine, naval architecture and geosciences.... Biofouling is a major problem
in cases ranging from surgical implants to submarines, and biofilms are a major
cause of antibiotic-resistant infections. The regulatory mechanisms for
collective behaviors in bacteria differ from those in more advanced organisms
and present an opportunity to compare different design solutions to similar
biological problems related to embryonic development. This workshop will develop
a more comprehensive view of our current understanding of these issues and
include a panel to discuss and report on new directions and collaborations. It
will bring together researchers in many disciplines who would not normally
attend the same conference (including experimental and theoretical biology,
biophysics, engineering, mathematics, and computer science). Approaches will
range from single molecule interactions and genetics to systems biology and
ecology. About fifty speakers will attend from the USA, Canada, Europe, Israel
and Japan, with a total participation of about 100, including many non-
specialists. The workshop will include tutorials for graduate students and
junior scientists, especially those not currently in the field, but interested
in learning about open problems, methodologies and opportunities. As part of the
workshop's outreach effort, Dr. Eshel Ben-Jacob will present a public lecture
for nonscientists and interested members of the community-at-large.&lt;br/&gt;