* 0352512
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Mechanobiology of Primate Cranial Sutures
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Mark Hamrick, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 9,000.00

Bone growth in the skull occurs at the perimeter of cranial bones in what are
referred to as cranial sutures. Bone growth at suture margins is required to
accommodate the growing brain. Sutures themselves are like ligaments that join
the skull bones to one another, and the suture tissue itself must be strong in
order to resist forces emanating from chewing muscles that attach to the bones
of the skull. The central goal of this study is to better understand the basic
mechanisms that regulate the growth and form of primate cranial sutures. Through
the use of laboratory rodents, molecular aspects of cranial suture regulatory
mechanisms will be perturbed. By observing the response of these systems, such
as cranial suture remodeling, to various disruptions, a mechanistic explanation
for how skeletal tissues grow and respond to mechanical influences can be
ascertained. These results will be used to test hypotheses relating primate
feeding behavior and encephalization to cranial suture morphology. Understanding
the mechanisms that determine how cranial sutures adapt and grow in response to
mechanical forces has several broader impacts. For example, premature fusion of
the cranial sutures (craniosynostosis) occurs in 1 in 1500 births. This
premature fusion restricts brain development and usually requires invasive
surgical intervention to "release" the suture. Understanding how cells in the
suture respond to changes in mechanical stress may eventually lead to novel,
non-surgical therapies to treat craniosynostosis. Furthermore, the orthodontic
and oral surgery communities will also benefit from an expanded understanding of
how tissues of the skull respond to changes in mechanical stress. In addition to
these medically oriented societal impacts, the research described here will
impact our basic understanding of how diet and brain enlargement have shaped the
skulls of humans and our primate relatives over time. This knowledge will in
turn expand upon current strategies and approaches for investigating the
evolutionary changes that have played significant roles in the origin of
humankind.

