* 0352047
* Turbulence Closure for Energetic, low-Ri Stratified Shear Flows
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Hartmut Peters, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2008
* USD 419,753.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0352047&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stratified, low-
Richardson number shear flows, which are of crucial importance in scientific and
practical contexts, place high demands on turbulence closures. A turbulence
closure model that can realistically simulate such flows will be developed by
taking, and if necessary modifying, existing closures and to subjecting them to
a three-step screening process. Step 0 is a demand that the closures have a
realistic steady state for homogeneous, stratified shear flows such as in the
laboratory experiments of Van Atta's group. In Step 1 the closures are tested in
isolation in a strict quantitative comparison of simulated and observed
turbulent dissipation rates and length scales. The observational basis of Step 1
are extensive microstructure measurements from the tidally driven Hudson River
estuary. The demand on the closures in Step 1 is that, given the observed shear
and buoyancy frequency, the closures produce a close match of the levels and
tidal depth-time structure of the observed turbulent mixing. In Step 2 the
closures are embedded in 2D and 3D numerical models of the outflow of saline
water from the Red Sea. The demand on the closure here is that it allow the
numerical models to reproduce the peculiar structure of the outflow which
combines a core layer at the bottom that undergoes little entrainment and
dilution over a distance of over 100 km while a thick shear zone above the core
layer undergoes highly energetic turbulent mixing. The difference in performance
of the closures in a non-hydrostatic 2D model and a coarser-resolution,
hydrostatic 3D model will be explored. The 3D model allows investigating
possible effects of rotation and of the outflow channel topography. The closure
schemes which will be considered include the new closure by Baumert and Peters,
the Canuto et al. closure which passes Step 0 after modification, another
closure previously employed by Peters et al. and Mellor/Yamada which is being
used ubiquitously.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research will
be through improved management of coastal and estuarine waters as well as
research into climate and climate change as a result of improvement of
turbulence closures embedded in most widely used models. An educational
component is given through the proposed participation of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;