* 0352877
* Development of a New Broadband Optical Seismometer
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jonathan Berger, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 455,927.00

EAR-0352877&lt;br/&gt;Zumberge &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;World-wide seismic networks
are increasingly complex and require seismometers that can detect Earth
vibrations spanning a wide range of amplitude and frequency. The mainstay
observatory-class seismometer used by global networks for the past two decades
is no longer manufactured and there is no other commercially available product
of sufficient quality on the market today. For such quality instruments, the
development risk is high, the development time long, and the market small and
apparently not sufficient to provide commercial viability. To meet the
instrumentation requirements of global seismology, we will design, build and
test a new observatory-class seismometer that will use optical fiber
interferometry to record the motion of a small mass suspended on a spring. The
use of optical fiber interferometry rather than traditional electronic
displacement transducers affords significant advantages. At the conclusion of
this proposed program, we expect to have developed, built and tested a new
observatory-class seismometer suitable for either vault or borehole
installation. The proposed research is important to advancing our knowledge of
Earth because it will ultimately result in clearer seismic images of the
interior. It will also provide for better observations from within boreholes,
where the inherent seismic signal-to-noise ratio is better. In the process, we
will have further developed a displacement sensor of sufficient sensitivity,
dynamic range and bandwidth not only to satisfy the requirements of observatory-
class seismology but with applications to other fields as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;