* 0352523
* US-India Cooperative Research: Extremal Structures in Banach Spaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Bor-Luh Lin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2008
* USD 18,486.00

0352523&lt;br/&gt;Lin &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
Cooperative Research: Extremal Structures in Banach Spaces. Professor Bor-Luh
Lin, University of Iowa and three Indian mathematicians, P. Bandyopadhyay and
T.S.S.R.K. Rao, Indian Statistical Institute and V. Indumathi, University of
Pondicherry will study the geometry of Banach spaces. In earlier work, they
solved completely the isomorphic properties of nested sequences of balls in
Banach spaces. They propose to extend this solution to the isometric properties.
Additionally, they will study generalizations of various ball separation
properties and the continuity of metric projections onto proximinal subspaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Geometry of Banach spaces is currently a very
active branch of research in Functional Analysis with wide-ranging applications
in pure and applied mathematics. Convex analysis is a major tool in many
branches of mathematics including probability theory, wavelet theory, partical
differential equations and computing theory with major applications to
mathematical finances, economics, management sciences, and to basic sciences.
The US PI is an established researcher and the Indian group has a strong
reputation. It is a valuable collaboration that will promote interactions with
excellent Indian instituions and will provide opportunities for graduate
students, junior colleagues, and minorities. The Government of India's
Department of Science and Technology (DST) funds this research under the NSF/DST
joint program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;