* 0352081
* Bacterial Manganese (II) Oxidation in the Guaymas Basin Hydrothermal Plume
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2006
* USD 288,479.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0352081&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal vents are a
globally significant source of dissolved manganese (II), an essential
micronutrient for organisms and a valuable tracer of hydrothermal activity. In
oxic waters such as hydrothermal plumes, soluble Mn(II) is eventually oxidized
to Mn(III/IV) oxides. These "scavengers of the sea" (Goldberg 1954) are highly
reactive minerals that are known to sequester a variety of metals and
participate in redox reactions with a wide range of inorganic and organic
compounds, thus playing an important role in marine geochemistry. Bacteria
catalyze the oxidation of Mn(II) to Mn(III/IV) at hydrothermal vents and other
environments and are thus thought to be responsible for the formation of natural
Mn(III/IV) oxide minerals. Although many studies have shown that bacteria are
responsible for the rapid Mn oxidation rates observed in the environment,
relatively little is known about the organisms involved, the mechanism(s) and
products of Mn biomineralization, and the biological function of Mn(II)
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers from the University
of California- San Diego Scripps Institute of Oceanography will identify the
bacterial community responsible for Mn oxidation in Guaymas Basin (GB) vent
plumes, determine the molecular mechanism and products of Mn oxide
biomineralization, and elucidate the role of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase (rubisco) genes recently found in Mn-oxidizing bacteria isolated
near hydrothermal vents. The mechanism(s) and products of Mn oxidation in GB
hydrothermal plumes will be investigated utilizing new insights into the
molecular biology of bacterial oxidation and advanced spectroscopic techniques.
Molecular probes will be designed to analyze the environmental diversity and
distribution of genes involved in Mn oxidation. Mn oxidation rates will be
measured in GB plume waters under a range of conditions designed to test our
hypotheses concerning specific molecular mechanisms of Mn oxidation. X-ray
absorption spectroscopy and synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction will be used
to characterize natural Mn oxides and reaction intermediates and products
produced by Mn-oxidizing isolates. To investigate the function of bacterial Mn
oxidation, the scientists will examine the role of genes involved in autotrophic
carbon fixation (rubisco) in Mn oxidizing bacteria recently isolated from deep-
sea hydrothermal vents. To detect expression of these genes both laboratory
(physiology) experiments on Mn-oxidizing bacterial isolates and fieldwork will
be performed. &lt;br/&gt;