* 0352127
* Collaborative Research:  Microbial Dynamics on Marine Snow Particles
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* George Jackson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 92,409.00

Marine snow fluxes sequester carbon to the deep ocean, significantly buffering
the greenhouse effect. In response to continuing global warming, large-scale
ocean fertilization has been proposed as a way to enhance marine snow fluxes and
remove extra atmospheric CO2. Marine snow particles harbor high densities of
bacteria and other microbes, whose activities modify the physical and chemical
characteristics of the particles. Understanding these processes is critical to
predicting the fate of marine snow fluxes in the ocean. This project is aimed at
a mechanistic understanding of the microbial dynamics on marine snow particles,
using an innovative approach of combining experiments, observations and
modeling. This project is 1) characterizing the time-dependent microbial
dynamics on marine snow particles, 2) investigating how different biotic and
abiotic factors modify the dynamics, and 3) developing mathematical models to
quantitatively describe such dynamics. Lab-generated diatom aggregates are being
used to test encounter models for predicting the rate at which bacteria colonize
marine snow. Agar-aggregates are being used to examine bacterial chemosensory
response to marine snow chemicals, and the effects of the bacterial
physiological status on the colonization process. Predator-prey dynamics on snow
particles are being investigated by grazing experiments with bacterivorous
protists. Field studies are following the changes in bacterial colonization
behavior, size and morphology of natural marine snow and the associated microbes
during the course of an algal bloom. Laboratory and field observations are being
used to test and expand colonization models in order to describe microbial
dynamics on marine snow based on hydrodynamics, microbial behavior, growth and
interspecific interactions. These models are being integrated with coagulation
models to study how marine snow formation coupled with microbial dynamics
affects marine snow and carbon fluxes in the water column. &lt;br/&gt;This
project is extending the existing collaborations between VIMS, TAMU and three
outstanding European research institutions. Graduate research training and
education are integral parts of the project. To promote ethnic diversity and
leadership training in marine sciences, minority undergraduates are being
recruited through a new internship program DREAMS to participate in the project
and gains hands-on research experience. The PIs are developing education
materials for the general public with focus on global warming, ocean-climate
interactions and ocean fertilization. These materials are being implemented by
DREAMS interns in their outreach activities that target grade school students
and teachers, allowing them to establish themselves as future leaders in climate
issues. &lt;br/&gt;