* 0352239
* Research Knowledge Utilization in Education: A SGER Proposal
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Alan Porter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2005
* USD 108,227.00

This project addresses the transfer of knowledge gained through research in the
field of education to practitioners. The objective is to enhance understanding
of research knowledge dissemination practices. That should, in turn, open
promising lines of research to enhance transfer of research findings beyond
immediate research communities. To achieve this, the researchers plan a three-
stage study. First, they will compare and synthesize findings on research
knowledge utilization (RKU) from multiple fields. They draw on extensive
experience in science and technology research evaluation with more limited
experience concerning educational research assessment. In addition, they propose
to review work in the public health domain that (as with education) relies
heavily on public sector mechanisms to achieve innovation. The cumulative
findings on RKU will be used to refine the initial educational RKU model
proposed. Second, the research team will develop retrospective studies analogous
to the successful "Traces" studies of how major technological innovations drew
upon disparate research findings. The intent is to compare how research
knowledge has contributed to advances in one Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) educational domain with the corresponding processes in a
public health domain. Selection of those domains will be based on preliminary
reviews of RKU studies in education and public health, combined with
perspectives on key research domains based on STEM issues. Methods will combine
broad and focused literature searches, review of pertinent case studies,
interviews, and bibliometric analyses. Third, the project will apply "text
mining" to help understand knowledge flows, identify applications, point to key
contributors to knowledge transfer, and identify potential user communities. The
team will contact selected participants representing multiple perspectives to
form panels. Interaction will be primarily electronic to conserve study
resources. Panelists will be asked to review the RKU model, enrich the
information bases for the "Traces" cases, and assess research protocols to
pursue knowledge transfer mechanisms. In terms of intellectual merit, the
project provides a conceptual model relating the factors that play major roles
in effecting RKU in education. This will draw on findings from RKU studies over
several decades, comparing educational factors with those in other domains.
Furthermore, findings from the two comparative "Traces" cases should elucidate
RKU leverage points that warrant investigation. This project should serve as a
base for further development of ways to facilitate RKU in STEM education. The
broader impacts of that could be tremendous. In essence, the Federal Government
funds a great deal of educational research whose utilization is largely in
question. To the extent that this project succeeds, it should offer enablers to
leverage educational research more effectively. That should pay off by enhancing
educational research value by facilitating transfer of knowledge to neighboring
research communities, to technically knowledgeable practitioners, and to users
without strong backgrounds in the research per se.