* 0352080
* Empirical Methods for Measuring Market Performance in Network Industries
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Frank Wolak, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 118,868.00

This research will devise and implement techniques for measuring market
performance in the electricity and postal delivery services industries. I will
undertake four lines of inquiry measuring&lt;br/&gt;performance in wholesale
electricity markets. First, I plan to apply the methodologies for measuring
market&lt;br/&gt;performance in the electricity supply industry presented in
Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002) and&lt;br/&gt;Wolak (2003b) to provide a
comprehensive diagnosis of the causes and solution to the California
electricity&lt;br/&gt;crisis. I have collected a number of new data sets that
will allow me to perform a more comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the causes
and remedy for the California electricity crisis. The second project will adapt
these&lt;br/&gt;two methodologies for measuring market-wide and firm-level
market power (or market inefficiencies) to&lt;br/&gt;wholesale markets that use
locational marginal pricing procedures to price electricity. The third topic is
how&lt;br/&gt;to value the net benefits of transmission network upgrades in a
wholesale market regime. Transmission&lt;br/&gt;network expansions have the
potential to increase the competitiveness of a wholesale electricity
market&lt;br/&gt;because they can increase the number of independent suppliers
able to compete with each local supplier. I&lt;br/&gt;am not aware of an
internally consistent methodology for valuing transmission upgrades that
accounts for&lt;br/&gt;these market power mitigation benefits. The power outage
in the eastern U.S. on August 14 and 15, 2003,&lt;br/&gt;suggests that such a
methodology is far overdue. The fourth line of inquiry will study the extent
integration&lt;br/&gt;of day-ahead forward markets with the real-time market. In
all U.S. wholesale markets, electricity is traded&lt;br/&gt;in a number of
forward markets in advance of delivery. There are a number of arbitrage
relationships that&lt;br/&gt;should hold between these markets if energy traders
are risk-neutral, and a different set of relationships that&lt;br/&gt;should
hold if energy traders are risk-averse. This research will derive these
relationships and examine their&lt;br/&gt;empirical
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Postal Service (USPS) has experienced
considerable financial turmoil over the past two&lt;br/&gt;years. For the first
time in the post World War II period, the demand for single piece First-Class
mail, the&lt;br/&gt;largest volume category of mail that the USPS delivers, has
experienced a decade of decline. This has caused&lt;br/&gt;the USPS to implement
a number of rate increases to recover lost revenue from these volume decreases.
The&lt;br/&gt;USPS also has nationwide uniform wage policy for workers in its
mail sorting facilities. This has resulted&lt;br/&gt;in substantial differences
in worker productivity across mail sorting facilities. This using a dataset
obtained&lt;br/&gt;from the United States Postal Rate Commission, I will first
document the extent of across-facility differences&lt;br/&gt;in worker
productivity and quantify the cost to the USPS of its nationwide wage policy.
This analysis should&lt;br/&gt;provide useful input into the USPS decision-
making process for reducing postal operating costs. I also plan&lt;br/&gt;to
extend my previous research on the impact of electronic alternatives to postal
delivery services and postal&lt;br/&gt;price increases on the household-level
demand for postal delivery services in a number of directions.