* 0352608
* High Resolution Laser Speckle Strain Gauge for Biomedical Research and Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Sean Kirkpatrick, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 05/31/2006
* USD 192,144.00

0201841&lt;br/&gt;Kirkpatrick&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focused on continued
development and implementation of a high resolution, imaging laser speckle-based
strain gauge for biomedical research and medical diagnostic purposes. During the
period of this award, the investigators propose to expand the useful range of
the system to the level of single cells and single-cell thick cell layers and to
develop and implement an optical means by which the viscoelastic properties of
tissues and cell sheets can be measured directly in a nondestructive manner. The
hypotheses driving this research are: 1) Improved laser speckle strain
measurement technology can provide detailed information on the mechanical
behavior of tissues at the cellular level with better strain resolution than
strain technologies conventionally employed for these purposes, including
classical interferometric technologies, 2) Variations of the speckle strain
gauge can yield information regarding the viscoelastic constants of biological
tissues such as mechanical loss factor (tan d), storage modulus, and loss
modulus and 3) The strain gauge technology can be modified to provide full 2D
strain data of tissues under biaxial loading. The specific aims to test these
hypotheses are: 1) To implement an imaging laser speckle strain gauge for
evaluating the micromechanical behavior of single-cells and cell sheets, 2) To
develop a variation of the speckle strain gauge to yield viscoelastic constants
such as loss factor (tan d), storage modulus and loss modulus and 3) To modify
the speckle strain gauge to acquire and analyze 2-dimensional strain data.
Results of the studies should have a significant impact on a variety of modern
diagnostic and therapeutic applications.