* 0352276
* Slow Earthquakes Beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Goran Ekstrom, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 03/31/2006
* USD 84,892.00

The Principal Investigator will investigate a group of highly anomalous
magnitude~5 earthquakes that he has recently detected in Greenland. The
earthquakes belong to a new class of seismic events associated&lt;br/&gt;with
glaciers discovered in early 2003. The previously unknown earthquakes on
Greenland generate long-period seismic surface waves that are recorded well on
globally distributed seismic stations. The earthquakes have previously gone
undetected because they do not generate the high-frequency seismic waves on
which traditional earthquake detection and location methodologies are based.
Beyond a few basic characteristics, little is known about these sources of
seismic radiation. Preliminary results indicate that the seismic waves are
inconsistent with tectonic faulting, but instead consistent with sudden and
massive glacial sliding. If the events are caused by rapid glacial motion, they
will represent a new and distinct mode of glacial behavior. The Principal
Investigator will make use of data from global seismic stations as well as
seismic stations on Greenland to improve the characterization of the new class
of earthquakes. In particular, our detection algorithms will be improved and
extended, and applied to continuous waveform data to develop a catalog of events
for the last ten years. Modification of the algorithm and the inclusion of data
from Greenland will lower the detection magnitude threshold and reduce the
location uncertainty, allowing a better geographic correlation with glacial
features and morphology. The seismic source model will be refined to allow
evaluation of different physical models for the earthquake source. The results
from the proposed seismological analysis will form the basis for an evaluation
of future research opportunities, including geodetic and seismic campaign work
on Greenland, and theoretical modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. This research will lead to a detailed characterization of the phenomenon
of slow earthquakes beneath the Greenland ice sheet. The analysis will address
first-order questions&lt;br/&gt;about the fundamental nature of the new class of
glacial earthquakes, and will explore various physical explanations for their
occurrence. Since almost nothing is currently known about these events, the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research will result in new knowledge about seismic sources
and the seismic behavior of glaciers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Current results strongly suggest that the newly discovered earthquakes are
caused by sudden sliding of large portions of the glacier in a manner not
previously described or observed. The&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator will
develop and test this and alternative explanations for the observed earthquakes.
If the glacial-sliding explanation is confirmed, this result is likely to have a
significant&lt;br/&gt;influence on the understanding of glacial movement and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;