* 0352999
* The Symmetry of Densest Packings of Space
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Charles Radin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 152,144.00

This proposal is in the spirit of Hilbert's Eighteenth problem,
to&lt;br/&gt;study the symmetries of the optimally dense packings, by spheres
or&lt;br/&gt;polyhedra, of Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces of general
dimension.&lt;br/&gt;Very few particular such packing problems have ever been
solved, but&lt;br/&gt;our goal is more directed to study such problems as a
class, to&lt;br/&gt;specify them so that they are well-posed, with reasonable
conditions&lt;br/&gt;for existence and uniqueness, and in particular to then
study the&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of the solutions. This work is motivated in part
by the&lt;br/&gt;discovery of aperiodic tilings, such as the Penrose tilings of
the&lt;br/&gt;plane by the kite and dart polygons, tilings which can be
understood&lt;br/&gt;as solutions of such a packing problem. The symmetries of
aperiodic&lt;br/&gt;tilings have long been connected with the mathematics of
ergodic&lt;br/&gt;theory, using either the translation group or the full
congruence&lt;br/&gt;group of the space being tiled as the dynamics. The
symmetry of the&lt;br/&gt;tilings has then been related to the conjugacy class
of the associated&lt;br/&gt;dynamical system. Several questions are proposed
here about the&lt;br/&gt;symmetry of packing problems, some directed at general
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;behavior and some directed at important special cases. For
instance,&lt;br/&gt;it is proposed to show that the symmetry of the densest
packings of a&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic space by spheres of fixed radius is different
for different&lt;br/&gt;radii. (It is already known that for most radii the
densest packings&lt;br/&gt;are aperiodic - they cannot have crystallographic
symmetry.) And more&lt;br/&gt;generally it is proposed to show that a "generic"
packing problem, in&lt;br/&gt;Euclidean or hyperbolic space, only has optimal
solutions which are&lt;br/&gt;not crystallographic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anyone
who has tried to squeeze as many pennies as possible onto a&lt;br/&gt;tabletop
has seen that the most efficient arangement is also very&lt;br/&gt;symmetrical,
with six pennies surrounding each. The similar problem&lt;br/&gt;for efficient
packings of spheres in space also leads to high&lt;br/&gt;symmetry. But there is
almost nothing known about precisely why, in&lt;br/&gt;general, efficiency leads
to symmetry, and what kinds of symmetry are&lt;br/&gt;possible. Twenty years ago
a new metallic alloy was discovered, a&lt;br/&gt;physical solution to a closely
related optimization problem, and the&lt;br/&gt;alloy was found to possess a
symmetry the nature of which is much less&lt;br/&gt;obvious, or, put another
way, in which the mathematics of the symmetry&lt;br/&gt;is less well developed.
This proposal concerns the study of the&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of efficient
arrangements in space of spheres and polyhedra&lt;br/&gt;and in particular the
development of a mathematical formalism in which&lt;br/&gt;such symmetries can
be usefully analyzed. Particular questions about&lt;br/&gt;the nature of
efficient packings of spheres are also specified.&lt;br/&gt;