* 0352466
* A Regional Network to Improve Understanding of the Carbon Cycle:  A Workshop Proposal
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Jerry Melillo, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2004
* USD 15,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Jerry Melillo at the Marine Biological Laboratory,
Woods Hole, MA to convene a workshop to develop a plan for integrating an array
of technologies and approaches into a regional to continental scale network to
improve understanding of the carbon cycle. The workshop, hosted by the Marine
Biological Lab will assemble carbon cycling research scientists, as well as
experts in ongoing regional to global carbon cyling networks and initiatives to
discuss the urgent gaps in understanding the carbon cycle and the technical
requirements for building local, regional, and national-level networks designed
to incorporate ongoing research and networks into a continuous, integrated,
high-quality research network with real or near real time monitoring
capbailites. Participants will share their experiences in expanding site-
specific science to broader spatial scales, and will discuss future research
infrastructure needs in light of new sensors (field and satellite) and data
collection capabilities. The participants that currently use established carbon
cycling networks will ground the workshop in the present-day realities of
existing infrastructure and capabilities, and will contribute to a new vision
for carbon cycling research infrastructure that can expand to meet the needs for
a national capability for observing and understanding regional to continental
scale processes. Discussion will include present state-of-the-art developments
in regional methodology, sensor technologies, networking, research information
delivery, and knowledge generation.&lt;br/&gt;Workshop presentations,
discussion, and working group sessions will focus on four topics: 1) The
integration of net carbon flux and key molecular indexes of regional carbon with
models of the terrestrical carbon cycle. 2) Defining the set of regional
networks of instruments necessary to make critical measurements and, 3) Building
scalable carbon information networks: from researchers to field stations to a
national architecture and 4) Enabling technologies and user requirements for
data and information management and delivery&lt;br/&gt;As biogeochemical
research becomes more complex and multidisciplinary, gains in our understanding
of carbon dynamics can be furthered through the application of technologies that
improve the scaling of measurements from local to regional to continenal scales
and molecular measurements to ecosystem flux, enhance modeling and prediction
capabilities; and facilitate communication among individuals, environmental
sensors, research networks, and databases. This workshop will be the first
attempt to design scalable national carbon cycling infrastructure that meets the
needs of scientists working at local and broader scales, as well as decision-
makers and educators that may require information at regional to national
scales. Consequently, the discussions and working group reports are anticipated
to be of broad interest to many disciplines. Workshop products will be made
available to a broader community via web archive of the presentations; a white
paper of the proceedings and recommendations which will be posted online; and a
report outlining present technical capabilities, the design of a future carbon
cycling network infrastructure, and a research and implementation plan that will
enable this goal to be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;