* 0352370
* A Device for Automated Large-Scale Morphological and Behavioral Screening
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Michael Levin, The Forsyth Institute
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 106,940.00

This award supports the development of a computer-driven, automated device for
screening libraries of small molecules on planaria. The proof-of-principle
device will consist of about 100 cells, each containing a single planarian and
one element of the library to be screened. Each cell will provide for
observation and analysis of worm behavior and morphology via a digital camera
and for the reward/punishment of certain behaviors by modification of light
levels and mild electric shock. The cells will be continuously analyzed and
controlled by a computer which will screen for specified results (for example,
screening the library for a reagent which increases worm motility, alters head
development, counteracts the effects of toxins, or accelerates the rate of
learning in operant conditioning). The computer will detect changes in
morphology, behavior, and other parameters. Initial development of the device
will be focused on planaria, but the final version will be useful for many
organisms (including transgenics carrying fluorescent reporters for analysis of
specific traits). It will enable screening of libraries of small molecules,
RNAi, proteins, antibodies, and others. Potential targets to be searched for
include reagents which: improve memory, increase or decrease motor activity,
modify neuronal growth, counteract effects of known drugs, enhance or dampen
sensory modalities, alter morphology during regeneration, slow aging, accelerate
or decelerate metabolism, or act as an anti-toxin to known poisonous compounds.