* 0352185
* Collaborative Research: Data Assimilation of Dual Doppler Lidar Observations of the Urban Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ronald Calhoun, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2008
* USD 101,542.00

Air motions in the clear air can be detected by Doppler lidar, which sees
primarily aerosol particles moving with the air. A scanning Doppler lidar system
can therefore characterize the air motions in a portion of the atmospheric
boundary layer (near the surface of the earth), but it only sees one component
of the motion, the radial component in the direction of the lidar beam. A
technique called data assimilation has been developed to determine the three-
dimensional wind field from a single Doppler lidar by using the measurements to
constrain a numerical model of the flow. When repeated measurements over time
are used, assimilation schemes can produce additional information in addition to
that measured directly, including cross-beam components of the velocity.
However, the deduced wind fields are to some extent dependent on assumptions in
the model, so it has not been demonstrated that this approach provides realistic
reconstruction of the wind fields. In this project, the investigators will use
two scanning Doppler lidars to observe the same parts of the wind fields from
different directions and so will have direct measurements of two components of
the wind vector. These measurements will be used in two ways: to test the
results obtained by data assimilation using only one lidar at a time, for which
the other lidar then provides verification, and to extend the data-assimilation
technique to use two lidars and thus obtain a still better reconstruction of the
wind field. The reconstructed wind fields will then be used to study turbulent
coherent structures and their roles in the urban boundary layer, especially as
they may influence the transport and dispersion of pollutants. Because the
lidars provide both wind and backscatter information, the data set can constrain
the model predictions of transport and dispersion of aerosols in the boundary
layer. These retrieval techniques will thus provide an important tool for
studying the structures and statistics of turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected outcomes of this research include: verification (and possible
improvement) of the data-assimilation technique as applied to single-lidar
observations, which are far more common and less expensive to obtain than dual-
lidar observations; new information on the nature of turbulent structures in the
atmospheric boundary layer and their contributions to dispersion; and improved
ability to predict dispersion. The results should lead to better capabilities
for monitoring and predicting dispersion in an urban setting, with possible
important benefits to public safety.