* 0352835
* SGER: Micromachined Floating Element Skin Friction Sensor Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Mark Sheplak, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 11/30/2004
* USD 60,313.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0352835 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: MARK SHEPLAK INSTITUTION:
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA

SGER: MICROMACHINED FLOATING ELEMENT SKIN FRICTION SENSOR TECHNOLOGY

This is an exploratory research program for the development of silicon-
micromachined floating-element shear-stress sensors via modeling, optimization
and preliminary fabrication of a "proof of concept" device. The goal is to
perform preliminary research on a novel measurement tool for fundamental fluid
mechanics research. The intellectual merit of the proposed activities will
benefit two scientific communities. In the MEMS community, the research will
utilize innovative fabrication techniques and multidisciplinary optimization to
realize a research instrumentation-grade wall-shear stress sensor. Specifically,
a novel, lateral ion-implanted, piezoresistive floating element sensor using an
integrated-circuit compatible manufacturing process yielding a device possessing
electronic through-wafer backside contracts will be developed. This
microfabrication contribution will result in a truly flush-mounted, direct wall
shear stress sensor, with the electrical leads and wire bonds hidden from the
flow field resulting in a robust sensor for gas or liquid applications that
induces negligible flow disturbances. In the fluid mechanics community, the
realization of this sensor will greatly extend the spatial and temporal
resolution capabilities as well as the accuracy of skin friction measurement
technology. Once developed, this technology will be employed to help elucidate
the fundamental physics of both two- and three-dimensional turbulent boundary
layers possessing variable pressure gradients in both air and water facilities.
These activities will broadly impact measurement technology. Successful
realization of the sensor will provide a critical measurement capability for the
turbulence research community, the aerospace industry, and biomedical research
community.