* 0352418
* Integrating and Extending Three Open-Source Real-Time Experiment Control Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Robert Butera, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2005
* USD 0.00

This award supports an effort to integrate three open-source experiment control
systems, and then extend their utility as a single freely-available, powerful,
and flexible system for real-time control of biological experiments. In recent
years, real-time control of instrumentation has emerged as an important tool for
biological experimentation. Traditionally, the ability of experimentalists to
perturb a system has been limited to pre-programmed patterns or flexible,
operator-controlled protocols limited by human reflexes. In contrast, real-time
control allows the researcher to utilize dynamic manipulations with
characteristics (e.g., pulse timing and amplitude) that are updated on-the-fly
according to automated analysis of rapidly-measured system parameters. Thus,
real-time methods can dynamically probe ion-channel function by networking
simulated and real excitable cells at rates of tens of thousands of
interventions per second. The specific aims of this project are: 1. Unification
of three existing real-time control systems developed independently by the PI
and his two collaborators in this project. Each system has particular strengths
that complement the weaknesses of the others. The merged system will be based on
a variant of Linux known as Real-Time Linux. Initial work will identify and
merge fundamental core parts of each of the three systems' source code, after
which a central source-code repository will facilitate the coordinated
development of new C and C++ code by the three groups. In comparison to these
first-generation systems, the unified system will have greatly expanded
functionality. 2. Development of performance-monitoring metrics and tools that
can monitor system performance (speed, latency, and jitter) 3. Creation of an
extensive real-time experiment application library containing general-purpose,
application-specific, and teaching-lab experiment-control plug-ins. 4. Optimize
end-user ease of use at every stage, from installation to plug-in modification.