* 0352731
* Collaborative Research:     Glacial History of Snowball Earth
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Eugene Domack, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 04/30/2008
* USD 69,788.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Harvard
University and Hamilton College. They will study the glacial history of the two
most recent "Snowball Earth" epochs, which preceded the first appearance of
complex animal life on the planet. (Snowball Earth refers to a state in which
the entire ocean is covered by Equatorward-flowing glaciers. It is the
manifestation of a fundamental instability in the climate system due to ice-
albedo feedback.) Snowball episodes expanded millions of years because
atmospheric pCO2 must reach hundreds of times present levels for deglaciation to
occur. This is achieved because silicate weathering (which consumes CO2) is
attenuated, but volcanic outgassing is not. Glacial deposits (diamictite)
previously used to test the snowball concept may actually have formed during
deglaciation, under very different conditions, creating a false dichotomy
between theory and observations. Fine-grained suspension deposits between or
beneath diamictites were previously regarded as interglacial or interstadial,
but they may better represent marine sedimentation during snowball Earth itself.
When a snowball Earth deglaciates, ferrous iron dissolved in seawater should
precipitate as iron oxide. Iron-oxide-rich deposits are observed to follow
suspension deposits and precede diamictite, consistent with the snowball
hypothesis if the former represent the snowball Earth and the latter its demise.
The suspension deposits are locally associated with carbonate sediments and
other indications of open water. Models imply that invasion by marine glaciers
from higher latitudes will keep the tropical ocean covered by thick ice even
after the surface temperature reaches the melting point (due to greenhouse
forcing). Consequently, 'oases' will open up on tropical shelves and inland seas
that are protected from marine glacial invasion. Carbonates precipitated in
snowball oases have characteristic isotopic patterns, dictated by the large
atmospheric carbon reservoir. These new concepts could eliminate the most potent
criticisms of the snowball Earth concept based on the glacial record.
Stratigraphic mapping and logging will be done in the fjord region of East
Greenland, northwestern Nordaustlandet (Svalbard), and the Mackenzie Mountains
of the northern Canadian Cordillera. In these areas, the full glacial history of
snowball Earth is well developed and exposed. Sample sets will be collected and
curated for collaborative geochemical studies.

Intellectual merit. The proposal brings together two of the most experienced
researchers in their respective fields in an intensely collaborative field-based
study to test a far-reaching theory (snowball Earth) using creative and original
concepts. Some of the concepts (e.g., snowball oases) derive from recent
theoretical modeling in yet another field (geophysical fluid dynamics). A
strength of the Harvard team's prior work on the snowball Earth problem was the
strong interest and involvement of a colleague, the geochemical oceanographer
Daniel P. Schrag.

Broader impact. Both Principal Investigators hold appointments at liberal arts
institutions, where the primary responsibility is to undergraduate instruction.
Both incorporate elements of their research in courses they teach, and both
include students as field and laboratory assistants. They regularly give
lectures intended for the general public, and are frequently consulted by media
science writers and television producers covering aspects of Antarctic
geoscience and snowball Earth. They have also contributed to courses in science
journalism. An article in Scientific American on Snowball Earth co-written by
one of the Principal Investigators is used by many elementary school teachers in
their classes.

