* 0352372
* Optimizing the Number of Points on Rating Scales
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Jon Krosnick, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Social scientists routinely design questionnaires using rating scales to measure
social and psychological constructs. There is no consensus, however, among
researchers about the optimal number of points to offer on such scales so as to
maximize reliability and validity. This project will compare the reliabilities
and validities of rating scales ranging from 2 points long to 11 points long
presented visually. This project also will explore the moderating roles of three
aspects of the task (biopolar vs. unipolar constructs; verbal labeling on all
scale points vs. the end points only; topic familiarity) and two respondent
characteristics (cognitive skills and motivation to provide accurate reports, as
gauged by need for cognition). Longer scales may be optimal for bipolar
constructs, scales that are fully verbally labeled, and highly familiar topics.
To address these issues, a three-wave survey will be conducted with a nationally
representative sample of adults by Knowledge Networks, a survey research firm
that collects data weekly via the Internet from an established panel of
respondents who have all been equivalently equipped with Internet access. The
questionnaire will manipulate number of points on target rating scales
addressing a range of topics and will include criterion measures for assessing
concurrent validity of the target ratings. Also manipulated will be polarity of
the construct and the extent of verbal labeling of the scale points. Issue
familiarity, respondents' cognitive skills, and their motivation to provide
accurate reports will be measured. Multiple groups longitudinal structural
equation modeling will be conducted to assess the effects of these factors on
the reliability and validity of responses, explicitly estimating random and
systematic measurement error and measurement validity.

Rating scales are ubiquitous in social science research because they are
convenient tools for measuring attitudes, beliefs, behavioral intentions,
behavioral experiences, and a range of other phenomenon of great interest to
scholars, policy-makers, and business planners. Researchers use a wide variety
of different scale lengths in different investigations, however, suggesting that
there is no consensus as to the optimal length of a rating scale to maximize the
accuracy of the measurements obtained. But it is easy to imagine that rating
scales may be too long, making it difficult for respondents to use them, because
the meanings of the scale points will be ambiguous. And rating scales may also
be too short and therefore suboptimal because they clump people into a few crude
categories (e.g., separating the people who support a law from those who oppose
it, rather than permitting people to express degrees of support or opposition).
This project will help to improve the accuracy of social science measurements by
comparing the effectiveness of rating scales of various lengths to identify
which are optimal. The study will investigate whether the optimal scale length
is greater for more familiar topics, for scales that have all points labeled
with words (instead of only the end points being labeled as such), and for
scales with a zero-point in the middle (e.g., from "dislike a great deal"
through "neither like nor dislike" to "like a great deal"), as compared to those
with a zero point at the end (e.g., from "not at all important" to "extremely
important"). And the project will test whether people with greater cognitive
skills and more motivation to report precisely are able to manage longer rating
scales more effectively. The findings will contribute to the psychological
literature on how ability and motivation moderate task performance, and the
findings will provide practical guidance for questionnaire designers in
government, in the commercial world, and in academia (in psychology, sociology,
political science, economics, education, communication, anthropology, medicine,
and many other sciences that make measurements via questionnaires).