* 0353760
* REU Site: Wyoming Infrared Observatory's Summer Undergraduate Research Assistanship Program (SURAP)
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Ronald Canterna, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 05/31/2009
* USD 449,715.00

Proposal ID: AST-0353760 Institution: University of Wyoming PI: Canterna, Ronald

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site will be continued at the
University of Wyoming Infrared Observatory (WIRO) Summer Undergraduate Research
Assistanship Program (SURAP), under the direction of Ronald Canterna. The
objective of the SURAP REU program is to offer undergraduates across the nation
its tutorial program in astronomical research. Specific goals include:
Introducing undergraduates to a realistic and fulfilling experience in
astrophysics research, including current concerns about science ethics.

Acquainting undergraduates with the diverse research fields in modern
astrophysics, and provide opportunities to work directly with active
professionals. The students will be given the responsibility to become
independent, creative researchers. Offering undergraduates valuable observing
experience. Placing undergraduates in a socially diverse environment with
student colleagues from diverse cultural, geographical and educational
backgrounds. Encouraging undergraduates to disseminate their research results in
publications and at professional meetings. Exposing undergraduates to a wide
variety of additional scientific and outdoor endeavors unique to the Wyoming and
Rocky Mountain region.

In each of the five years of the grant, seven undergraduate students will be
chosen from colleges and universities throughout the nation. Special emphasis
will be placed on meeting the SURAP goal of selecting students from diverse
backgrounds by concentrating on freshman and sophomore undergraduates, women and
under-represented minority students from liberal arts colleges and small
universities with limited research facilities. A concurrent academic/laboratory
course and research seminar will be undertaken, as will dedicated seminars
designed to address issues related to science ethics. A Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) component will also be included, which will allow two K-12
teachers to participate fully in the research activities.

This proposal is co-funded by the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, and the Division of Ethics and Values Studies in the Social,
Behavioral and Economical Sciences Directorate.

