* 0353963
* REU/ASSURE Site in Physics at Wright State University (WSU) and Wright Patterson Air Force Base (WPAFB)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Douglas Petkie, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2007
* USD 249,391.00

The Physics Department at Wright State University (WSU) enjoys strong and
production collaboration with the Air Force Institutte of Technology (AFIT) and
several research groups associated with the Air Force Base (WPAFB), in close
proximity to WSU. This REU Site utilizes these collaborations to allow ten
undergraduate students to join ongoing research efforts at WSU and WPAFB for a
ten-week program during the summer. Each student is mentored by a WSU or AFIT
faculty member or an AFRL research scientist on a project that focuses on the
experimental or computational aspects of basic and applied research in atomic,
molecular and optical physics, chemical physics, plasma physics, solid state
physics, materials science, and biological physics. The summer research
experience also includes workshops to complement the research projects, weekely
participant meetings that inlclude a series of seminars exploring the research
areas, educational opportunities and careers in the physical sciences, tours of
area laboratories and facilities, poster and research presentations by the
participants and several social activities. Students are encouraged to present
research results during the academic year at an appropriate professional
meeting. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with
the NSF REU program.