* 0353562
* REU Site on Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Julio Turrens, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 332,794.00

Project title: REU site on Protein Structure and Function&lt;br/&gt;Host
Institution: University of South Alabama&lt;br/&gt;Participating departments:
This is an interdisciplinary REU site, involving faculty from the departments of
Biochemistry, Biology, Biomedical Sciences, Chemistry, Microbiology and
Pharmacology. These departments are part of various academic units (Allied
Health Professions, Arts and Sciences and the College of Medicine basic sciences
program).&lt;br/&gt;Other institutions involved: Students are recruited from
various institutions in the Southeastern states including Alabama A&amp;M,
Alabama State University, Stillman College and Spring Hill College in Alabama
and Tougaloo College in Mississippi and Xavier University in New Orleans, and
Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. &lt;br/&gt;Number of students
involved: 10 students, 6 or more of them from institutions different from the
host institution. Applicants select a project from a list of 13 different
ongoing studies.&lt;br/&gt;Duration: 10 weeks during the summer
semester&lt;br/&gt;Activities: Students participating in this REU site will
receive a stipend and be housed on campus. Each student is assigned to work in a
research laboratory during the summer. In addition, all participants will: i)
take a one-week long course on protein biochemistry; ii) participate in eight
sessions with discussions and presentations on "Ethical aspects of Research and
Research Integrity" ; iii) attend weekly presentations by all faculty members in
the REU program; iv) write a scientific report summarizing their results; v)
make an oral presentation of their results in Power Point format at a Symposium
at the end of the program, and vi) discuss their progress during three informal
meetings with other undergraduates from various
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is designed to provide research
opportunities to undergraduates from institutions in the Southeastern US. The
goal is to stimulate critical thinking and to encourage undergraduates to
consider a career in research. A substantial number of students are recruited
from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU). This program allows
undergraduates to explore in depth various research areas in proteomics and
protein science, and trains them in the use of equipment not commonly available
at smaller institutions. More information is available at
http://www.southalabama.edu/biomedical/ucur/NSFREU.htm &lt;br/&gt;Major field:
Biology, Biochemistry and Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator and primary
contact: Julio F. Turrens, Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;Address: Biomedical Sciences, UCOM
6000, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688&lt;br/&gt;Telephone number:
251-380-2714 Email address: jturrens@usouthal.edu &lt;br/&gt;