* 0353997
* The Keck Northeast Astronomy Consortium: An Integrated, Collaborative and Effective Program to Involve Undergraduates in Research
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2007
* William Herbst, Wesleyan University
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 10/31/2007
* USD 201,502.00

AST 0353997 Herbst

The Keck Northeast Astronomy Consortium (KNAC) is comprised of astronomy faculty
and students at the following institutions: Colgate, Haverford (including
students from Bryn Mawr), Middlebury, Swarthmore, Vassar, Wellesley, Wesleyan
and Williams. KNAC provides an integrated and collaborative program, designed to
provide research experiences for students that they would otherwise not have.
The programs have four integrated components:

o A 10-week summer research opportunity for students to work at a KNAC
institution other than their own. o A fall Student Symposium attended by nearly
the entire faculty and a large number of students (not just those who have done
research) at which each KNAC-supported student gives a 10-minute research talk
on his or her project. Students from our institutions who have done research
projects under auspices other than KNAC are also invited and encouraged to
either speak at the Symposium or present poster papers. o Publication of
Proceedings from that Symposium, for which each presenting student writes a
4-page research paper. These Proceedings are distributed widely within the
astronomical community (e.g. to graduate institutions) and included by the
Astrophysics Data System in their electronic bibliography. o A summer planning
and evaluation meeting of the KNAC faculty.

