* 0353915
* REU Site: Ecology in Human-Dominated Landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 285,063.00

Miami University will conduct an REU site on Ecology in Human-Dominated
Landscapes in which 12 students would spend 10 weeks In the summer, engaged in
collaborative, multi-disciplinary research that emphasizes ecological questions
in landscapes heavily influenced by human activity. We will recruit students
with the goal of having a diverse group that includes underrepresented
minorities, first-generation college students, and students from colleges with
little research opportunities. Students will conduct individual research
projects with the guidance of individual faculty mentors. Each student project
will also be part of a research "cluster," with each cluster consisting of 3-5
students and an equal number of faculty mentors. Students will develop projects
that are collaborative with other students in the cluster, focused around a
theme that ties together the research programs of several faculty members. Thus,
students will be exposed to a broad range of research and have the opportunity
to work in multi-disciplinary research teams, structured similarly to research
groups solving real-world problems. Each student will also participate in whole
group activities, including a 10-week workshop course (2 hours per week) that
covers the scientific process, scientific and environmental ethics, careers in
ecology, how to prepare and deliver scientific presentations, and other research
aspects. In addition, all students will participate in whole-day field trips as
a group, and attend the annual conference of the Ecological Society of America
with some of the faculty mentors. Finally, each student will present his or her
research as an oral presentation, an electronic poster, and a written paper that
will eventually be developed into a manuscript for publication. Miami University
has excellent field and lab facilities for executing this REU site, including a
diverse array of human-dominated ecosystems (including the Ecology Research
Center, a nearby field station), and state-of-the-art laboratory facilities.
Miami also has a long and excellent history of involving undergraduates in
research, a foundation upon which this REU project will build. For further
information, please contact Dr. David J. Berg at bergdj@muohio, 513-529-3174, or
visit our REU program website at www.muohio.edu/ecoreu.