* 0353488
* Trinity University Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Vadim Ponomarenko, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2007
* USD 188,445.00

2004 will see the Trinity University Research Experiences for Undergraduates in
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program enter its seventh year of funding from the
National Science Foundation. The Program will offer 12&lt;br/&gt;students the
opportunity to pursue an 8 week long broad based program of Mathematical
research topics&lt;br/&gt;under the direction of a highly experienced group of
faculty mentors. Available projects for the 2004 program include Abstract
Algebra, Combinatorics, Discrete Dynamical Systems, and Mathematical Programming
(with an emphasis in Computational Biology). The program emphasizes 7 major
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To provide the student participants with an
understanding of, an appreciation for, and an experience&lt;br/&gt;in the nature
of mathematical research and the life of a mathematical researcher, to a degree
that&lt;br/&gt;encourages them to pursue the study of the mathematical sciences
on the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To offer these experiences with a
special eye toward students who do not typically have these
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;Of particular interest are students who are either
female or a member of an under-
represented&lt;br/&gt;group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To develop in each
participant superior skills in mathematical writing and oral mathematical
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To produce quality mathematical work
appropriate for publication on our web site or in
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;research journals and, when possible, in higher level
research journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To extend the research experience
beyond the 8 weeks at Trinity by motivating the students to
present&lt;br/&gt;their REU research at either their home institution or at a
regional/national meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To gain experience in the use
of computers and their interaction in mathematical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To immerse the participants in the culture of
mathematics and instill in each member a lifetime value&lt;br/&gt;of the
importance of collegiality and group interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our 2004
program will include some significant changes over our past programs, including
an extension&lt;br/&gt;of the program from 7 to 8 weeks, a revised First Week
Schedule, an added emphasis throughout the&lt;br/&gt;Program with respect to
mathematical writing skills and oral mathematical presentation, a
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;weekly Colloquium featuring speakers of national
prominence in undergraduate mathematics, and support&lt;br/&gt;for students who
wish to present their REU research at a regional or national meeting.