* 0353752
* Plant Science and Conservation Biology Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Craig Bina, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 234,008.00

The focus of this REU program, offered at the Chicago Botanic Garden in
cooperation with Northwestern University, is on field and laboratory research in
plant biology and conservation. During a 10-week summer internship, eight
students will participate in a program with the following major components: 1)
Scientists at the Chicago Botanic Garden will mentor students in meaningful
research projects on topics such as: plant conservation, soil ecology, plant
genetics, plant ecology, economic botany, ex situ propagation, paleoethnobotany
and plant demography. Each student, in cooperation with her/his mentor, will
learn the enjoyment of scientific discovery through hands-on, hypothesis-driven
research activities. 2) The research staff will present a series of seminars in
their respective areas of expertise to expand the learning experience of
students to various allied fields of plant biology. 3) Research staff will
coordinate and present a second, more formal series of tutorials and seminars on
research techniques, such as quantitative methods, database management, computer
graphics, Geographical Information Systems (GIS), and Global Positioning Systems
(GPS). 4) Student interns will actively participate in bi-weekly symposia where
they present the goals and projected outcomes of their research projects.
Students will have opportunities to interact with other students in their
cohort, socialize and develop public speaking skills in a friendly environment.
5) The project will offer students a variety of educational, social and cultural
activities in a series of field trips to a rich array of nature preserves,
historic sites and cultural institutions in the Chicago area. 6) During the
final week, students will participate in a mini-symposium and present their
research results in poster format. Following the 10-week internship program,
students will be encouraged to present their data at an appropriate professional
meeting. This will give students an opportunity to participate in scientific
activities and exchange ideas in a national or international arena. Further
information on this program can be found by contacting Dr. David L. Lentz at
dlentz@chicagobotanic.org or visiting our website:
http://www.chicagobotanic.org/research/index.html.

Keywords: plant biology, conservation, paleoethnobotany, genetics