* 0353610
* NSF-Europe: Collaborative Study of Geometrically Frustrated Magnetic Material: New Materials and New Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Peter Schiffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 458,055.00

This is an international collaborative research project that was submitted in
response to NSF Solicitation NSF 02-135. The project will investigate the
unusual properties of geometrically frustrated magnets, materials in which the
interactions between atomic spins compete with each other due to the triangular
geometry of the magnetic sublattice. This leads to highly degenerate ground
states where the interaction energies cannot all be simultaneously minimized.
This in turn prevents ordinary magnetic ordering down to temperatures well below
the energy scale of the spin-spin interaction. The low temperature magnetic
properties will be investigated via a collaborative approach involving two U.S.
investigators, who specialize in materials chemistry and magnetothermodynamic
measurements, and two European groups: One in the areas of nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and other measurements at Laboratoire de Physique des Solides,
Universite Paris-Sud, the other in the areas of neutron diffraction and theory
at University College London. One research theme is the chemical synthysis of
new geometrically frustrated magnets with the specific goals of investigating
new frustrating lattice types and of finding materials that are both highly
frustrated and that can be grown as high-quality single crystal samples. The
second theme is the study of effects of chemical substitution on geometrically
frustrated systems. Students involved in the research will participate in
international research activities, together with traditional and cutting edge
training that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry or
government.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is an international collaborative
research project that was submitted in response to NSF Solicitation NSF 02-135.
The project will investigate the unusual properties of a class of materials
known as geometrically frustrated magnets. In contrast to ordinary magnets, and
due to the geometrical arrangement of magnetic atoms in the lattice, these
materials cannot attain a unique, low temperature, lowest-energy arrangement for
their magnetic moments. The key geometry leading to the effect has magnetic
atoms placed at the vertices of triangles. These systems are fundamentally
different from other magnetic materials in that their properties at low
temperatures cannot be understood within current theoretical models.
Understanding geometrical frustration in magnets has implications for complex
systems as diverse as superconducting junction arrays or neural networks, and
may also provide insight into computational algorithms. The research is a
collaboration between four groups, two in the U. S., one in the United Kingdom
and one in France. The two U.S. investigators have a long record of working with
a diverse group of students and involving graduate students and undergraduates
in every stage of the research process. Students involved in the research will
participate in international research activities, together with traditional and
cutting edge training that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry or
government.&lt;br/&gt;