* 0353247
* 2004 Protein Derived Cofactors Gordon Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 01/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Protein Derived Cofactors, Radicals, and
Quinones will be held January 11 to 16, 2004 at the Holiday Inn, Ventura CA.
This conference has evolved from conferences on quinones and quinoproteins.
Because of the properties of quinones and their involvement in biological
electron transfer, a topic that became a natural component of the early
conferences was electron transfer, especially long-range electron transfer.
Because of the chemistry of quinones and the involvement of free radicals in
their reactions and in biological electron transfer, radicals also became a
focus in earlier programs. Many quinones in biocatalysis are quinoproteins, in
which amino acid residues have been modified post-translationally to quinones
that serve as cofactors. Other post-translational modifications of amino acid
side chains in proteins have been discovered in recent years, and these too have
been included in the programs of this conference. The topics of this conference
are further related by the fact that the chemistry of the biological processes
is novel, both biologically and chemically, and for this reason are of interest
to a broad range of chemists, biophysicists, and biologists. The biosynthesis of
novel cofactors within the scope of this conference, the functions of these
cofactors, the roles of radicals and electron transfer in the actions of
cofactors, and the structures of enzymes incorporating novel cofactors will be
emphasized. Travel support and conference fees will be provided for increasing
participation of young participants and for fostering diversity among
participants.