* 0353085
* An Integrated Framework for Greener Solvent Selection and Solvent Recycling under Uncertainty
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Urmila Diwekar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2007
* USD 244,961.00

Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waste solvents from the chemical process
industries (CPI) are not only financially costly because funds are needed for
separation, removal and disposal, but what is not removed deteriorates
environmental quality. Solvent recycling is costly and determining optimal
separation sequences is a complex process synthesis problem. This research
project is a coupled solvent selection (which involves "product design" and
chemical synthesis) and solvent recycling ("process design") approach to
pollution prevention and greener processes. Integrating chemical synthesis with
process synthesis to improve environmental and economic performance poses a
challenging mathematical problem of multiple conflicting objectives, with a
combinatorial explosion of alternatives and uncertainties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of an efficient
multiobjective optimization (MOP) framework under uncertainty for this
simultaneous integration around the commercially available ASPEN simulator. This
framework is based on algorithms for multiobjective, discrete/continuous
optimization, and for uncertainty analysis. The multiobjective optimization
framework will provide a set of non-dominant designs where further improvements
for one objective will be at the expense of another. This is valuable in a
situation where there are a large number of desirable and important objectives,
which are not easily translated into dollars: for example, human health and
life, environmental impacts and plant flexibility. The framework will also be
useful to solve problems where objectives are difficult to quantify, and when
there is a lack of data or the data is
inaccurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the obvious importance to the environment,
the project will also benefit underrepresented groups as the PI plans to target
women for participation in the project and is collaborating with the University
of Puerto Rico/Mayaguez. The PI is a faculty advisor for the Society of Women
Engineers (SWE) and a mentor in the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;