* 0353585
* The Keck Geology Consortium: A Core Undergraduate Research Program
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Beth Palmer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 01/31/2005
* USD 552,732.00

ABSTRACT for EAR0353585

The Keck Geology Consortium focuses on enriching undergraduate education
through development of high-quality research experiences. The Consortium has
been a fundamental component of the undergraduate-research landscape over the
last seventeen years, supporting 909 undergraduate students from eighty-three
schools across the nation. In addition to research projects, the Consortium
program includes the annual Keck Research Symposium in Geology. The symposium is
a gathering place for some of the most talented and motivated undergraduate
students in the nation. For the students, the symposium is a place to present
research results in an environment that emphasizes the importance of
communication and builds self-confidence. For the faculty, the symposium is an
opportunity to interact and share information with each other, stimulating
development of new collaborations and innovative programs.

This award will is to continue the Keck Geology Consortium in order to
capitalize and build on the seventeen-year experience of the Keck Geology
Consortium in collaboration, design, and administration of undergraduate
research projects.

The REU site will serve as the platform for a systematic assessment study to
produce a web-based assessment library that can be adapted by the geoscience
community to inform the development and practice of teaching undergraduate
research.