* 0353236
* U.S.-Uganda Cooperative Research:  Undergraduate Research Investigating Wetlands Adjacent to Lake Victoria
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Sharon Jones, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Patterson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 95,360.00

0353236 Ruggles

This international research and education program will focus on the study of
wetland regions adjacent to Lake Victoria in Uganda, Africa. The wetlands in
this region and throughout Africa are subjected to increased stress from
deforestation, agricultural intrusion, population increase, and increasing
sediment and nutrient loads. The goal of this project is to engage U.S.
undergraduates and faculty in international teams to investigate the hydrologic,
hydraulic, and environmental efficiency of wetlands. The research will be
divided into four separate but interrelated studies. Individual research teams
made up of undergraduate students from the United States and Uganda and
supervised by faculty from Lafayette College and Makerere University will 1)
measure water quality, hydrologic, and sediment parameters within selected
wetlands, 2) conduct a rapid monitoring of the wetland - lake interface, 3)
assess historical remotely sensed images to establish land use and wetland area
as a function of time, and 4) construct a controlled wetland to be used to
examine agricultural techniques, treatment reliability, and hydrologic
strategies. Research teams will take advantage of local expertise while in
Uganda by collaborating with scientists from Lake Victoria Environmental
Management Program and the Fisheries Research Institute.

The broader impacts of the project include developing a better understanding of
the function of the wetland as a mechanism in the removal of contaminants
produced by increasing populations. Wetlands in the proposed study region
receive substantial volumes of runoff due to increasing population and
deforestation, are used as tertiary treatment for sewerage, and are being
encroached upon to develop agricultural land. Stresses such as these will
continue to be placed on the wetlands throughout the world. The research
conducted in this study will provide scientific information that can be used to
develop a better understanding of wetlands and how they are impacted by stresses
directly related to world population growth. This educational broader impact of
the project will provide hands-on research experience for U.S. undergraduates in
an international context.















