* 0353129
* Production, Accumulation, and Regional Socio-Political Dynamics in the Southern Amazon (Brazil), AD 1250-1600
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Michael Heckenberger, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 219,532.00

This research examines the socio-political organization of large, complex
communities in the Upper Xingu region of southern Amazonia (Brazil),
particularly with respect to the production and distribution of economic and
symbolic capital. The research builds on previous NSF-funded archaeological
research (2001-2003), which focused on regional survey and site mapping. Prior
research revealed unexpectedly complex regional and local settlement patterns,
including first-, second-, and third-order plaza villages and non-plaza hamlets,
and substantial ecological transformations associated with the large and densely
distributed late prehistoric communities. The present research will investigate
differences in production and accumulation of resources at local and regional
levels to characterize regional social dynamics in late prehistoric times (c. AD
1250-1650). Investigations will address differences between sites and intra-site
distributions and zonation, particularly with respect to major structural
features of communities, e.g., within, near, and distant from central plazas.
Specifically, the research will test three models of production and
accumulation. The first suggests that bulk food resources (notably agricultural
surplus) and economic centralization is at the heart of regional political
economics. The second suggests that political economy was based primarily on the
control and exchange of tangible luxury items, a "prestige goods" economy. The
third model, inspired by Clifford Geertz's definition of the "theater state,"
suggests that it is control of public ritual and space that forms the basis of
differential power production. Fieldwork involves archaeological surface
evaluation, soil coring and analysis, test-pit and larger block excavations at
select sites, including at least one example of each site type. Lake-bottom
coring, for paleo-environmental reconstruction (headed by project participant
Dr. Mark Brenner), and paleoethnobotany (headed by project participants Dr. Lee
Newsom and Dr. Jose Iriarte) are also planned. Laboratory activities include
processing and preliminary analysis of artifacts, soils, and satellite imagery.
The project involves participation by US and Brazilian researchers and graduate
students, as well as substantial participation by local indigenous (Amerindian)
populations.