* 0354223
* Collaborative Research: FRG: New development on nonparametric modeling and inferences with biological applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jianqing Fan, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2008
* USD 552,000.00

The objectives of this proposal are to develop new and widely
applicable&lt;br/&gt;semiparametric and nonparametric approaches to solve
challenging&lt;br/&gt;statistical problems from computational biology. Frontiers
of biological&lt;br/&gt;research such as normalization and analysis of
microarray and proteomic&lt;br/&gt;data, functional connectivity of brains,
covariate effects on longitudinal&lt;br/&gt;and functional data, and prediction
of individual response trajectories&lt;br/&gt;have generated a number of
outstanding statistical challenges. Several&lt;br/&gt;new semiparametric and
nonparametric models have been introduced to&lt;br/&gt;address the imminent
needs for the aforementioned biological applications. &lt;br/&gt;A number of
innovative methods on nonparametric estimation and inferences&lt;br/&gt;are
proposed. Their properties will be investigated via both
asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;theory and simulations. Their efficacy in biological
applications will be&lt;br/&gt;carefully scrutinized. This proposal not only
introduces a number of&lt;br/&gt;innovative techniques and useful statistical
models, but also provides&lt;br/&gt;various new insights into nonparametric
inferences. The research findings&lt;br/&gt;will have significant impact on the
future development of statistical&lt;br/&gt;theories and
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological invention and information
advancement have revolutionized&lt;br/&gt;scientific research and technological
development. Quantitative methods&lt;br/&gt;have been widely employed in
scientific communities. They have played&lt;br/&gt;pivotal roles in knowledge
discovery. This proposal intends to develop&lt;br/&gt;new nonparametric
techniques and theories that arise from frontiers of&lt;br/&gt;scientific
development. In particular, the investigators will develop&lt;br/&gt;models and
cutting-edge technologies for the analysis of microarray,&lt;br/&gt;proteomic,
longitudinal and functional data and fMRI brain images.
Common&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of these data are their complexity and size,
where&lt;br/&gt;nonparametric techniques are particularly powerful and under
developed.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed techniques address imminent needs in
computational aspects of&lt;br/&gt;molecular biology, neurology, and
epidemiology. In addition, they will&lt;br/&gt;integrate new mathematical
developments with those in science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering, which empowers new
knowledge discoveries and prudent policy&lt;br/&gt;making. Undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctors and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups will be
trained as results of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;