* 0354828
* Nuclear Reactions with Short-lived Nuclear Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* James Kolata, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2008
* USD 750,000.00

The proposed project will involve the study of nuclear reactions utilizing
short-lived radioactive nuclear beams (RNBs) together with the development of
instrumentation, techniques, and apparatus to facilitate nuclear research in
general and RNB studies in particular. Specific experiments will emphasize the
investigation of the structure and reaction mechanisms of neutron- and proton-
rich nuclei near the limits of nuclear stability.&lt;br/&gt;These studies are a
continuation of a very successful program to elucidate the unusual effects that
the exotic&lt;br/&gt;nuclear halo structure, which appears for weakly-bound
systems at the limits of stability, has on various&lt;br/&gt;nuclear reactions.
Another part of the project relates to the synthesis of elements in normal
stars, as well&lt;br/&gt;as in supernova explosions and other extreme
astrophysical environments. As appropriate, the work will&lt;br/&gt;be carried
out at the University of Notre Dame (UND), Oak Ridge National Lab (ORNL), and
possibly&lt;br/&gt;at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) .
Finally, the production and properties of&lt;br/&gt;Fermium and trans-Fermium
isotopes will be studied in collaboration with a group at Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;(TAMU), and other experiments using heavy-ion reactions at
intermediate energies will be carried out. This&lt;br/&gt;work will involve the
use of the UM BigSol 7T solenoid apparatus, which has been relocated to a
dedicated&lt;br/&gt;beamline at the TAMU K500 superconducting-cyclotron
laboratory and is now operational.&lt;br/&gt;Proposed technology development
projects include an upgrade of the University of Michigan (UM) dual&lt;br/&gt;6T
superconducting solenoid ion-optical system (TwinSol ), presently at UND.
Related to this, the construc-&lt;br/&gt;tion of an expanded particle-neutron
coincidence detector array is proposed. This will upgrade the
existing&lt;br/&gt;low-energy RNB facility to allow for more detailed studies of
nuclear reactions with already-available beams, and for the development and use
of new, higher-atomic-number (Z) beams.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
have an impact on graduate, undergraduate, and high school education,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as on the development of a technologically- literate work
force and the commercial applications of&lt;br/&gt;superconducting magnet
technology. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students from
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan and the University of Notre Dame, together
with faculty members and students from&lt;br/&gt;several other (primarily
undergraduate) schools located in the Midwest, in close proximity to UM and
UND.&lt;br/&gt;The hands-on training of these students in the use of advanced,
state-of-the-art computational methods,&lt;br/&gt;nuclear accelerators,
radiation detectors, vacuum and cryogenic techniques, and superconducting ion-
optical&lt;br/&gt;magnetic systems has already had an important impact on the
development of a technologically-literate&lt;br/&gt;scientific workforce.
Several of the graduate students and postdoctoral research associates who
worked&lt;br/&gt;on this project in the past are currently employed in highly-
responsible positions on national-security and&lt;br/&gt;medical-physics related
projects. Still others hold tenured or tenure-track academic positions, often
at&lt;br/&gt;primarily-undergraduate institutions with active research
participation programs. The current proposal will allow for the continuation of
this tradition, and for the initiation of a new pilot program that will
involve&lt;br/&gt;high-school students from the socioeconomically-challenged New
Buffalo, MI school district in physics-related research.&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
research will also help in the development of instrumentation and techniques,
together with&lt;br/&gt;future research personnel, that will be needed for the
next generation of RNB facilities, and in particular&lt;br/&gt;for the planned
US-based Rare Isotope Accelerator (RIA) . Finally, the development of precision
high-&lt;br/&gt;field, large-bore superconducting magnetic solenoids with
special design features (such as light-weight, low-loss aluminum cryostats) has
had and will continue to have an impact on technology transfer to US-
built&lt;br/&gt;commercial magnet systems used in a wide variety of important
applications.