* 0354962
* Scaling and universality in random matrix models, random polynomials and statistical physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Pavel Bleher, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 141,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Bleher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is directed
on fundamental problems of the&lt;br/&gt;theory of random matrices and random
polynomials and their&lt;br/&gt;applications, and on related problems in
statistical physics. The&lt;br/&gt;cornerstone of the problems is different
conjectures of universality,&lt;br/&gt;which state that as the size of a random
matrix (or the degree of a&lt;br/&gt;random polynomial) approaches infinity, the
correlations between&lt;br/&gt;properly scaled eigenvalues (or zeros) approach a
universal limit. In&lt;br/&gt;the current project the PI continues his studies
of the universality&lt;br/&gt;in random matrix models, random polynomials, and
statistical&lt;br/&gt;physics. This includes: (i) The Riemann-Hilbert (RH)
approach to&lt;br/&gt;double scaling limits in random matrix models. (ii) RH
approach to&lt;br/&gt;random matrices with external source. (iii) Semiclassical
asymptotics&lt;br/&gt;and RH approach to multi-matrix models. (iv) RH approach
to the&lt;br/&gt;six-vertex model of statistical physics. (v) Scaling limits
and&lt;br/&gt;universality in non-Gaussian ensembles of random polynomials
and&lt;br/&gt;random algebraic varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
an interdisciplinary character and it lies on the&lt;br/&gt;frontier between
physics and mathematics. The problems of scaling and&lt;br/&gt;universality are
central in many areas of modern science: theory of&lt;br/&gt;critical phenomena
and phase transitions, statistical physics and&lt;br/&gt;quantum field theory,
theory of quantum chaos, nonlinear dynamics,&lt;br/&gt;etc. This project is
directed on development of powerful mathematical&lt;br/&gt;methods to the
problems of scaling and universality in the theory of&lt;br/&gt;random matrices,
random polynomials, and related topics. It involves&lt;br/&gt;different areas of
mathematics: analysis, theory of integrable&lt;br/&gt;systems, probability
theory, semiclassical asymptotics for systems of&lt;br/&gt;differential
equations, complex analysis, etc. The research project&lt;br/&gt;under
consideration has direct applications to various physical&lt;br/&gt;problems:
combinatorial asymptotics related to quantum gravity,&lt;br/&gt;exactly solvable
models of statistical physics, spin systems on random&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, theory
of critical phenomena and phase transitions, quantum&lt;br/&gt;chaos. Possible
further applications include theory of knots and&lt;br/&gt;links and related
problems in molecular biology, growth models,&lt;br/&gt;statistical data
analysis, and others.&lt;br/&gt;