* 0354270
* EMSW21-RTG:  Graduate Education in Geometry and Topology at the University of Chicago
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* J. Peter May, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0354270&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Kevin D. Corlette&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
activities of the geometry/topology&lt;br/&gt;group at the University of Chicago
which have an impact on the&lt;br/&gt;training of graduate students. This group
currently consists of&lt;br/&gt;six senior faculty, thirteen junior faculty and
about thirty&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. The research interests of members of
the&lt;br/&gt;group span a wide array of topics in geometry and
topology,&lt;br/&gt;including complex differential geometry, rigidity and
locally&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces, connections of ergodic theory with
discrete&lt;br/&gt;groups and number theory, geometric group theory,
3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;topology, Teichmuller theory, geometric topology
of&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional manifolds, the moduli space of
Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;metrics, complex dynamics, symplectic topology and
homotopy&lt;br/&gt;theory. The activities of the group include active
research&lt;br/&gt;seminars in geometry/topology and algebraic topology,
several&lt;br/&gt;student seminars and a visitors program, all of which
are&lt;br/&gt;directly relevant to the education of graduate students.
These&lt;br/&gt;activities, in combination with the general structure of
the&lt;br/&gt;graduate program in the department, provide ideal conditions
for&lt;br/&gt;students to gain exposure to a broad range of current
research&lt;br/&gt;while pursuing their own specific research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and topology are fundamental parts of
mathematics which&lt;br/&gt;are currently experiencing rapid development, with
many new ideas&lt;br/&gt;and lines of investigation being pursued. Many of
these&lt;br/&gt;developments are internal to the subject, while others arise,
at&lt;br/&gt;least in part, from contact with fields such as physics
and&lt;br/&gt;computer science. It is particularly exciting to be a student
in&lt;br/&gt;a field undergoing this kind of change, but it is at the
same&lt;br/&gt;time a challenge to orient oneself when the landscape is
rapidly&lt;br/&gt;changing. This project will enhance the ability of
doctoral&lt;br/&gt;students at the University of Chicago to learn about and
do&lt;br/&gt;research in these areas, thus helping to train the
next&lt;br/&gt;generation of researchers in geometry and topology. In
addition&lt;br/&gt;to providing direct support for graduate students as they
do&lt;br/&gt;research, the project will also provide support for
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students to travel to conferences and the bring visitors to
the&lt;br/&gt;University for seminar talks and collaboration. All of this
is&lt;br/&gt;intended to expose graduate students to the frontlines
of&lt;br/&gt;research as effectively as possible.&lt;br/&gt;