* 0354125
* REU Site: Integrative and Evolutionary Biology
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 218,150.00

The University of Massachusetts - Boston, located on Boston Harbor, is offering
a ten-week REU program in Biology. The program provides opportunities to ten
undergraduate participants each summer to become immersed in a positive research
experience. Each student carries out an independent research project under the
close guidance of a faculty advisor. The program stresses the integration of
diverse fields of biology, demonstrating common themes across the biological
sciences and especially the connections between cell and molecular biology on
the one hand, and ecology and conservation biology on the other. Accordingly,
student research projects will span a diverse array of problems in biology. The
projects are designed to help students develop independence in making research
decisions, understand the complexities of experimental design, and appreciate
their broad field of research. In addition to carrying out research projects,
students participate in enrichment activities designed to promote a sense of
community, enhance communication skills, help students understand the issues
surrounding modern biology, and prepare students for advanced work in science.
These experiences occur during weekly discussions and workshops that focus on
practical, personal, and ethical aspects of research. The program also features
a three-day retreat at our Nantucket Island Field Station, other field trips in
and around Boston Harbor, and final research presentations. The program will
serve a culturally and ethnically diverse student population, thus broadening
the participation in science of underrepresented groups. Close mentoring
relationships, as well as collegial interactions among student participants, are
key components of the experience. The program is designed to stimulate and
support interest in biological research and to equip students to pursue research
careers. For more information and application materials, please contact Maria
Mahoney, Biology Department, at 617-287-6600 or maria.mahoney@umb.edu, or visit
http://www.bio.umb.edu.