* 0354855
* PACDIV-SPSM
* GEO,OPP
* 09/30/2003,09/30/2011
* Carl Shimazu, Department of Navy Naval Facilities Engineering Command
* Contract Interagency Agreement
* Susanne Lafratta-Decker
* 09/30/2011
* USD 5,299,108.00

This amends an existing Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) by making an award to the
Pacific Division Naval Facilities Engineering Command (PACDIV) for engineering
services to the United States Antarctic Program's (USAP) South Pole Station
Modernization project (SPSM).

The following tasks are included:

1. SPSM PACDIV Management Support 2. SPSM Complete Design of Wing A-4 3. SPSM
Architectural/Engineering Site Inspection - January 2004 4. SPSM FY04 Fire
Safety Review and Inspection 5. SPSM Title II Services for FY04 Summer Season 6.
SPSM Title II Services for FY04 Winter Season 7. SPSM Post Construction Award
Services 8. SPSM Revised Lighting Design for A4 and B1-4 9. SPSM Aircraft Fuel
Module 10. SPSM Growth Chamber Review 11. SPSM Kitchen Hood Exhaust System
Redesign

Similar services have been provided by PACDIV and their contractors since 1983.
The services have always been timely, cost effective, and professional. It is
expected that this work will be accomplished in a similar manner. PACDIV is a
government agency, not associated with the NSF or the support contractor. PACDIV
has no interest in the support contract that could constitute a conflict of
interest.

For the reasons stated above it is in the best interest of the NSF for PACDIV to
continue with the ongoing tasking. This award is recommended for the amount of
$689,486 as estimated by PACDIV to be funded from the SPSM MREFC project budget.