* 0354590
* Workshop on New Technology Foresight, Forecasting and  Assessment Methods, May 2004, Spain
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,10/31/2004
* Alan Porter, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 10/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The objective of this project is to facilitate participation by US social
scientists in a workshop on New Technology Foresight, Forecasting, and
Assessment Methods tentatively scheduled for May 13-14, 2004 in Seville, Spain.
The Institute for Prospective Technology Assessment (IPTS) is hosting the
workshop for 50-80 persons and the EU Directorate General for Research should be
able to cover essentially all on-site costs of the American participants. The US
planning group has issued a general call for papers, encouraging a broad range
of submissions. It will select from among them those who bring new perspectives
and are otherwise unlikely to be able to attend. The stipends in this award will
help cover travel costs for 10 Americans to participate in this workshop, which
will explore ways to advance the state of the art in assessing emerging
technologies. Such "technological intelligence" is increasingly in demand for
technology management and policy decision support. Yet, utilization of FTA in
the past has been quite limited -- the potential to do better is great. There is
much to be gained from bringing together European emphases on process management
and public sector, large scope studies with American leanings toward
quantitative methods and private sector, "micro" analyses of specific
technologies. Moreover, fresh approaches are needed to understand changes in the
nature of the technologies to be assessed -- from industrial to information to
molecular. There is promise in exploiting rich science and technology
information resources more fully and in bringing to bear new insights from
complex systems perspectives. The aim is that the workshop will instigate a
series of ongoing activities including research, bi-annual meetings, and
nucleation of a thriving professional community. Academic engagement should
enrich the approaches to FTA and lead to courses. The final report will include
a white paper about directions for technology foresight, forecasting and
assessment methods, including work on constructive technology assessment.