* 0354733
* SGER:    Key to Designing Competitive and Environmentally Conscious Complex Products:    Radically Reduced Computation
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Achille Messac, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/2005
* USD 99,768.00

Motivated by the increasing challenge of developing commercially successful and
environmentally conscious products, US industry is taking simulation-based
design to new levels that are far beyond the power of today's computers. As a
result, the critical need to comprehensively explore the set of options in
design space is severely compromised. The resulting consequences are: less
economically competitive and less environmentally conscious products. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project proposes to explore a radical new
idea that may literally collapse (by at least an order-of-magnitude) the
computational explosion that characterizes the modeling of complex systems. In
particular, this project will explore the puzzling notion that it is possible to
obtain more accuracy and radically more design space exploration capability by
actually radically reducing the computation effort. The risk involves adequately
demonstrating the feasibility of the approach, providing evidence that it can
lead to an improvement in establishing optimal parameters in design space with a
reduction in computational resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
research will result in a counterintuitive paradigm shift that will make it
possible to identify highly competitive products and systems that are well
beyond today's state of the art. An intensive dissemination plan will allow the
research findings to reach the broader research and industry communities. The
ultimate result of this effort is consumer products of vastly higher economic,
environmental, and engineering performance.