* 0354495
* Collaborative Research: Mapping Globalization: Geographies of Knowledge in the Oil Exploration and Production Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Gavin Bridge, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2007
* USD 60,433.00

"Globalization" has become a catchall term for describing and analyzing social,
economic, and political changes that are seen to mark the emergence of a new
global era. In many accounts, globalization is seen as a systemic and inevitable
force that operates as an invisible hand beyond the reach of actors and
institutions. Contemporary work by economic geographers has sought to challenge
this view by turning attention to the practices that make up globalization. At
the same time, academic and popular accounts have increasingly emphasized the
knowledge-based nature of the "new economy" and the role of knowledge in
ensuring competitive success. The two themes of knowledge and globalization have
rarely been brought together, however. This collaborative research project links
"knowledge" and "globalization" in order to understand how and where different
types of knowledge are produced, acquired, and mobilized by firms as they seek
to extend their global reach. The project also seeks to examine how these
networks of knowledge structure new geographies of economic activity. The
project focuses on the globalization of the U.S. oil exploration and production
industry and has two primary goals: (1) to understand how firms in the oil
industry acquire, develop, and mobilize different types of knowledge to operate
successfully in diverse geophysical and geopolitical environments; and (2) to
determine how networks of knowledge in the industry influence, and are
influenced by, technological, organizational, and geographical restructuring.
The research is divided into three tasks: extracting and characterizing the
range of knowledge types involved in the exploration and production of oil;
mapping of the networks of knowledge associated with the development of three
major oil fields (in the Gulf of Mexico, Venezuela, Kazakhstan); and examining
the relationships among knowledge networks, technological and organizational
change, and firm strategies for extending global reach. Research methods include
semi-structured interviews with key individuals in the oil industry and
comparative case studies of exploration and development in three oil fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be one of the first major empirical
studies of knowledge acquisition, development, and mobilization within a mature
industrial sector. It is designed to make a significant empirical, analytical,
and theoretical contribution to economic geography and the social sciences more
broadly. Specifically, the project will generate three major outputs. First, the
empirical work will generate an assessment of the different types of knowledge
that enable the oil industry to explore and produce in diverse geophysical and
geopolitical environments. Second, the project will lead to the development of
an analytical framework for understanding the role and significance of knowledge
in industries that are extending their global reach. While it emerges from
detailed study of the oil industry, this framework will be applicable across a
wider range of economic sectors. Third, the research is positioned to make a
significant theoretical contribution to on-going debates over globalization and
the new knowledge economy. With knowledge becoming increasingly significant as
an economic resource and with geographies of economic activity becoming ever
more complex, bringing together these two, conventionally discrete areas of
inquiry has assumed special significance.&lt;br/&gt;