* 0354662
* Collaborative Research:    FRG:    Applications of Multiple Dirichlet Series to Analytic Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel Bump, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 299,661.00

Abstract for Collaborative FRG proposals DMS- 0354534, DMS -0353964, DMS-0354662
and DMS-0354582 of Hoffstein, Bump Friedberg and
Goldfeld&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The object of this proposal is to
continue to&lt;br/&gt;develop the theory of multiple Dirichlet
series&lt;br/&gt;along a number of highly promising directions.&lt;br/&gt;These
include the formulation of a&lt;br/&gt;classification theory via Dynkin diagrams
and&lt;br/&gt;metaplectic forms, analysis of natural&lt;br/&gt;constructions as
inner products of automorphic forms on GL(n),&lt;br/&gt;and investigating
examples coming from&lt;br/&gt;Eisenstein series related to deformation
theory&lt;br/&gt;of universal elliptic curves. Many&lt;br/&gt;applications are
expected to the analysis of various families&lt;br/&gt;of
L-functions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The theory of L-functions of one complex
variable is&lt;br/&gt;central in modern number theory. Special values
of&lt;br/&gt;L-functions have provided links between such
diverse&lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics as algebraic geometry,
topology,&lt;br/&gt;probability and statistics, the representation theory
of&lt;br/&gt;infinite dimensional Lie groups, and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;physics. In contrast, the theory of L-functions
of&lt;br/&gt;several complex variables (multiple&lt;br/&gt;Dirichlet series) is
still in its infancy. A large part of the&lt;br/&gt;foundational theory was
developed&lt;br/&gt;by the PI's and Postdocs of this proposal, who
have&lt;br/&gt;been collaborating in teams, over the&lt;br/&gt;last twenty
years. The accumulated scientific results,&lt;br/&gt;combined with a mass
sustained joint effort of the&lt;br/&gt;PI's, now point to the possibility of
major breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;There is also an additional&lt;br/&gt;training
component. Workshops will be held each year&lt;br/&gt;as well as short courses
aimed at attracting graduate&lt;br/&gt; students, postdocs,
and&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians in related fields. The motivation&lt;br/&gt;will be
to categorize and advertise&lt;br/&gt;the major accessible problems in the
field, to&lt;br/&gt;map out progress made, and to prepare
the&lt;br/&gt;participants for research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;