* 0354737
* FRG: Collaborative Research:  Geometric Flows and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Shing-Tung Yau, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 170,000.00

Proposals DMS-0354603/0354621/0354737&lt;br/&gt;Title: FRG- Geometric flows and
applications&lt;br/&gt;P.I.s: R.Hamilton, P.Daskalopoulos (Columbia
University)/&lt;br/&gt;H-D Cao (Lehigh University)/ S-T Yau (Harvard
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Geometric flows give rise to nonlinear parabolic partial
&lt;br/&gt;differential&lt;br/&gt;equations. It can be used to understand how a
geometric structure evolves&lt;br/&gt;to a more canonical one or the union of
canonical structures. In most &lt;br/&gt;cases, there&lt;br/&gt;is a tension
field which governs the evolution. The most notable cases &lt;br/&gt;are the
harmonic&lt;br/&gt;map flow, the Ricci flow, the mean curvature flow, the
Gaussian &lt;br/&gt;curvature flow, and the&lt;br/&gt;inverse mean curvature
flow. The long time existence and asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;behavior of the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure has revealed deep understanding of geometry and
topology. Even &lt;br/&gt;short time existence&lt;br/&gt;have immediate
consequence of smoothing out the structure. For example, &lt;br/&gt;the short
time existence of the&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow for complete manifolds with bounded
curvature provides &lt;br/&gt;smoothing effect to&lt;br/&gt;approximate the
metric by metrics with bound covariant derivatives of
&lt;br/&gt;curvature.&lt;br/&gt;All these geometric flows have many common
features, most notable is the &lt;br/&gt;fundamental role&lt;br/&gt;of solitary
solutions of the flow. It gives strong understanding of &lt;br/&gt;singularity
of the nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;system and lead to good estimates: like the Li-Yau-
Hamilton estimate &lt;br/&gt;which play important&lt;br/&gt;roles on singularity
formations. While working on the Ricci flows, there &lt;br/&gt;are constant
insight by&lt;br/&gt;working on the mean curvature flow and other geometric
flows, and vice &lt;br/&gt;versa. The works of&lt;br/&gt;Huisken and Sinestrari
will be important for this purpose. And so is the &lt;br/&gt;work of Huisken-
Ilmanen&lt;br/&gt;on the inverse mean curvature flow. The most recent
breakthrough of &lt;br/&gt;Perelman will of course be the central
piece&lt;br/&gt;of discussion for the whole project. Not only that we like to
make sure &lt;br/&gt;the whole program of&lt;br/&gt;geometrization for three
manifolds, but also we like to strengthen and &lt;br/&gt;apply the technique to
various&lt;br/&gt;important geometric situation: the Ricci flow for compact
Kaehler &lt;br/&gt;manifolds with positive Chern&lt;br/&gt;class, and to four
dimensional manifolds. Note that the recent work of &lt;br/&gt;Cao-Chen-Zhu
has&lt;br/&gt;already pointed to the importance of the argument of Perelman in
the &lt;br/&gt;Kaehler case. Perelman's&lt;br/&gt;most recent work in the
Kaehler case made further progress. We hope to &lt;br/&gt;incorporate it in a
bigger picture of&lt;br/&gt;Kaehler geometry. When one studies the Kaehler
geometry, a very &lt;br/&gt;important ingredient to understand&lt;br/&gt;Mirror
geometry for Calabi-Yau manifolds is the study of special &lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian
submanifolds. This&lt;br/&gt; has been pursued by M.- T. Wang using the
Lagrangian mean curvature flow .&lt;br/&gt;The existence and regularity of such
submanifolds will play important &lt;br/&gt;roles in the future of geometry.
As&lt;br/&gt;was mentioned above, the inverse mean curvature flow will also be
&lt;br/&gt;important for our discussions as it was&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated by the
work of Huisken-Ilmanen in solving the Riemannian &lt;br/&gt;Penrose conjecture.
In terms&lt;br/&gt;of general relativity, Bray, Huisken, M.-T. Wang and Yau will
be very &lt;br/&gt;much involved in the analysis of&lt;br/&gt;various flows that
appeared. (Huisken-Yau used the mean curvature flow &lt;br/&gt;to study center
of gravity, Bray&lt;br/&gt;studied the Penrose conjecture) As a whole, there
will be close &lt;br/&gt;cooperation and many students will be&lt;br/&gt;trained
under this joint program. We also expect to have joint &lt;br/&gt;consultations.
Applied mathematicians will&lt;br/&gt;also be consulted on questions like porous
media flow, diffusion of &lt;br/&gt;oil, imaging sharpening, etc.&lt;br/&gt;
Daskalopoulos has been active on porous media flow, the Gaussian
&lt;br/&gt;curvature flow and related questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;