* 0354195
* Development and Validation of a Case Study Approach to Teaching Human-Computer Interaction
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 01/31/2007
* USD 298,250.00

A prior proof of concept project has developed a prototype set of usability
engineering case studies, a case browsing tool, and several classroom activities
based on the case studies. This work was coordinated with the development and
publication of a new HCI undergraduate textbook (Morgan Kaufmann, 2002). The
textbook differs dramatically from current offerings, interleaving the
presentation of HCI content with a comprehensive scenario-based framework for
the development of interactive systems. A key innovation of the new textbook is
its use of a case study to introduce and exemplify the analysis, design, and
evaluation framework. The proof of concept project enhanced the case study
material presented in the book, by developing richer and more flexible online
materials, and by building cases from three additional problem domains. This
project, submitted to the CCLI-EMD track, further develops and validates the
learning effectiveness of case studies as an element of teaching HCI. Using the
marketing channels of Morgan Kaufmann, we recruit professors and students from
8-10 other universities interested in using the book, and participating in the
evaluation of the case study materials. We work with these instructors and
students to develop new activities, as well as packaging the prototype
activities for convenient use. We also refine the browsing tool, responding to
formative evaluation received during the prototype project, and add new
functionality to support traceability of concerns throughout the life cycle,
more flexible views and case study reporting schemes, and authoring by both
experts and students. This project leverages our ongoing research on scenario-
based development methods, incorporating the methodology concepts into
undergraduate education. It also highlights the use of information technology in
undergraduate education, for both content access and student project support.
The graduate students who develop the case studies are becoming experts in
presenting and illustrating the scenario-based framework, helping to prepare
them for careers in HCI education.