* 0354939
* NSF-Europe:  Development and Characterization of Electrically-Active Interfaces for Chemical Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Lisa Porter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 311,350.00

This project is a joint collaboration between Prof. Lisa Porter/Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU) and Prof. Anita Lloyd Spetz from S-SENCE (Center for Sensor
Technology) at Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden. The aim is through the
combined collaborative expertise to push forward materials science understanding
and subsequent development of high-temperature sensors, and to understand
mechanisms that limit their performance. Examples of applications for these
sensors include monitoring of selective catalytic reduction in automobile
combustion engines and of flue gases from power plants. The approach is to
develop and characterize ohmic contacts and insulators for SiC based chemical
sensors that demonstrate substantial improvements in long-term stability at high
temperatures (e.g., 300-800 C) required for optimum detection of certain gas
species (e.g., hydrocarbons or NH3). Specifically, test devices (capacitors and
Schottky diodes) will be fabricated based on contact and insulator materials, as
well as associated processing conditions, developed by the CMU group. The
devices will then be tested at S-SENCE for their gas sensor response at high
temperatures. Initial research at Carnegie Mellon will consist of materials
selection for ohmic contacts (e.g., TaC and PtSi), gate metals (e.g., Pt3Si) and
gate insulator (e.g., SiO2 or AlN) followed by device fabrication. The devices
will consist of TLM patterns for contact resistance measurements, MIS capacitors
and Schottky diodes. The stability of these devices will then be measured using
current-voltage (I-V) and/or capacitance-voltage (C-V) measurements as a
function of both annealing temperature and measurement temperature. Selected
samples will be sent, or brought, to S-SENCE for measurements of their gas
response. This will be accomplished by mounting each sample onto a ceramic
heater, which is attached to a 16-pin holder. After introducing specified gases
into the assembly, the sensor response will be measured as the voltage at a
constant current of 0.1 or 1 mA. Promising materials structures will be
incorporated in MISiCFET devices. An important part of this research will
include investigations of the morphology and interfacial chemistry and their
relationship to the electrical properties of the sensors. The morphologies of
the contact films will be characterized using scanning electron microscopy. The
interfacial chemistry of the metal-insulator, insulator-semiconductor and metal-
semiconductor will be characterized by Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), TEM,
XRD and SIMS. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
research issues associated with electronic materials having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the integration of research
and education, and an international collaboration providing both scientific and
educational benefits. Broader impacts associated with the project are
exemplified by the education of undergraduate and graduate students in a unique
technical, cultural and professional context. The approach includes: 1) graduate
student exchange through visits to and from Sweden, 2) supervision of an
undergraduate research project pertaining to chemical sensors, and 3)
introduction of a lunch/speaker series designed to inspire and retain women
graduate students and post-docs in materials science. This NSF project is a
Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF
02-135). &lt;br/&gt;