* 0354613
* New Transition Metal Catalyzed Annulation Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Vladimir Gevorgyan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2007
* USD 414,283.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to develop regio- and
chemocontrolled annulation methodologies. To these ends, sequential
cycloadditions/cyclizations of conjugated enynes, triggered by regiocontrolled
palladium-catalyzed enyne-yne [4+2] benzannulation reactions, will be employed.
Further, alternative activating groups for the palladium-catalyzed [4+2]
benzannulation reaction will be identified. Synthetic targets will include
2,5-dicarba-, and 2,4,5-tricarbasubstituted resorcinol cores and aza-analogs, as
well as monomers for monodisperse oligophenyleneethynylenes. Aza-enyne aza-
enynophiles will be used for the direct synthesis of pyridine derivatives via
the transition metal-catalyzed [4+2] strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Vladimir Gevorgyan of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois at Chicago. Dr. Gevorgyan will focus his work on the
development of methodologies for metal catalyzed formation of multisubstituted
aromatics and heteroaromatics. The research will expand knowledge of transition
metal-catalyzed ring forming reactions and will provide underemployed approaches
for the preparation of important classes of compounds. The project provides an
excellent arena for the training of undergraduates and graduate students and has
potential broader impact for the pharmaceutical industry.&lt;br/&gt;