* 0354453
* SLC Center:   The LIFE Center:   Learning in Informal and Formal Environments
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Roy Pea, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2010
* USD 25,276,973.00

LIFE abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the Learning in Informal and
Formal Environments (LIFE) Center it to understand and advance human learning
through a simultaneous focus on implicit, informal, and formal learning, thereby
cultivating generalizable interdisciplinary theories that guide the design of
effective new learning technologies and environments. The investigators argue
that, given the complexity of learning phenomena and the disparate levels of
analysis that can be used to study learning, a transformed science of learning
will not come about by proceeding with "research as usual." Their plan is to
bring experts together from research traditions that have tended to work
separately rather than collaboratively. The expertise in the Center spans
neurobiological, psychological, and social/cultural approaches as well as
pioneering work in augmenting human learning through innovative technology and
new media tools. The investigators hope to encourage productive conceptual
collisions by deliberately juxtaposing the different traditions' prevailing
assumptions, theories, and methodologies. These collisions are designed to spark
efforts toward creating a coherent, integrated perspective that is theoretically
sound and has clear and far-reaching implications for improving people's
abilities to learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central premise of the LIFE Center
is that successful efforts to understand and propel learning require a
simultaneous emphasis on informal and formal (e.g., K-16) learning environments,
and on the implicit ways in which people learn. The basic research will be
conducted through three intersecting and multidisciplinary strands of inquiry.
The first strand, Implicit Learning and the Brain, will document learning in the
brain over the lifespan and discover from empirical and modeling work the
underlying neural processes and principles associated with implicit forms of
learning in the domains of cognitive, linguistic, and social learning. The
second strand, Informal Learning, will conduct studies of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math learning in informal settings to develop comprehensive and
coordinated accounts of the cognitive, social, affective, and cultural
dimensions that propel learning and development outside of school. The third
strand, Designs for Formal Learning and Beyond, will conduct experimental
studies of theory-based principles for the design of high-quality learning
environments. A major focus of the cognitive component of the strand will
involve theories and measures of transfer -- the ability to enter an
unanticipated setting with the skills, knowledge, and dispositions to make sense
of the structure of a problem, to locate and use relevant resources, and to
reflect on one's efforts so as to learn to "work smarter." The investigators
also propose to initiate a line of technology projects that would proceed in
concert with the theoretical work on transfer. This strand will place special
emphasis on studying powerful roles for new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;