* 0354772
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Topological Quantum Field Theory and its Application to Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2010
* Michael Freedman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2010
* USD 669,945.00

The investigators plan to classify topological quantum field
theories&lt;br/&gt;(TQFTs) with less than six labels, prove that there are only
finitely&lt;br/&gt;many TQFTs with a fixed number of labels, and identify the
closed images&lt;br/&gt;of certain TQFT representations of the mapping class
groups of surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;For applications to quantum computing the
investigators aim to&lt;br/&gt;understand how TQFTs would arise from microscopic
many-body quantum&lt;br/&gt;physics. The proposed program is based on work of
Turaev and&lt;br/&gt;Moore-Seiberg-Walker which&lt;br/&gt;essentially establish
a one-one correspondence of TQFTs with modular&lt;br/&gt;tensor
categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological quantum field theory emerged in the
1980s from the study of&lt;br/&gt;three distinct riddles: the relation of the
Jones polynomials of knots to&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional topology, the fractional
Quantum Hall effect (FQHE) in&lt;br/&gt;condensed matter physics, and the
infrared limit of 2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;conformal field theory in string
theory. The connection between&lt;br/&gt;topological quantum field theory and
quantum computing was first explored&lt;br/&gt;by Freedman and Kitaev in late
1990s. Their work opened up the&lt;br/&gt;possibility of building an inherently
fault-tolerant quantum&lt;br/&gt;computer---a topological quantum computer. Such
a computer would&lt;br/&gt;exploit new states of matter closely related to TQFT.
Examples of such&lt;br/&gt;"topological states of matter" include electron gases
confined between the&lt;br/&gt;interface of two semi-conductors which exhibit
the FQHE. The extreme&lt;br/&gt;physical conditions for fractional quantum Hall
electron gases make it&lt;br/&gt;impractical to build a topological quantum
computer from such materials.&lt;br/&gt;To discover or fabricate new materials
capable of universal quantum&lt;br/&gt;computation under practical physical
conditions is a goal of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;program. The problem of
classifying TQFTs (or equivalently topological&lt;br/&gt;states of matter) is
analogous to the problem of classifying the&lt;br/&gt;chemical elements, and can
be used to identify appropriate candidates&lt;br/&gt;for quantum computing. The
proper characterization of materials capable&lt;br/&gt;of universal quantum
computing, not to speak of their actual fabrication,&lt;br/&gt;could open up a
new chapter in many-body quantum physics. The&lt;br/&gt;possible applications of
such new materials are hard to predict,&lt;br/&gt;but would definitely not to be
limited to quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;