* 0354824
* CAREER:  A Methodology to Systematically Characterize and Diagnose Manufacturing Variation with In-Process Measurement Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Daniel Apley, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 05/31/2008
* USD 313,333.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
develop, implement, and teach a systematic and generic methodology for
diagnosing product and process variation in a modern data-rich manufacturing
environment. The methodology developed in this CAREER plan will provide a means
of effectively utilizing the measurement data for manufacturing variation
reduction, leading to higher quality manufactured products that boost the
competitiveness of our nations industries. The primary focus of the research is
on representing, characterizing, and quantifying the precise nature of the
temporal and spatial patterns. The intent is that graphical displays of the
variation pattern characteristics will serve as powerful diagnostic aids which
facilitate the identification and elimination of root causes of variation by
human operators. The methods that will be employed have a strong
multidisciplinary emphasis. Temporal and spatial representations of variation,
which are based on underlying physical and engineering principles, will be
incorporated into the proposed statistical diagnosis algorithms in order to
effectively extract and interpret meaningful information from the data. Linear
and nonlinear spatial representations and joint time-frequency temporal
representations will provide general, yet descriptive, characterizations of
process variation. As the structure of in-process measurement data becomes
increasingly dense, methods developed for signal and image processing
applications gain importance as tools for statistical process control (SPC) of
manufacturing variation. Concepts from sensor array processing and time-
frequency analysis will be used extensively in the research plan. The proposed
education plan emphasizes the need for this multidisciplinary approach to SPC.
The curriculum will provide training in the physics and modeling of complex
manufacturing processes (from a mechanical engineering perspective) and sensing
and signal processing technology (from an electrical engineering perspective),
as well as in the statistical fundamentals of SPC. Virtual plant tours and case
studies from the results of the research plan will be used to illustrate the
complexity of advanced manufacturing processes, the prevalence of in-process
measurement technology, and the multidisciplinary methods needed to effectively
utilize the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology developed in this CAREER
plan will provide a concrete basis for integrating systematic diagnosis
strategies into SPC, which will advance the body of scientific knowledge on SPC
for manufacturing variation reduction. To reach a wide audience, the results
will be broadly disseminated in applied statistics, quality control, signal
processing, and manufacturing conferences and journals. The multidisciplinary
emphasis will strengthen the link between the signal processing and SPC
disciplines and help to attract students and researchers from other academic
areas to the field of manufacturing quality control, bringing with them an
infusion of new ideas. The plan involves close collaboration with major
representatives of two industries that are vital to the US economy - automobile
and electronics manufacturing. Both have demonstrated a strong commitment to
ensuring the success of this CAREER plan, and their manufacturing facilities
will serve as testbeds for directly implementing the results. It is expected
that the results will be broadly applicable in a variety of manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;