* 0354729
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Applications of Transportation Theory to Nonlinear Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Robert McCann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2009
* USD 804,011.00

Proposal DMS-0354729&lt;br/&gt;PIs: W.Gangbo (Georgia Tech), L.Caffarelli (U
Texas), L.C.Evans&lt;br/&gt;(U California Berkeley), M. Feldman (U Wisconsin),
R.McCann (U. Toronto)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Applications of Transportation
Theory to Nonlinear
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the analysis of a collection of variational&lt;br/&gt;optimization and
dynamical evolution problems centered around the theme&lt;br/&gt;of optimal
transportation --- which enters the dynamical setting&lt;br/&gt;whenever the
evolution conserves a scalar locally. The central problem can be
&lt;br/&gt;caricatured as follows:Given a distribution of iron mines throughout
the &lt;br/&gt;countryside, and a distribution of factories which require iron
ore, decide &lt;br/&gt;which mines should supply ore to each factory in order to
minimize the total&lt;br/&gt;transportation costs. Here the cost per ton of ore
transported from the&lt;br/&gt;mine at x to factory at y is specified by a
function c(x,y) --- so the &lt;br/&gt;problem can be formulated as a linear
program. However, when the mines and&lt;br/&gt;factories are distributed
continuously throughout Euclidean space or&lt;br/&gt;a curved landscape with
obstacles --- and the cost is related to the&lt;br/&gt;distance on this
landscape, then the problem has a rich structure and&lt;br/&gt;deep connections
to geometry and non-linear PDE which have only begun &lt;br/&gt;to be explored.
Incarnations of this problem embed in current models for&lt;br/&gt;surprisingly
diverse phenomena. Along with basic questions concerning &lt;br/&gt;the
structure and qualitative features of optimal mappings, the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research addresses models for front formation in the
atmosphere, dissipative &lt;br/&gt;equilibration in kinetic theory, fluid flow,
and granular materials and &lt;br/&gt;geometric and dynamical
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After half a century of mathematical neglect,
the past decade witnessed a &lt;br/&gt;revival of interest in optimal
transportation, and watched as it blossomed into &lt;br/&gt;a fertile field of
investigation as well as a vibrant tool for exploring diverse
&lt;br/&gt;applications within and beyond mathematics. The transformation
occurred partly &lt;br/&gt;because long-standing issues could finally be
resolved, but also because &lt;br/&gt;unexpected connections were discovered
which linked these questions to problems &lt;br/&gt;in physics, geometry,
computer vision, partial differential equations, earth &lt;br/&gt;science and
economics. The time is ripe for a collaborative effort on
an&lt;br/&gt;international scale to explore existing connections and unearth new
ones, while &lt;br/&gt;simultaneously developing the basic theory of optimal
maps and introducing &lt;br/&gt;students and colleagues to the challenges and
promise of the field --- thus for &lt;br/&gt;the formation of a focused research
group with these goals. The core of our &lt;br/&gt;plan is to arrange sustained
interactions between and around members of the &lt;br/&gt;group, who in addition
to collaborating scientifically, will work together over &lt;br/&gt;the next
several years to create the research environment and manpower necessary
&lt;br/&gt;for transportation research to flourish. To achieve this goal, we
plan to &lt;br/&gt;organize two workshops on different aspects of the subject.
Furthermore, we &lt;br/&gt;plan to share the responsibilities of training
graduate students and &lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral fellows, by using funds from the
grant to support young &lt;br/&gt;researchers. This unique arrangement will give
participants&lt;br/&gt;access to an unusually broad assortment of perspectives
and expertise.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, we believe a three-year nurturing window for
young researchers to &lt;br/&gt;learn the subject and become involved --- if
continued now --- will ultimately &lt;br/&gt;further advance progress in the
field by more than a decade.&lt;br/&gt;