* 0355053
* Community Planning for Ocean Obervations, Long Term Series and Observatory Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Larry Atkinson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 10/31/2006
* USD 369,907.00

Ocean.US was created by the National Oceanographic Partnership Program in late
2000 as a National Office to promote and facilitate the establishment of an
integrated and sustained ocean observing system. &lt;br/&gt;In March 2002, a
planning workshop was held to create a design and implementation plan for an
integrated and sustained observing system for the United States. Some 110
attendees participated in discussions, the results of which are summarized in
the report titled " An Integrated and Sustained Ocean Observing System (IOOS)
for the United States: Design and Implementation" (Ocean.US, 2002).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has played an important role in coordinating these
community-planning efforts. His continued participation in the Ocean.US
activities will provide the continuity necessary to keep the initiative moving
forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main effort in the coming year will be to
provide representation at Ocean.US to ensure that basic research remains an
important element of the integrated ocean observing system implementation
planning process;fFunction as liaison between IOOS and the new OOI Project
Office; act as an interface between federal planning and the academic and user
communities; stay abreast of the DAC activities at Ocean.US; continue to
interact with scientists active in the forming of the regional associations;
explore issues associated with the transition of techniques and technology from
research to operations; continue working on the development of an implantation
plan for HF Radar for measuring surface currents in US Coastal waters; and keep
abreast of current and emerging biological and chemical technology for Observing
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;