* 0355318
* Fabrication of Three-Dimensional Microvascular Networks for Biomedical Microfluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Scott White, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2009
* USD 240,000.00

The broad objective of this research is to understand the processing science of
three-dimensional microvascular networks consisting of interconnected
microchannels (1-300 mm). The experimental approach is to fabricate these
networks by robotically controlled deposition (RCD) of new fugitive organic
inks. The proposed RCD route relies on a layer-by-layer deposition of fugitive
nanocomposite organic inks to create three-dimensional fluid paths. It is a
mold-less deposition process in which a freestanding scaffold of the network is
formed first, followed by infiltration of a secondary (structural) matrix phase
and removal of the sacrificial scaffold. This research will focus on the design
and characterization of nanocomposite organic inks for use in RCD of three-
dimensional freestanding scaffold structures, as well as process models that
track the time-dependent deformation of the scaffold network from deposition
through final curing of the secondary matrix. The effects of nanocomposite ink
composition and rheology as well as various process parameters (e.g., nozzle
diameter, deposition speed, extrusion pressure) on shape evolution during
fabrication will be studied. Finally, the mixing performance of fabricated 3-D
microvascular fluidic devices will be evaluated for a variety of architectures
and flow conditions.

The proposed research is expected to provide fundamental knowledge needed for
agile fabrication of microfluidic networks. Three-dimensional microvascular
networks will provide an enabling platform for a new generation of microfluidic
devices in biomedicine for applications such as gene sequencing, functional
genomics, drug discovery, pharmacogenomics, diagnostics, and pathogen
detection/ID. Training will be provided for one graduate student throughout the
project period educated in an interdisciplinary research group at the University
of Illinois that facilitates interactions across a number of disciplinary
fields.