* 0355366
* Workshop on Advanced Approaches to Quantify Denitrification
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Sybil Seitzinger, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rachael G. Craig
* 12/31/2004
* USD 29,964.00

During the last few decades, the introduction of reactive nitrogen (N) into the
&lt;br/&gt;biosphere by food and energy production has been greater than rates
of N fixation in native &lt;br/&gt;terrestrial ecosystems. By far the largest
uncertainty about the human domination of the N &lt;br/&gt;cycle on all scales
is the amount of reactive N that is converted back to N2 during the last step
&lt;br/&gt;of denitrification. Without this knowledge, it is impossible to
determine the rate of &lt;br/&gt;accumulation of reactive N in most
environmental reservoirs, and thus impossible to assess its &lt;br/&gt;long-term
consequences. Nitrogen interacts with carbon and other nutrient cycles and has
&lt;br/&gt;numerous cascading effects on water and air quality and climate. An
improved understanding &lt;br/&gt;of where, when, and how much reactive N is
denitrified could contribute to finding solutions &lt;br/&gt;to the problems
created by excessive reactive N in the environment. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, we have little knowledge about rates of
denitrification across &lt;br/&gt;landscapes and waterscapes. We know the
environmental conditions under which &lt;br/&gt;denitrification occurs, but
reliable quantification of N2 production in the field is still relatively
&lt;br/&gt;rare. There are three primary reasons for lack of knowledge about N2
production: (1) it is &lt;br/&gt;difficult to measure due to the high
atmospheric background concentrations; (2) N2 &lt;br/&gt;production rates are
very heterogeneous in space and time; and (3) there is a lack of synergy
&lt;br/&gt;between the scientific communities that determine N2 production
rates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We propose holding a 3-day workshop in May 2004 of
about 35 participants to focus &lt;br/&gt;on quantification of N2 production via
biological denitrification. The objectives of this &lt;br/&gt;workshop will be:
(1) to evaluate the state of our knowledge of denitrification rates in a wide
&lt;br/&gt;range of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems; (2) to compare
methodologies that have been &lt;br/&gt;adopted by different scientific
disciplines, with the expectation that collaborations across
&lt;br/&gt;disciplines could yield methodological advances; and (3) to chart out
the current weaknesses &lt;br/&gt;and the actions needed to address those
weaknesses for an improved global assessment of &lt;br/&gt;where, when, and how
much reactive N is converted to N2 in the biosphere. Two important
&lt;br/&gt;considerations will be superimposed over a matrix of ecosystem types
and methodological &lt;br/&gt;approaches: (1) What are the appropriate scales
over which N2 production can and should be &lt;br/&gt;measured?; and (2) How can
models be integrated with the measurements to improve &lt;br/&gt;mechanistic
understanding of the processes and permit estimation of fluxes at larger spatial
&lt;br/&gt;scales, longer temporal scales, and across a range of forecasted
scenarios? The results of the &lt;br/&gt;workshop will be published as one or
more synthesis papers in a peer-reviewed journal. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this activity include an effort to direct our scientific
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the N cycle toward finding solutions to society.s
concerns about &lt;br/&gt;eutrophication of the biosphere. The proposed workshop
is being organized as an integral &lt;br/&gt;part of the International Nitrogen
Initiative (INI), a joint project of SCOPE and IGBP. The &lt;br/&gt;overall goal
of the INI is to optimize nitrogen's role in sustainable food and energy
&lt;br/&gt;production, while minimizing negative effects on human health and the
environment. Hence, &lt;br/&gt;this workshop is part of an effort that has board
implications for society by contributing &lt;br/&gt;knowledge to future
management the global N cycle to meet objectives of both food security
&lt;br/&gt;and environmental quality. &lt;br/&gt;