* 0355206
* Fundamentals and Applications of Ultra-Slow Light Propagation in Room Temperature Solids
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Robert Boyd, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 03/31/2007
* USD 216,000.00

0355206&lt;br/&gt;Boyd&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has led to the
development of techniques that can allow light to propagate through a material
system with a greatly reduced (or increased) group velocity. Interest in slow
light results both from conceptual issues and for its potential usefulness in
applications such as controllable delay lines, information storage devices, and
quantum information processing. Most techniques to date for the production of
slow light have been very difficult to implement, involving for instance a Bose-
Einstein condensate, hot atomic vapors, or cryogenically controlled
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently demonstrated (PRL
90,113903,2003)a technique for the production of slow light that is much easier
to implement in that it entails the use of room-temperature solids. It is based
on the modification of the refractive index profile that accompanies the
spectral hole created by a novel quantum coherence process. This spectral hole
is created as the result of coherent population oscillations (CPO), the periodic
modulation of the ground state population at the beat frequency between two
applied fields. Using this technique, he demonstrated light velocities as low as
57 m/s using a ruby crystal. Coherent population oscillations can also provide
an extremely sensitive spectroscopic tool for studying the structural properties
of optical materials. In the case of alexandrite, chromium ions can be located
at either sites with mirror or inversion symmetry, and these two sites show
different sorts of saturation behavior. The PI has found (Science
301,200,2003)that at certain wavelengths the inversion sites dominate and
alexandrite shows ultra-slow propagation, whereas at other wavelengths the
mirror sites dominates leading to superluminal (but causal)
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program will study slow
and fast light propagation in room temperature solids from several related
points of view. Questions include the fundamental limitations to how much a
pulse can be retarded or advanced by means of CPO and how to optimize the effect
through the use of different materials and different interaction geometries. A
particularly interesting possibility along these lines involves studies of
optical delay in erbium doped optical fibers, an extremely important system
component. Preliminary experiments have shown the existence of this effect.
Related questions include how well can one build optical delay lines and storage
devices based on this effect, and what other physics and applications are
enabled by slow-and fast-light techniques. As an example, it is expected that
there will be a very strong acoustooptic interaction under conditions such that
the velocity of light in a given material becomes equal to the velocity of
sound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed activity includes
the following aspects. The PI 's research group consists of a large diverse
group of individuals who are encouraged to work collaboratively and to explore
the intellectual underpinnings of their research projects. The subject area of
the proposed effort is one that is of interest to the general public, and indeed
the PI's earlier work on this topic has been covered by the popular press.
Several workshops on the subject area of the proposal will be held during the
course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;