* 0355129
* RUI : Shell Structure and Isospin Symmetry in Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Lewis Riley, Ursinus College
* Continuing Grant
* Ani Aprahamian
* 06/30/2007
* USD 86,288.00

This is a project engaging Ursinus College undergraduates
in&lt;br/&gt;experimental nuclear structure research. The project is part of
an&lt;br/&gt;ongoing collaboration with colleagues at the National
Superconducting&lt;br/&gt;Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and Florida State
University (FSU)&lt;br/&gt;involving experimental work at the NSCL. The proposed
work will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to the understanding of proton and neutron
contributions to&lt;br/&gt;low-lying collective states in exotic nuclei outside
the valley of&lt;br/&gt;stability. Proton and neutron contributions to nuclear
excitations can&lt;br/&gt;be disentangled by comparing transition strengths
measured using pairs&lt;br/&gt;of complementary experimental probes. The advent
of radioactive beam&lt;br/&gt;technology has enabled such investigations away
from stability through&lt;br/&gt;inverse-kinematics proton scattering and
Coulomb excitation&lt;br/&gt;measurements. We plan to investigate the
persistence of shell&lt;br/&gt;structure away from stability in neutron-rich
exotic nuclei via&lt;br/&gt;inverse-kinematics proton scattering and test
isospin symmetry in T=1&lt;br/&gt;isospin multiplets near mass A=50 via Coulomb
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central goal of the project is to maintain an
active research&lt;br/&gt;program in nuclear structure on the Ursinus College
campus. Ursinus&lt;br/&gt;College is a national liberal arts college of about
1475 students with&lt;br/&gt;a long history of strength in the sciences. This
project will provide&lt;br/&gt;students opportunities to apply their knowledge
of physics outside the&lt;br/&gt;classroom, gain practical skills in data
acquisition and analysis,&lt;br/&gt;observe and participate in the operation of
a nuclear accelerator&lt;br/&gt;facility, and present their work to colleagues.
Participants will&lt;br/&gt;travel to the NSCL to perform experiments and
analyze the data at&lt;br/&gt;Ursinus. They will present their results to the
Ursinus community as&lt;br/&gt;part of the Ursinus College Summer Fellows
Program and to the nuclear&lt;br/&gt;physics community at American Physical
Society/Division of Nuclear&lt;br/&gt;Physics meetings.&lt;br/&gt;