* 0355391
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Decision-Theoretic Methods for Robust Design Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Layne Watson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

Engineers increasingly rely on computer simulation to develop new products, such
as, airfoils, and to understand emerging technologies, for instance, fusion
capsules. In practice, this process is permeated with uncertainty: manufactured
products deviate from designed products; actual products must perform under a
variety of operating conditions. The problem of robust design &lt;br/&gt;is the
problem of optimizing complex, simulation-based engineered systems in the
presence of uncertainty about manufacturing and operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will address the problem
of developing rigorous, computationally tractable methods for robust design.
Statistical decision theory, specifically the Bayes principle, provides a
conceptual framework for quantifying the uncertainties. The application of
statistical decision theory to robust design has been infrequently attempted and
lies at the frontier of current engineering practice; the proposed project will
extend that frontier by developing more efficient computational methods. The
methods to be developed will be demonstrated on aerodynamic design optimization
problems of vital interest at NASA Langley Research Center. These problems
provide an ideal platform for the development of robust design methods. Beyond
our focus on aerodynamic design, uncertainty-based design methods hold great
promise for a wide range of applications, e.g., the design of fusion capsules
tested at Sandia National Laboratories. The potential benefits include increased
confidence in analysis tools; reductions in design cycle time, risk, and cost;
increasingly robust designs; and improved system performance with ensured
reliability. Undergraduates from across mathematics, computer science and
engineering will be involved with this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;