* 0355532
* GOALI:  3D Nanomanufacturing with Rubber Stamps and Conformable Phase Masks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ralph Nuzzo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2008
* USD 386,033.00

This proposed research will directly address a critical need for nanoscience and
technology: broadly useful techniques that have the ability to fabricate
complex, well defined three dimensional (3D) nanostructures. Two new methods are
proposed here. The first uses single or multilayer transfer of thin solid 'ink'
coatings from high resolution rubber stamps onto substrates. The second uses
these stamps as conformable phase masks for proximity field nanopatterning of
thin layers of transparent photopolymers. Although both techniques use the same
pattern transfer elements, they rely on completely different physical
principles, and they provide complementary patterning capabilities. The
operational simplicity of the techniques, their ability to pattern large areas
quickly, and the flexibility in the geometry of structures that can be formed
with them suggest general utility for 3D nanomanufacturing. The scientific
thrusts of the program involve: 1) Surface chemistries that can be used to
transfer thin solid 'inks' from high resolution rubber stamps to target
substrates, and materials for these inks. The aspects that will be investigated,
such as surface chemical structure and bonding density required for transfer and
physical toughness in ultrathin multilayer assemblies, will enable multilayer
and 3D transfer printing. These studies will also provide insights into the
molecular-level aspects of adhesion and fracture. 2) Near, proximity and far
field optics of high resolution conformable phase masks. Modeling and
experimental work will explore the ability to manipulate the 3D flow of light by
using masking elements that modulate the optical phase. In addition to their
central role in the proximity field nanopatterning approach, these studies will
have relevance to conventional photomask design and near field optical imaging
and detection. 3) Structure-property relationships in elastomeric polymers that
provide high modulus, high physical toughness and high index of refraction. This
work will yield materials for robust, reliable stamps and masks for the 3D
nanomanufacturing techniques described above. It will also establish general
strategies for polymer modification based on (i) bimodal segments, (ii) blends
with highly crosslinked network resins domains and (iii) phase separated
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science and methods that emerge from the
research will be disseminated widely though conference talks, papers and
materials posted on a central website, where they can be accessed and downloaded
by any interested parties. Furthermore, the GOALI partner, Dow Corning
Corporation, will provide expertise in new materials and processing methods,
thus ensuring broad technology transfer of successful efforts and excellent
educational and outreach opportunities for the students. A hands-on summer
laboratory course on nanofabrication will be developed to introduce this
important area to students from a wide range of disciplines. It will also expose
these fields to underrepresented undergraduate students from Clark Atlanta
University, an historically black institution, who will actively participate in
this summer course and the research.&lt;br/&gt;