* 0355474
* A Statistics Program at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Richard Katz, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,230,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI: Douglas Nychka&lt;br/&gt;proposal:
0355474&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geophysical Statistics Project (GSP)
at the National Center for&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric Research (NCAR) provides a
unique opportunity to address&lt;br/&gt;important research problems at the
interface between the geosciences and&lt;br/&gt;statistics. The statistical
research includes contributions to the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of nonstationary
spatial and spatio-temporal data, the design and&lt;br/&gt;analysis of computer
experiments, filtering, the statistics of extremes,&lt;br/&gt;data mining, and
statistical computing. These methods are adapted to large&lt;br/&gt;data sets
and publicly available software is available to implement new&lt;br/&gt;methods
for spatial data and extremes. The intellectual contributions
to&lt;br/&gt;applications in the geosciences is equally broad and includes
the&lt;br/&gt;introduction of stochastic modeling for sub-grid scale
processes,&lt;br/&gt;estimating the climatology for extreme events, the
construction of&lt;br/&gt;spatially coherent weather generators, and statistical
improvements to&lt;br/&gt;methods of data assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
grand scientific challenge for this century is to understand the
complex&lt;br/&gt;interrelationships among the atmosphere, ocean, land
processes, biosphere&lt;br/&gt;and human activities that define the Earth
System. Coupled with this&lt;br/&gt;effort is the need to predict changes to our
environment and to translate&lt;br/&gt;such changes into more immediate economic
and societal impacts. There is&lt;br/&gt;a corresponding challenge for
statistical science to tackle the large and&lt;br/&gt;complex data sets that are
now the norm in many areas of science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering and to leverage
the rich structure and prior knowledge&lt;br/&gt;afforded by traditional
numerical models. Through the training of young&lt;br/&gt;researchers, a
vigorous visitor program and participation within several&lt;br/&gt;of the NCAR
strategic initiatives, this work reaches a wide community&lt;br/&gt;of
statisticians and researchers in the geosciences. In this context,
some&lt;br/&gt;specific problems are the design and analysis of large
computer&lt;br/&gt;experiments that simulate the Earth's climate, extrapolating
historical&lt;br/&gt;meteorological data sets to locations where they are not
observed,&lt;br/&gt;improving the algorithms used to make numerical weather
predictions, and&lt;br/&gt;identifying models that include random processes to
represent complicated&lt;br/&gt;geophysical phenomenon. One common element
throughout this research is&lt;br/&gt;quantifying the uncertainty in a derived
method or result. Uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;estimates are often difficult to obtain
without a statistical treatment&lt;br/&gt;but are particularly important when
the analysis is subsequently used for&lt;br/&gt;decision making or to assess
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;