* 0355370
* Circle of Knowledge on Climate, Weather and Environmental Change: A Community-based Research Project with the Koyukon Athabascan Communities along the Koyukuk River in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Shannon McNeeley, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2007
* USD 89,076.00

ABSTRACT SGER PI Shannon McNeeley UCAR

This SGER proposal is to co-develop a community based research project "Circle
of Knowledge: Climate, Weather and Environmental Change" along the Koyukuk River
(Huslia, Hughes, Koyukuk, Alatna, Alakaket), Alaska. The proposed research is
appropriate for a SGER as it is "preliminary work on untested and novel ideas,"
as well as "a venture into emerging research." Traditional knowledge is an
emerging research concept in the social sciences that has the potential for
developing new ways of thinking not only among social scientists but natural
scientists as well. The Arctic Social Sciences Program has funded several
projects collecting and identifying traditional concepts of the environment,
climate and social relations, but few of these projects were co-developed
between scientists and communities, such as proposed here.

It is always important for scientist to make solid social relationships and
inform people and gain consent prior to undertaking research in Alaska Native
communities. This is a well-stated principle in the NSF's "Principals for
Conduct of Research in the Arctic." What is unique about this proposal is that
the PI is not only making contacts and receiving consent crucial to the success
of any scientific research project and all the more crucial among politically
empowered Alaska Native communities, but she is consulting Alaska Native
communities about the research from its very conception and design. In addition,
the proposed SGER will lay the groundwork for future research by the PI in a
region that has few research project, the Interior of Alaska among the Koyukon
Athabascan people.