* 0355014
* Theoretical Nuclear Physics: A Group Proposal
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Gordon Baym, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 06/30/2008
* USD 901,003.00

This project is a continuation of the program now in progress which aims to
develop fundamental theory of nuclear and other many-particle systems, including
applications to astrophysical and condensed matter systems. The theories of
nuclear systems being developed will be capable of unifying all available data
from present and future experiments at facilities including the Continuous Beam
Accelerator Facility (CEBAF), National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory(NCSL), the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC), and the proposed
Rare Isotope Accelerator (RIA). Among the works are basic studies of nuclear
forces, currents, structure and reactions, properties of nuclear matter, and
nucleon and hadron structure. A major focus is on understanding new states of
matter that are formed under extreme conditions of temperatures and pressures,
e.g., quark gluon plasmas formed in ultrarelativistic heavy ion collisions,
including color superconductivity and its consequences. Nuclear processes and
properties underly the structure and evolution of stars. The present program
applies nuclear theory to neutron stars, nuclear reactions in the cosmos, and
supernovae, with the aim of explaining observations and using observations to
learn properties of matter under extreme conditions. Research on neutron stars
includes the structure of the crust, equation of state and superfluid properties
of cold nuclear matter, possible transition to quark matter cores, including
droplet and novel superconducting phases. Production, absorption, and scattering
rates of neutrinos in hot and dense nuclear matter are studied along with the
equation of state and composition. The strong theoretical connections between
nuclear systems and condensed matter systems allow important cross-fertilization
between these areas. The condensed matter part of this program continues a long-
standing complementary effort to gain theoretical understanding of unusual
states of matter. Topics currently being studied include Bose-Einstein
condensation in magnetically trapped atomic systems, including states at high
rotation, and correlation effects arising from interactions between particles.

Broader Impact Understanding how nuclear processes and properties govern the
evolution of galaxies and the energy generation in stars, including our sun, is
an essential step in describing the universe in which we live. The nuclear world
operates on length scales a million times smaller than that of the atomic world,
and thus provides a deeper view of the structure of matter in the universe. A
crucial aspect of this program is to bring out the ways in which underlying
interactions between constituents of systems on scales from nuclear to condensed
matter to astrophysical govern the system's structure and dynamics. The nuclear
and condensed matter systems being studied are very unusual many-body systems
that provide unique intellectual insights. A vital component of this research
program is its active tradition of training students and postdoctoral
researchers. The group attracts able students and postdocs who, through the
broad training they receive and their intimate involvement in the research of
the group, develop the ability to combine nuclear, particle, astro and condensed
matter physics research on forefront problems. The young scientists trained in
this program generally go on to have significant impact in research at
universities and national laboratories.