* 0355415
* Exploring the Post-Chaco Era in Southeastern Utah
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Catherine Cameron, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 61,236.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Catherine Cameron and a team
of archaeologists and other experts will conduct excavations at the Bluff Great
House and the Comb Wash Community in southeastern Utah. These excavations
explore the collapse of the 10th - 12th century Chacoan regional system and the
transition to the post-Chaco era. The sites are on what was once the northern
periphery of the Chaco world, an area called the northern San Juan region. The
Chacoan regional system, the most geographically extensive system in the
prehistoric Southwest, was centered on a complex of massive, monumental great
houses and great kivas (underground ceremonial chambers) located at Chaco Canyon
in northwestern New Mexico. Throughout the northern Southwest over 150 smaller
great houses (including Bluff), were built in the same style as those in Chaco
Canyon and (along with prehistoric connecting roads) suggest strong links with
Chaco Canyon. These smaller great houses outside Chaco Canyon were surrounded by
the residential hamlets of people who used the structures as a focus for their
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About A.D. 1150, the center at Chaco Canyon
suddenly collapsed and building on the monumental great houses ceased. Oddly, in
peripheral regions like the northern San Juan, some Chacoan great houses (like
Bluff) continued to be used and new great houses (like Comb Wash) were built
during the post-Chaco era (A.D. 1150-1300). The present project explores this
apparent continuation of Chacoan ideas. Southeastern Utah (the westernmost part
of the northern San Juan region) is especially interesting, as the territories
of two major prehistoric cultures met here: Mesa Verde to the east and Kayenta
to the south and west. During the Chaco era, these cultures appear to have been
overlain by the pervasive Chacoan culture. The goal of the present project is to
explore continuities and discontinuities between the Chaco and post-Chaco eras:
1) How did the construction and use of great houses in southeastern Utah change
after the Chaco collapse? 2) Did the residents of Bluff and Comb conduct trade
or otherwise interact with other parts of the northern San Juan region during
the post-Chacoan era or with more distant regions? If so, how do these
interactions compare in scale and direction with regional and interregional
interactions during the Chaco era? 3) How did Chacoan and post-Chaco great
houses relate to their surrounding communities? Did these buildings continue to
serve as community centers or did they become residences themselves? &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project furthers understanding of a key transition in
Southwestern prehistory and contributes both methodologically and substantively
to knowledge of the development and operation of middle range societies
(especially at the complex end of the continuum of such societies). It provides
an opportunity to explore cultural interaction, especially those aspects of
cultural identity that are retained, lost, or reestablished during the
development and collapse of a more powerful social system. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project operates as the University of Colorado's Archaeological
Field School, involving both undergraduate and graduate students in a high
profile research project. Concerned Native American groups are consulted about
the project and their visits to the site help students understand the importance
of indigenous involvement in archaeology. The project works closely with local
archaeological organizations, incorporates volunteers, and communicates results
through public outlets. Finally, the project assists the Federal Bureau of Land
Management and the private Southwest Heritage Foundation (site landowners) in
reaching their management goals. &lt;br/&gt;