* 0355457
* SGER:  Development of a Research Agenda on the Communication of Climate Change Science Across Disciplines
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Joseph DiMento, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 2,500.00

What is the greenhouse effect and what does it mean for present and future
generations of Californians? The news about climate change is constant and a bit
confusing. Reports indicate there is close to a consensus among scientists that
the earth is getting warmer, that people contribute to that warming, and that
the effects over time are significant. Some changes are good; most appear to be
undesirable. At the same time, other information suggests that some important
scientists are not concerned. How can we understand better the risks and
potential benefits that climate change brings? &lt;br/&gt;This project involves
the sharing of information between social and earth scientists to determine
better the nature of the difficulties in communicating climate change research
results to policy makers. The intellectual contribution of the project includes
enhancement of knowledge about obstacles to interdisciplinary research in many
areas with climate change as a case study.&lt;br/&gt;The challenges of social
and natural scientists to work together on important environmental problems are
well known. Although both groups recognize the need on each side and the value
of appreciating each other's perspectives, they also recognize the serious
obstacles to integrating their knowledge into results that can be more valuable
to society's needs. These include:&lt;br/&gt;-Meeting
specialization&lt;br/&gt;-Methods differences and priorities in
choosing&lt;br/&gt;-Organizational boundaries&lt;br/&gt;-Vocabularies and the
continuing refinement of those vocabularies&lt;br/&gt;In addition the project
will connect leading figures in the climate change and risk communication fields
to the public including leading California policymakers to increase their
understanding of a major environmental issue and to promote outreach of science
to various publics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;