* 0200331
* In-Line Optical Measurement of MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) Devices During Production
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2006
* USD 300,492.00

This grant provides for the development of a metrology tool to enhance quality
assurance of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). The micro-interferometers
developed will enable the high-speed geometric measurement of micro-geometries
providing feedback as to the conformance of the micro-part geometry to target
specifications. The sensors to be developed in this research are based on
diffraction grating interferometry making them extremely accurate, reliable and
fast. As the sensors are fabricated using MEMS technology, they can be
inexpensively fabricated in the form of an array. Furthermore, electrostatic
drives will be integrated into the sensor arrays along with electronics and
logic for tuning individual sensors in the array. This will permit the
generation of self-tuning, parallel sensors increasing the speed at which a
group of MEMS parts can be measured with sub-nanometer resolution. Inspection
results will be generated for several known geometries to validate the sensors.
The micro-interferometer arrays, which provide three-dimensional information,
will also be compared to current two-dimensional metrology systems used in IC
fabrication as another means of determining their capabilities.

If successful, the proposed work will enable the measurement of micro-components
that are critical in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). To date,
measurement of such devices has been slow and inaccurate at best. The new
metrology capabilities will enable both an increased understanding of the
quality level of such systems that will, in turn, permit the monitoring and
enhancement of the processes that are used in fabricating such systems.
Furthermore, the speed at which measurement can be taken with the proposed
sensors will enable dynamic measurement of moving MEMS devices. This will permit
the validation of not only the static geometry of the devices, but also the
validation of the dynamic behavior of these devices.