* 0200375
* MRPG:  Intelligent Control of Distributed Large Scale Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2002
* Fernando Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 11/30/2002
* USD 17,951.00

This Minority Research Planning Grant (MRPG) provides funding for the planning
of a full proposal to the Manufacturing Enterprise Systems program for the
development of a tool that will offer distributed intelligent control of
flexible manufacturing systems (FMS). FMS is a fairly a new concept in
manufacturing where the manufacturing plant produces a large variety of parts in
very low quantity. This type of manufacturing is suitable for manufacturing
replacement parts where parts are manufactured as needed and no inventory is
kept. While this manufacturing concept is very promising, because it is always
operating in a transient state, it requires a very complex control system that
continuously optimizes its operation. This planning activity will compliment the
future proposal in two areas. First industry partners will be sought to advise
and educate the research team on the current needs and practices of industry in
this area of research. These Industry partners will play a key role in guiding
the research effort through its development. They will also allow the team to
look at real applications of the tool and real problems. Second a prototype of
the controller tool will be developed to measure its potential improvement over
current technology and measure its capability to control a FMS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful the results of this research will
demonstrate and validate the capabilities of this new type of controller and
show its obtainable improvement over current systems. The manufacturing partners
will educate the team on the current practices and needs and allow the team to
study actual systems. Potential performance improvements will prove the need for
such complex control architectures. The results of the eventual research will
optimally control a FMS and allow this new manufacturing concept to reach the
goals that they were originally designed to meet.