* 0200203
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Sherry Dollhopf, Dollhopf                Sherry         L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2002. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "The microbiology of iron reduction
in the salt marsh." This research is investigating the importance of
microorganisms that use iron to obtain energy for growth in the salt marsh
ecosystem. Comprehensive geochemical and microbiological laboratory techniques
are being used to quantify the contribution of microbial iron respiration to
total organic matter decomposition in different salt marsh environments to
estimate the importance of iron respiration to carbon cycling on a marsh-wide
scale. The diversity and community structure of iron-reducing microorganisms is
being investigated using serial dilution cultures, 16S rRNA based techniques,
fluorescent in situ hybridization, and microscopy. This research could lead to
the discovery of new iron-reducing organisms that are important in coastal
marine environments.