* 0200970
* Statistical Tools for RNA Folding Prediction and Antisense and Ribozyme Design for High Throughput Functional Genomics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Ye Ding, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0200970&lt;br/&gt;Ding&lt;br/&gt; The long-term goal of this project is to
develop statistical methods and software for improved prediction of RNA
secondary structure, and for improved computational design of antisense
oligonucleotides (oligos) and trans-cleaving ribozymes as the vehicles for high-
throughput functional genomics and drug target validation in the post-genomic
era. The objectives of the project include: 1) development of statistical
algorithms and methodology for the rational design of antisense oligos and
ribozymes; 2) experimental testing and improvement of antisense design method
with experimental feedback data; 3) development of a statistical RNA folding
software Sfold for RNA folding prediction and design of antisense oligos and
ribozymes; and establishment and maintenance of a Sfold Web server for RNA
folding and antisense oligo and ribozyme design. The Web server will be freely
accessible by the scientific community for non-commercial applications.
&lt;br/&gt; Of the estimated 30,000-40,000 genes in the human genome, definitive
functions have been assigned to only a few percent. Through gene down-
regulation, antisense oligos and ribozymes are important tools for the
assignment of gene functions and for the validation of human therapeutic
targets. There is compelling experimental evidence that the accessibility of the
messenger or viral RNA by antisense oligos or ribozymes is most constrained by
the secondary structure of the target. Recently, statistical approaches to the
prediction of RNA secondary structure and antisense targets have shown promise
and advantages over established methods. It is thus important to explore fully
the advantages of statistical approaches to RNA folding prediction and antisense
oligo and ribozyme design. It is expected that the methods and software
developed from this project will be widely used for functional genomics
applications. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition
sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science
Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the
National Institutes of Health. &lt;br/&gt;