* 0200167
* RUI:  Determinant Identities, Szego Type Limit Theorems, and Connections to Random Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Estelle Basor, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 80,000.00

Determinants of Toeplitz matrices have arisen in many branches&lt;br/&gt;of
mathematics and physics. For example, they describe the&lt;br/&gt;spin
correlation between two sites in the classical Ising&lt;br/&gt;model of a two-
dimensional magnet. More recently, they have&lt;br/&gt;been used to describe
statistical properties of random &lt;br/&gt;matrices, whose eigenvalues model
complicated systems. &lt;br/&gt;The asymptotic behavior of determinants of
Toeplitz matrices&lt;br/&gt;is described using the Strong Szego-Limit Theorem
and its&lt;br/&gt;generalizations. Recently, this theorem was improved in
the&lt;br/&gt;sense that a new identity was found for the determinant
that&lt;br/&gt;allows one to find very good estimates for the error in
the&lt;br/&gt;Szego expansion of the determinant. The major purpose
of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to extend this identity to other classes
of&lt;br/&gt;matrices and operators. This has applications such as finding
&lt;br/&gt;the distributions of linear statistics in random matrix
theory,&lt;br/&gt;as well as finding the level spacing of the eigenvalues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior
that&lt;br/&gt;exact predictions become impossible, so instead
average&lt;br/&gt;properties of these systems are studied. For example,
the&lt;br/&gt;energy level of a particle of a compound nucleus in a
slow&lt;br/&gt;nuclear reaction has complicated unpredictable
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Random matrix theory provides mathematical models that
allow&lt;br/&gt;a simulation of the energy levels of the particle.
&lt;br/&gt;One of the tools that is used to study the statistical behavior
&lt;br/&gt;of the random matrices and thus of the energy levels, &lt;br/&gt;is a
determinant of a Toeplitz matrix. A determinant is a &lt;br/&gt;number that
yields important information about a square &lt;br/&gt;array of numbers. These
Toeplitz determinants occur in many&lt;br/&gt;branches of applied mathematics.
One classical use was to&lt;br/&gt;study the properties of models of two-
dimensional (or very&lt;br/&gt;thin) magnets. Determinants are often hard to
compute.&lt;br/&gt;However, there is a result, called the Strong Szego
Limit&lt;br/&gt;Theorem, which yields an estimate for such a
determinant.&lt;br/&gt;Recently, this estimate was improved so that error
terms&lt;br/&gt;could be calculated more easily. One major goal of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is to extend these results to other classes
of&lt;br/&gt;determinants. This will yield information about the
energy&lt;br/&gt;levels of complicated systems in other types of models,
&lt;br/&gt;not covered by the Toeplitz case.