* 0200784
* Regularity for Fully Nonlinear Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Yu Yuan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 83,673.00

PI: Yu Yuan, University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0200784&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of a
priori estimates and solvability for fully nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;equations with
the convexity condition are well developed. While other&lt;br/&gt;concrete
equations like Isaacs equations from the stochastic optimal&lt;br/&gt;control
theory and special Lagrangian equations from calibration geometry&lt;br/&gt;do
not have the usual convexity condition. Only preliminary attempts
were&lt;br/&gt;made toward this direction in recent years. Though the
complex&lt;br/&gt;Monge-Ampere equations have the usual convexity condition,
the&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic invariance is too large. There is no theory of a
priori&lt;br/&gt;estimates for the complex Monge-Ampere equations with non-
smooth&lt;br/&gt;right hand side. This project concentrates on the following
four parts. In&lt;br/&gt;part one, the objective is to derive Holder a priori
estimates for&lt;br/&gt;finitely piecewise linear Isaacs equations by further
employment of the&lt;br/&gt;ideas in recent work. In part two, the attempt is to
study the regularity&lt;br/&gt;for general fully nonlinear elliptic equations in
3-d in the light of&lt;br/&gt;recent work that any homogeneous order two
solution to fully nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;elliptic equation in 3-d must be linear.
In part three, the purpose is to&lt;br/&gt;answer whether any homogeneous order
two solution to special Lagrangian&lt;br/&gt;equation of dimension four or
higher is trivial. In part four, the aim is&lt;br/&gt;to study the Bernstein
problem for complex Monge-Ampere equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential
equations and differential geometry are further applications&lt;br/&gt;of
Newton's calculus to the investigation of laws and shapes of
nature,&lt;br/&gt;and even some phenomena of our real world. This project deals
with some&lt;br/&gt;particular equations, like Isaacs equations from optimal
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;control theory, special Lagrangian equations and complex
Monge-Ampere&lt;br/&gt;equations from differential geometry. Understanding those
equations would&lt;br/&gt;have impacts on not only the related mathematical
fields, but also fields&lt;br/&gt;outside mathematics like
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;