* 0200681
* Normal and Shear Stresses in Dynamic, Submicron Liquid Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Jeffrey Streator, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2007
* USD 250,001.00

0200681&lt;br/&gt;Streator&lt;br/&gt;This project is a 3-year experimental and
theoretical investigation of capillary effects in tribological contacts. The
proposed investigation is motivated by the technological trend for smaller and
smaller form factors, leading to higher surface-area-to-volume ratios and an
increasing significance of liquid-mediated interfacial adhesion. Direct
measurements of negative capillary pressures will be conducted with several
different liquids at sub-micron interfacial spacings, under dynamic conditions.
The liquids to be studied include selected perfluoropolyether (PFPE) oils as
well as water. The effects of liquid properties such a molecular weight,
viscosity, polarity and surface tension will be investigated. Mathematical
modeling will be conducted in conjunction with the experiments. It is
anticipated that this work will lead to better models of capillary effects in
tribological contacts, thereby providing micro- and nano-system designers with
improved mathematical tools. Graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed
to modern experimental and computational methods, and will learn fundamentals of
liquid-mediated contact. Additionally, special efforts will be made to involve
under-represented students in this project by taking advantage of an existing
NSF-sponsored program at Georgia Tech that provides graduate stipends and
undergraduate research funds to under-represented students in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;