* 0200148
* RUI:  Image Aquisition and Analysis Facility for Faculty-Student Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Lawrence Espey, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 05/31/2005
* USD 123,667.00

Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Ribble of the Biology Department at
Trinity University to fund state of the art image acquisition and analysis
instrumentation and software. This equipment will be housed in the Center for
Image Acquisition and Analysis, a multi-user research facility that will enhance
the research capabilities of all faculty and undergraduate students in the
Department of Biology at Trinity University. Trinity University will remodel an
existing laboratory to provide a site for this Center and will share in the cost
of the equipment and software. To satisfy the needs of this diverse research
community, the Center will contain equipment and software to acquire, store, and
analyze images appropriate to research studies in molecular biology, cellular
biology, physiology, ecology, and evolution. To meet these needs, the following
items of equipment will be purchased: a gel documentation system; a fluorescence
microscope with deconvolution capabilities, digital cameras, computers, and
support software.

The Center for Image Acquisition and Analysis will significantly increase
faculty and student research capabilities, enhancing the activities of the
varied research groups within the Department of Biology. Each of these groups
will make intensive use of this new facility. These ongoing research projects
include the study of the following topics: The mechanisms for selective
destabilization of secretory protein mRNAs at the ER Changes in ovarian gene
expression during ovulation Regulation of photosystem production by a putative
GTP-binding protein in Rhodospirillum centenum Paracellular permeability of
tight junctions in intestinal epithelial cells Rat epidermal cell responses to
radiofrequency radiation Evolution of monogamy and conservation of mammals
Sociality and social parasitism in galling aphids

Not only will this equipment support the ongoing research activities of faculty
and students; the sensitivity, resolution, and analysis capabilities of the
proposed equipment will provide opportunities for research initiatives and
directions not currently possible at Trinity. Furthermore, use of this shared
facility will help develop collaborative research projects between the diverse
sub-disciplines within the Department of Biology.