* 0200056
* Statistical Adjustment for Short-Run Manufacturing: Parametric Optimization, Robustness Analysis, and Ensemble Control Using Gibbs Sampling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Enrique Del Castillo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 05/31/2006
* USD 193,455.00

A problem located at the foundations of the Statistical Process Control (SPC)
field is how to adjust a manufacturing process that is suspected to be operating
in a malfunctioning mode. Rapidly adjusting a manufacturing process when the
setup operation is defective is particularly important. The object of this
research is to develop optimal sequential adjustment methods for the setup and
within-run control problems. The setup adjustment problem was first analyzed by
F. Grubbs who derived a simple sequential scheme. A Bayesian formulation for
process adjustment will be developed based on Kalman filters. The formulation
unifies several adjustment rules including Grubbs' scheme, Stochastic
Approximation, and classical control methods such as Linear Quadratic Gaussian
(LQG) control. The proposed work will follow two main research thrusts: a)
parametric optimization and robustness assessment of existing adjustment rules;
b) development of a new ensemble-optimal adjustment rule. It is proposed to
utilize Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques, and in particular, Gibbs Sampling,
applied to the problem of estimating the mean of a sequentially-adjusted process
that experiences errors in the setups according to some stable distribution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main outcome of this research will be a new set of
process adjustment tools that will provide efficient setup and within-run
control in short-run manufacturing processes. This formulation has the major
advantage that after a few runs or lots are produced, it allows to start
adjusting a new lot prior to obtaining the first measurement in the lot. This is
clearly an advantage for the type of flexible, short-run manufacturing systems
this research is expected to benefit. Use of Penn State's FAME manufacturing
laboratory will provide a realistic testbed for the techniques developed in this
project. Collaboration with industrial researchers (Eli Lilly and SAS Institute
Inc.) will provide expertise in the real-life application of the techniques
developed in this research and guidance about software implementation. To allow
technology transfer, software tools will be written and will be freely
distributed at Penn State's Applied Statistics laboratory web site.