* 0200372
* Spatial Squeezing, Entanglement, and Solitonic EPR Sources in Chi(2) Minicavities
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,12/31/2005
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00



This award is in support of studies of spatial squeezing in optical second
harmonic generation. Practical sources of radiation fields exhibiting time
domain quadrature squeezing, twin-beam correlations, and other quantum optical
phenomena were developed in the 1980's and 1990's. We will investigate spatial
aspects of non-classical light generated by optical second harmonic generation.
Spatial squeezing has been theoretically predicted to appear in second harmonic
generation as a sub-critical precursor of transverse modulational instability.
We are working on a series of experiments aimed at observing both classical
patterns above the modulational instability threshold, as well as the below
threshold quantum signatures.

The experimental work uses singly and doubly resonant optical cavities driven
by continuous wave and nanosecond pulsed near infrared sources. Detailed
measurements will be made of the degree of squeezing as a function of cavity
tuning, phase mismatch, and spatial wavenumber. We will also work with parameter
regimes where the second harmonic field that is internally generated in the
optical cavity directly drives the competing process of optical parametric
oscillation. This so-called internally pumped optical parametric oscillator
(IPOPO) has the unique feature that the down converted parametric fields that
display non-classical correlations are generated at the same wavelength as the
incident pump beam using a single nonlinear crystal. This eliminates the need
for separate frequency doubling stages, which reduces device complexity, and
greatly facilitates frequency tuning of the combined process. The resulting
quadrature squeezed fields will be used for measurements of spatial displacement
with sub shot-noise resolution.

In parallel with the experimental work we will perform theoretical calculations
of the spectrum of spatial squeezing for the different possible cavity
configurations. In particular a search will be made for parameter regimes that
provide continuous variable entanglement of spatially modulated fields in the
IPOPO device.

The educational component of the project will include training graduate students
in modern experimental and theoretical techniques that enable applications of
non-classical light fields.

