* 0200930
* 2002 Tetrapyrroles Gordon Conference;  July 14 -19, 2002, Newport, Rhode Island
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Gloria Ferreira, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Neil E. Hoffman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 5,000.00

This application requests support for the 19 th Gordon Research Conference on
the&lt;br/&gt;Chemistry and Biology of Tetrapyrroles, to be held at Salve Regina
University,&lt;br/&gt;Newport, RI, from July 14-19, 2002. The specific aims of
this conference are the&lt;br/&gt;following:&lt;br/&gt;1) To provide a forum for
discussion of recent unpublished data by scientists with&lt;br/&gt;common
interest in the study of the chemistry and biology of tetrapyrrole
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) To promote the exchange of ideas between
established and new investigators from a&lt;br/&gt;wide variety of scientific
disciplines (e.g., chemists, biochemists, clinicians,
plant&lt;br/&gt;biologists, microbiologists, biotechnologists) by providing
ample discussion time&lt;br/&gt;following formal presentations, by holding
poster sessions which serve as a focus for&lt;br/&gt;the discussion of common
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This biennial interdisciplinary conference has
stimulated collaborations between basic&lt;br/&gt;biologists, chemists and
clinicians interested in tetrapyrroles for more than three&lt;br/&gt;decades. In
association with proteins, tetrapyrroles serve diverse roles as
biological&lt;br/&gt;redox catalysts, in the harvesting of light energy, in the
activation and delivery of&lt;br/&gt;oxygen, and as signaling molecules. Free
tetrapyrroles are also essential nutrients&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., vitamin B12), serve
as regulators of gene expression (e.g., hemes), and are being&lt;br/&gt;utilized
as therapeutic agents (e.g., photodynamic cancer therapy, target delivery
of&lt;br/&gt;radionuclides). Owing to their photodynamic activity, toxicity and
lipophilicity, the&lt;br/&gt;accumulation of tetrapyrroles (e.g., porphyrins,
bilirubin) is associated with numerous&lt;br/&gt;pathologies of the skin, liver
and brain. For these reasons, this conference represents&lt;br/&gt;an important
venue for exchange between basic and applied researchers
on&lt;br/&gt;tetrapyrroles and for refinement of new tools and therapies for
development by the&lt;br/&gt;biomedical industry. Funds requested in this
application are targeted to support 10&lt;br/&gt;young investigators who have
not previously had the opportunity to attend this&lt;br/&gt;conference and for
travel of two young ioprimarily undergraduate
institutionle&lt;br/&gt;researchers. The sessions, which highlight recent
technological progress, will include&lt;br/&gt;22 invited speakers, a plenary
lecturer and 14 discussion leaders. All of these&lt;br/&gt;individuals have been
selected for their scientific excellence, recent innovative work&lt;br/&gt;and
contribution to the breadth of the program. The remaining 100 conferees will
be&lt;br/&gt;chosen to ensure a broad representation of women, ethnicity and
young scientists from&lt;br/&gt;various disciplines in academia, medical
research institutions and industry. Strengths&lt;br/&gt;of this ongoing Gordon
conference are its high disciplinary diversity, integration
of&lt;br/&gt;research from basic chemistry through practical and clinical
applications, focus on&lt;br/&gt;new unpublished work, time for discussion,
informal atmosphere, and ban on&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of conference
proceedings, (which it is essential to assure&lt;br/&gt;confidentiality when
discussing unpublished results).