* 0200178
* Dynamics of Nonlinear Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* John Mallet-Paret, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 103,503.00

PI: John Mallet-Paret, Brown University DMS-0200178

Abstract:

We propose a fundamental study of qualitative properties of various classes of
nonlinear dynamical systems, in particular as they arise from differential and
difference equations. Among the systems to be considered are those from ordinary
and partial differential equations, systems of lattice differential equations
(that is, spatially discrete systems), differential delay equations, and
nonlinear maps on cones. Issues such as existence of equilibria and their
stability, spontaneous formation of spatial patterns and spatial chaos, and
existence and qualitative properties of traveling fronts, will be studied for
these equations. In addition to established techniques (both theoretical and
numerical) from differential equations and dynamical systems, a significant
portion of the proposed research involves the development and implementation of
new tools and techniques with which to study these systems. Among the techniques
to be employed are those involving singular perturbations, invariant manifolds,
exponential dichotomies, and topological methods (Morse decompositions, fixed
point theorems, degree theory).

We are developing new mathematical techniques for analyzing and understanding
differential equations and difference equations which arise as models in various
areas of science. Very broadly, these types of mathematical systems model time-
dependent or evolutionary behavior, as it occurs in a wide range of scientific
areas, including biology, chemistry, electrical circuit theory, image
processing, and material science. While this is a very broad scope of inquiry,
the specific problems to be studied exhibit features in common -- spontaneous
formation of patterns, self-sustained oscillations, regulation by internal
feedback (often with time delays) -- which can be analyzed with some of the
basic tools of dynamical systems theory. It is expected the resulting
mathematical advances arising from these studies will increase the knowledge of
and will provide insight into both the abstract theory of dynamical systems and
the scientific areas of inquiry.

