* 0200949
* New Design Criteria for Soil-Construction Material Interface Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Marte Gutierrez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 223,578.00

CMS-0201482&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joseph Dove&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia
Polytechnic and State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: "New Design Criteria for Soil
and Construction Material Interface Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to many facets of geotechnical engineering
design is the problem of determining how local interactions between soil
materials and manufactured inclusions dictate overall behavior of a geotechnical
composite system. Whether the inclusion is geosynthetic, steel, concrete, or a
new material yet to be developed, the interactions between soil and construction
materials are governed by underlying physical principles related to measurable
properties. Unfortunately, there are few, if any, predictive relationships for
interface systems available to the research and practice communities. This
deficiency is important because innovative applications are arising which
require close control over interface resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this project are to: 1) Formulate new practical design methods and tools for
interface systems; 2) Quantify the micro-mechanical behavior of soil-
construction material interfaces in two- and three-dimensions; and 3) Determine
the spatial scales that control behavior of interfaces for a given soil material
and inclusion geometry. Results from previous NSF-sponsored research, a
laboratory testing program, and two and three-dimensional discrete element
micromechanical models will be used to accomplish these goals. Specific issues
to be addressed in the experiments and modeling include the role of grain shape;
surface topography; relative hardness; particle movements with respect to the
surface asperities; particle breakage; and, solid surface wear on the strength
and dilatancy of the soil within the interface shear
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research will be realized in
five primary impact areas: integration of education and research; participation
of minorities and women; enhancing infrastructure for research; rapid and broad
dissemination of research results; and, societal benefits. Education and
research will be integrated by bringing research results and new materials into
undergraduate and graduate courses. The PIs will continue their long-standing
practice of involving undergraduate students in research through the REU
program. Participation of underrepresented minorities and women is encouraged.
The Ph.D. student involved in this project will serve as a model for her fellow
women graduate and undergraduate student colleauges. McNair Scholars, especially
those from the Appalachian region, will be actively recruited to conduct their
summer internship on this project, and as graduate students. The three-
dimensional models and algorithms produced will enhance the research and
teaching infrastructure by providing advanced computing resources for solving
problems in soil/structure interaction. In addition, project findings will be
widely disseminated in print and web-based media. A surface profile database
will be created in downloable format on the world wide web. Finally, society at
large will benefit from cost saving opportunities and technological
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;