* 0200974
* Development of the Constant-Flow Method for Concurrent Measurement of the Soil-Water Characteristic Curve and Hydraulic Conductivity Function of Unsaturated Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Harold Olsen, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2003
* USD 49,088.00

PI: William Likos&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Colorado School of
Mines&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Development of the constant-flow method for concurrent
measurement of the soil-water characteristic curve and hydraulic conductivity
function of unsaturated soils"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two fundamental material
parameters are required to analyze geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering
problems involving the flow of fluids through unsaturated soils:&lt;br/&gt;1)
the soil-water characteristic curve, and 2) the hydraulic conductivity function.
Together, these&lt;br/&gt;functions describe the relationships among matric
suction, hydraulic conductivity, and water content in unsaturated soils. The
functions may either be measured directly or modeled
indirectly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is a considerable shortage of
practical, cost-effective, and reliable experimental techniques for direct
measurements of these two important parameters. Several techniques have been
developed for independently measuring either the soil-water characteristic curve
or the hydraulic conductivity function; however, very few are available for
concurrent measurement of both functions, particularly for a single undisturbed
specimen under stress-controlled conditions. Most of the existing techniques
tend to be impractical for general use because they are limited in terms of
complexity and/or cost. As a result, engineers in practice more often rely on
indirect estimations of characteristic curves and conductivity functions using
analytical or empirical models based on routinely measured material properties
such as grain-size. In most situations, however, direct measurements are much
more desirable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research attempts to develop the
constant-flow method (CFM) for direct, steady-state, and concurrent measurement
of both the soil-water characteristic curve and hydraulic conductivity function
of unsaturated soils. The majority of the work will be in the form of
modifications to a prototype CFM permeameter system developed in the mid 1990's
by project Co-PI Dr. Harold Olsen at the Colorado School of Mines. Early results
demonstrated several distinct advantages over the more traditional measurement
techniques. Most notably, both functions could be obtained for a single specimen
without the requirement for separate testing procedures on split sub-samples.
Hydraulic conductivity (HC) measurements could be obtained much more rapidly and
with substantially smaller hydraulic gradients. Because testing was conducted in
a triaxial cell, HC and matric suction could be evaluated as functions of water
content as well as applied effective stress. Unfortunately, several limitations
were also evident in the prototype CFM system. Specifically, HC measurements
were limited to relatively fine-grained soils (k &lt; 10 -8 cm/sec), pore-air
pressure was applied at only one end of the specimen, diffused-air flushing
circuits were not incorporated, specimen volume changes could not be measured,
and problems with leakage due to an overly complex design were
encountered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this work is to expand the
capability and practicality of the CFM approach for unsaturated soils testing by
addressing and eliminating these limitations. Key modifications to the prototype
system will allow HC to be measured for both coarse- and fine-grained soils,
account for specimen volume change, decrease testing time, and increase the
system's overall robustness and ease-of use. Flushing circuits will be added so
that measured pore-water pressures will be less affected by diffused air in the
system and permeation rates may be more accurately controlled. The entire system
will be computer automated and tailored for compatibility with conventional
triaxial permeameter systems. Finally, the system performance will be evaluated
for a wide range of soil types and the experimental results will be compared
with commonly used analytical and empirical models to check their mutual
validity. New testing methods are needed to more accurately analyze the
increasingly widespread geoenvironmental problems involving unsaturated fluid
flow. This research will establish the constant-flow method as a reliable,
practical, and economical testing alternative. NIOSH IC 9453, pp.
111-132.&lt;br/&gt;