* 0200972
* Morphing Complete Vibrational Potentials for Hydrogen Bonded and Related Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* John Bevan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2006
* USD 341,100.00

In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Bevan and Lucchese will use high-resolution spectroscopic
experimental techniques and theoretical methods to obtain accurate interaction
potential energy functions for prototypical hydrogen-bonded systems and related
interactions. Gas-phase neutral reactive radical dimers and molecular complexes
will be investigated using high-resolution microwave, millimeter-wave,
submillimeter-wave, and infrared spectroscopy. Spectra will be measured for
dimers of the type X-HY (where X and Y are typically halogen atoms) as well as
for HX clusters and hydrogen-bonded systems of biological interest, such as
formamide:water. Potential energy surfaces will be computed using ab initio
techniques and used to predict spectroscopic data. The potential energy
functions will then be morphed until the predicted and experimental data agree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at obtaining a broader knowledge about
fundamental properties related to chemical bonding. The accurately determined
potentials for the prototypical systems being studied will provide benchmarks
for modeling and predicting the behavior of larger and less tractable systems.
The results will aid in understanding the structure and internal dynamics of
larger species, including proteins and other biological molecules, as well as in
resolving problems associated with other diverse fields such as atmospheric
pollution and materials engineering. Students supported in this project will
receive training in both state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical
techniques and will be exposed to international collaborations that will enhance
their preparation for careers in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;