* 0200334
* Micro-Scale Laser Shock Processing with Controlled Mechanical Properties, Microstructure and Fatigue Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 03/31/2006
* USD 300,093.00

Laser shock processing (LSP), also known as laser peening, is a process in which
beneficial compressive residual stress is imparted into surface layer of
metallic parts by directed laser pulses. Parts are treated the specific areas
prone to premature failures. It was incepted in early 70's and is currently in
production for parts such as turbine blades using millimeter-sized laser beams.
Motivated by the rapid progress being made in microsystem design and
fabrication, preliminary studies on micro-scale LSP (i.e., using laser spot size
of a few microns) have shown feasibility. While the dominant material in
microsystems is silicon, metallic thick- and thin-film structures are often an
integral part. Some of these metallic microstructures, such as MEMS actuators,
metal-coated micro-gears, micro medical implants, micro-switches, and relays,
experience cyclic loads in service. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is thus to advance the state of knowledge in micro-scale LSP technology,
and to develop reliable ability to modify metallic structures in microsystems,
with controlled mechanical proper-ties, microstructures and fatigue performance.
More specifically, the aims of this project are (1) to de-velop better
understanding and reliable prediction capabilities for the micro-scale LSP by
properly consid-ering phenomena important to the micro scale concerned, and by
considering both bulk, thick- and thin-film materials; and (2) to design and
properly execute an aggressive experimental program to complement the modeling
effort and to accumulate experimental data for further development. This program
will in-vestigate characterization methods appropriate for the micro-scale
concerned to measure residual stress distribution; and methods to quantify
microstructure change caused by LSP. This research is of substantial interest to
industry, and support from IBM, LSP Technologies and Brookhaven National Lab
will provide intellectual and characterization exchanges. Education outreach to
a diverse group of undergraduate stu-dents through local chapters of
professional societies in the New York City area will enhance efforts to recruit
and retain these students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;