* 0200120
* Microwave and Radio Frequency Rapid Electromagnetic Induction Heating (EMIH) of Silicon Wafers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Yogesh Gianchandani, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The need to reduce the thermal budgets (time, temperature) of next generation
semiconductor device processing has created a significant interest in short-term
rapid thermal processing (RTP) of silicon. One of the most important
applications for RTP is the formation of the source and drain regions of CMOS
gate stacks. Another application is the bonding of wafers for fabrication of
micromechanical and power microelectronic devices. This proposal requests
support for basic research of microwave and radio frequency (RF) rapid
electromagnetic induction heating (EMIH) of Si. EMIH would provide valuable and
unique capabilities for wafer bonding. Moreover, EMIH may be the only viable
method to anneal ultrashallow implanted impurity dopant regions to the
specifications required to manufacture the next generation of high density VLSI
integrated circuits (the so-called 100 nm technology node).

The research program involves investigations of rapid microwave and RF EMIH of
Si wafers. For example, initial data indicate that EMIH spike-annealing of
ultra-shallow boron-implanted wafers is superior to conventional lamp RTP.
Experiments with ultra-shallow boron-implanted wafers are proposed to establish
just how effective EMIH RTP can be, and to elucidate the unconventional
mechanisms responsible for the observed superior performance. Similarly, initial
results indicate that EMIH enables very rapid wafer bonding without the need for
intermediate glue layers. The research will more thoroughly determine the
quality of the bond, the minimum time and temperature required to obtain a good
bond, the prospects for multi-level wafer stack bonding, and the mechanisms that
explain how uniformly strong bonds are obtained during RF EMIH, even with
significant radial temperature gradients.

Supporting collaborations with leading semiconductor fabrication industrial
organizations will provide critical input to experimental design and results
analysis, and valuable mentorship of students. These collaborations will also
leverage grant resources by providing sources of ultrashallow implanted wafers
and post-anneal characterization from institutions with unparalleled experience
and expertise in this technology area.