* 0200204
* GOALI - Green CMP: Chemical Mechanical Planarization Process Modeling for Minimizing Environmental Impact
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* David Dornfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 325,000.00

Chemical-mechanical planarization (CMP) is one of the most critical steps in the
production of multilayer silicon microelectronic devices. The goal of the
research project is to develop a framework for environmental modeling which
combines mechanical-chemical modeling of CMP tool components, environmental
impact factors and cost of ownership (CoO) based upon competent variable
sensitive process models of material removal in CMP. This work will extend
earlier work to more detailed process capable models within an integrated
process assessment framework. We focus here on the continued development of
models for the mechanical interactions as well as models of the chemical effects
and influence on the process. We expect to determine the dependency of material
removal (both at a specific point and over the wafer surface) on process
variables such as slurry, pattern density, wafer material, etc. The model will
be able to offer information on designing new or novel pad geometries to
facilitate "environmentally efficient CMP."

The work at UC, San Diego, on chemical removal mechanisms, is added to prior
work at Berkeley. The resulting software will link process models to higher-
level tools for assessing the environmental impact of the process and the
upstream and downstream energy, consumable and waste requirements. A result of
this model-based "environmental analysis tool" will be quantitative suggestions
to process engineers and product and tool designers to enable them to insure
that energy, waste and consumable use is minimized while maintaining the
capability of the process and high product standards - that is - Environmentally
Benign Manufacturing.