* 0200151
* Generalized Branch-and-Cut Method for Mixed Integer Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2006
* USD 287,204.00

Models involving general integer variables with nonlinear constraints are very
hard to solve. There has been some, but limited progress towards solving large
scale models of this type. Computational results on practical test problems
suggest that the gap between the optimum objective value and a bound from the
solution of the relaxed problem at the root node is significantly larger when
compared with bounds obtained in the linear case, and the size of the
enumeration tree explodes quickly. To overcome the difficulties in solving large
scale problems of this type, advances in several directions are needed. Methods
for generating good cutting planes need to be developed further, as well as more
advanced heuristics for identifying a feasible solution quickly need to be
developed. However, we think that the most fundamental advance may come from the
development of advanced branching schemes in a branch-and-cut method. The
standard branching schemes branch on a single variable disjunction at a time.
Lenstra showed that by branching on general hyperplanes we can solve a mixed
integer linear programming problem in polynomial time. Lenstra's algorithm has
found limited practical value. This is because the computational cost of finding
the branching hyperplane in his algorithm is very high. However, there is a
possibility for finding branching planes that are ``good quality'' but
computationally not as expensive. This research will focus on this problem as
well as related issues towards solving nonlinear mixed integer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several engineering and management problems lead
to models that are nonlinear, possibly stochastic, integer programs. These
problem areas include inventory, production and chemical process planning,
layout, location, logistics and financial optimization. For example,
nonlinearity arises naturally while modeling uncertainty using the second
moment. This proposal request funds to support our ongoing research for finding
efficient techniques for solving such models. The development of general purpose
solution methodology for solving nonlinear integer programming problem will have
a wide ranging impact, as it would facilitate solving such problems arising from
many different areas.