* 0200320
* Fast Algorithms for a Class of Large-Scale Semidefnite Programs That are Widely Encountered in Systems and Control Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Lieven Vandenberghe, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 219,960.00

Fast Algorithms for a Class of Large-Scale Semidefinite Programs that are Widely
Encountered in Systems and Control Applications

Semidefinite programming (SDP), i.e., convex optimization with linear matrix
inequality (LMI) constraints, is now widely recognized as a powerful numerical
tool in several areas of engineering, including control, communication, signal
processing, and circuit design. However, some limitations of SDP have become
apparent. Most important, the reduction of an engineering problem to an SDP
often requires a large number of auxiliary variables, so that the resulting SDP
problem can be very large, even though the underlying engineering problem is not
particularly large-scale. This limits the problem sizes that can be handled by
general-purpose SDP solvers, and hence the applicability of SDP in practical
engineering problems. In order to have an impact on engineering practice, future
SDP solvers will have to be able to take advantage of problem structure, without
overly restricting their scope of applicability or sacrificing reliability.
Motivated by these observations, we have identified a class of engineering
problems with a rich enough structure that much faster special SDP algorithms
can be devised for it, but with wide enough applicability that the benefit is
widespread. Specifically, we address the fast solution of SDP problems where the
underlying LMIs have a special form that is typically encountered with the
application of the Kalman-Yakubovich-Popov Lemma. The research component of the
proposal will contribute to the propagation of SDP into the mainstream of
engineering practice. The educational component will provide graduate student
researchers with an interdisciplinary training in control, optimization, and
numerical computing.







