* 0200365
* Semiconductor Optical Buffers Using Grating Slow-Wave Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Shun-Lien Chuang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Optical buffering is essential to optical packet switch implementations which
have been proposed worldwide to overcome future problems with large electronic
packet switches. We propose to design and fabricate semiconductor-based optical
buffers by using sampled gratings, Moir gratings, and chirped Moir gratings.
These gratings will be fabricated using a new method to obtain a photonic
bandgap-engineered material that has a large index contrast, which is essential
for group velocity reduction in our proposed gratings. Optical fiber delay lines
have been commonly used in recent years in the design of optical buffers,
typically through a fiber loop with standard components such as optical
isolators, 3-dB couplers, and semiconductor laser amplifiers for the gating,
interconnection, and signal amplification. The fundamental difficulty facing the
design of an optical buffer is that variable-length buffers must be implemented
with delay lines; however, by their nature, fiber loop optical delay lines are
of fixed length. Our proposed optical buffer, unlike fiber loop delay lines, is
variable by using current injection. Another significant advantage is that other
semiconductor optoelectronic and optical devices can be integrated with our
proposed variable optical buffers since they are based on the same semiconductor
III-V compounds. Our proposed tasks include the design and fabrication of
sampled gratings, Moir gratings, and chirped Moir gratings as slow-wave devices.
The wavelength range for our proposed devices will be centered at 1.5-1.6 micron
wavelength. Sampled gratings and Moir gratings can be shown to have a large
group delay factor when a large contrast in the refractive index is introduced.
This large refractive index contrast will be achieved using our proposed
semiconductor and oxide materials. This contrast is at least two orders of
magnitude larger than that of the fiber gratings. A chirped Moir grating allows
for a broader bandwidth for the pass band. A novel photonic bandgap structure
will be fabricated using periodic buried AlOx channels with growth on a
patterned substrate. The advantages of this structure include tight optical and
electrical confinement with very low defect densities. One or multiple current
sources can be applied to the gratings via the doped AlGaAs layer to change the
refractive index in the slow-wave structures for controlling the buffer delay.
Our research will lead to the realization of a new class of semiconductor
optical buffers, which can be immediately integrated with many optoelectronic
devices.

