* 0200439
* Models and Algorithms for Integrated Multi-Stage Production/Distribution Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Philip Kaminsky, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 434,257.00

This grant provides funding for a rigorous analysis of several classes of multi-
stage supply chains in both deterministic and stochastic settings. Novel models
will be developed for the structural analysis of optimal production and
distribution policies. These models will be used as a foundation for the
development of new, efficient, and robust heuristics for integrated production
and transportation planning. These models and heuristics will be extended to a
variety of relatively complex environments, including settings featuring multi-
stage serial production, multi-component assembly networks, multi-class
transportation cost functions, multi-class demand, and make-to-stock and make-
to-order production strategies. After exploring these models in a centralized
setting in which all stages are working toward the same objective, decentralized
settings where each stage strives to achieve its own objective will be
considered. Loss of efficiency due to decentralization will be explored, and
coordination mechanisms will be developed. These models and algorithms will be
validated with industrial data, in order to test the applicability of insights
and the effectiveness of algorithms.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to a deeper understanding
of integrated production and transportation planning in modern supply chains,
and in particular, will help to explain the impact of finite capacity and
distribution economies of scale in typical manufacturing supply chains. This
insight, as well as the algorithms which will be developed, will lead to more
efficient and effective decision-making in these supply chains, and will
ultimately lead to effective heuristics for even more complex real-world models.
Finally, the insights developed in this research will be incorporated into a
case study and a teaching module.