* 0200484
* A WAVE Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Egbert Schwartz, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 114,796.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Phillip Danielson at the University of Denver to
fund the purchase of a Transgenomic Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System. Based
on established DNA size separation and mutation detection technology, this
system will increase the quality and cost effectiveness of
undergraduate/graduate research and&lt;br/&gt;education in molecular biology.
Specific research programs that will benefit immediately include National
Science Foundation-funded studies to identify novel genes that encode: (1)
endocrine hormones in the brain; (2) cytochrome P450 toxin-metabolizing enzymes
- which are critical to the control of crop pests and disease-carrying
organisms; 3) microbial proteins that can be used to clean up of toxic waste
sites contaminated with heavy metals and 4) molecular markers that can be used
to identify and track genetic diversity in endangered species - work is
conducted in collaboration with the Denver Zoological Gardens and Denver Museum
of Science and Nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, the identification
of mutations required the laborious screening of hundreds to thousands of genes
for subtle variations in DNA sequence. Analysis of a single novel gene by the
direct sequence approach currently used, can require a day or more to complete.
The Transgenomic WAVE System funded by this grant will reduce the analysis time
to 2-4 minutes/sample. The discovery and analysis of genes that encode proteins
involved in toxin breakdown, as well as neuropeptides linked to stress is the
focus of several research programs. Since these genes often exist as duplicates
with subtle but critical differences, it is essential that both copies be
isolated. The WAVE system will be used to reduce the potential number of
competing non-target gene fragments by precise size fractionation of the initial
pool of DNA used for gene amplification reactions. The instrument's mutation
detection and fragment capture functions will be used to increase the efficiency
with which these related genes are identified and recovered - even where two
genes sequences differ by less than 0.5%. In research focused on conservation
biology and microbial ecology, the WAVE system will provide an extremely
sensitive approach to the analysis of DNA sequence differences among and within
species. Finally, the WAVE's high-speed genotyping capabilities will be used to
gather gene frequency data from hundreds of samples for large-scale, multi-state
conservation genetic projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the benefit to the
research activities at the University of Denver, a broad range
of&lt;br/&gt;laboratory and classroom-oriented educational goals will be
advanced at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Benefits will be
particularly evident in the molecular-oriented laboratory courses that are at
the heart of the Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Molecular
Biology. On a broader level, department-sponsored biotechnology classes offered
to high school students and teacher-training workshops that promote hands-on
science education at the secondary school level will also be greatly enhanced by
providing first-hand experience in one of the most modern methods of genetic
analysis. The benefit to high school outreach efforts will immeasurable given
that these programs target students in urban and low-income school districts who
have traditionally been underrepresented in the natural sciences. In short,
acquisition of the&lt;br/&gt;WAVE Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System will
provide significant and immediate&lt;br/&gt;benefits to education at the high
school, undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;