* 0200856
* Discrete Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Jeffry Kahn, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 366,932.00

The project addresses problems covering a rather broad&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of
discrete mathematics (DM), some drawn from related&lt;br/&gt;areas such as
statistical mechanics (SM), probability, and&lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer
science (TCS). A common thread in many &lt;br/&gt;of these problems is:one is
given a probability distribution &lt;br/&gt;on some large discrete space (e.g.
independent sets in, or &lt;br/&gt;proper colorings of, a graph), and wants to
know whether &lt;br/&gt;behavior in one part of the system can significantly
affect &lt;br/&gt;behavior in other, distant parts. The loose
term&lt;br/&gt;``long range effects" (LRE's) is used for such
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;Both strong and weak LRE's are of
interest:&lt;br/&gt;For SM what's wanted is, more often than
not,&lt;br/&gt;strong LRE's, usually under the name ``phase transition"
(PT).&lt;br/&gt;In very recent work, the investigator and his student
David&lt;br/&gt;Galvin used mainly combinatorial ideas to settle
one&lt;br/&gt;much-studied question in this area (concerning PT's in
the&lt;br/&gt;``hard-core lattice gas model"), and a particular hope
at&lt;br/&gt;present is that ideas from this work, and, more
generally,&lt;br/&gt;the investigator's combinatorial perspective, will lead
to&lt;br/&gt;progress on various more or less related questions.&lt;br/&gt;From
the perspectives of DM and TCS, on the other hand,&lt;br/&gt;weak LRE's are
often desirable, e.g. because of their&lt;br/&gt;connections with rapid mixing
of Markov chains (a topic&lt;br/&gt;of major interest in TCS), and because in
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;applications of probability, systems with
sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;weak LRE's can sometimes substitute for probability
spaces&lt;br/&gt;based on purely independent choices. (This again
involves&lt;br/&gt;the hard-core model, which arises in surprisingly
diverse&lt;br/&gt;mathematical contexts.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speaking very
generally, the (main part of the) project aims&lt;br/&gt;at understanding the
degree of order or disorder in various&lt;br/&gt;large random systems, for
instance the extent to which the&lt;br/&gt;global structure of a physical system
can be predicted from&lt;br/&gt;knowledge about interactions between neighboring
particles.&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, random systems similar to those used to
model&lt;br/&gt;physical reality have played increasingly important
roles&lt;br/&gt;in TCS and DM, partly because they can be helpful in
analyzing&lt;br/&gt;(algorithmically and/or theoretically) even non-random
problems&lt;br/&gt;in these areas; and there has been an increasing realization
of&lt;br/&gt;the degree to which the issues arising in these three
disciplines&lt;br/&gt;are related. One major theme of the present project is an
interest&lt;br/&gt;in applying ideas and methods across mathematical
boundaries:&lt;br/&gt;especially in using ideas from the investigator's core
area (DM)&lt;br/&gt;to attack problems in SM and TCS, but also in bringing an
&lt;br/&gt;increasing familiarity with techniques from the latter areas
to&lt;br/&gt;bear on several problems of longstanding interest in
DM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;