* 0200749
* Riemann--Hilbert Problems in Random Matrix Theory, Approximation Theory, and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Kenneth T-R McLaughlin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 106,999.00

&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ken McLaughlin, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill&lt;br/&
gt;DMS-
0200749&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;********************
*************************************&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;McLaughlin's research
concerns applications of Riemann-Hilbert problems and new techniques developed
for their asymptotic analysis to classical problems in (1) random matrix theory,
(2)&lt;br/&gt;integrable systems, and (3) approximation theory and orthogonal
polynomials. In integrable systems, the proposed research will continue
McLaughlin's work on singular limits of integrable&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear partial
differential equations. Integrable nonlinear partial differential equations
provide canonical models for a wide variety of physical settings. For some
integrable models, such as&lt;br/&gt;the semi-classical limit of the focusing
nonlinear Schroedinger equation, the Korteweg-de Vries equation, and the Toda
lattice in a continuum limit, McLaughlin (with collaborators) is
developing&lt;br/&gt;methods to understand, predict, and control their behavior.
In random matrix theory, McLaughlin will continue his work on the asymptotic
behavior of eigenvalues of random Hermitian matrices.&lt;br/&gt;He will study
the asymptotic behavior of the partition function of random matrix theory. This
basic quantity is a partition function in the classical sense of statistical
mechanics, for an&lt;br/&gt;interacting log-gas. The asymptotics McLaughlin
proposes to study are as the number of particles grows. The research will impact
upon several areas of mathematical research, such as the theory of Hankel
determinants pioneered by Szego some 70 years ago, the theory of 2 dimensional
quantum gravity, and approximation theory. In approximation theory, McLaughlin
will investigate new connections (recently discovered by McLaughlin and
collaborators) between the asymptotic analysis of Riemann-Hilbert problems and
rational approximation. This includes the classical problems of Pade'
approximation. In related work, McLaughlin will study the asymptotic behavior of
discrete orthogonal polynomials, which are polynomials orthogonal with respect
to a measure that is a sum of Dirac masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal
of scientific research is to understand and control complicated phenomena. Such
understanding and control of a physical process enhances our ability for
technological&lt;br/&gt;advancement. Physical models for complex nonlinear
phenomena often boil down to the study of partial differential equations in
parameter regimes where their solutions exhibit singularly
wild&lt;br/&gt;behavior. In other instances, statistical theories with great
amount of randomness are developed to understand complex phenomena. Three
examples: laser beams in optical fibers can&lt;br/&gt;explode, or signals they
carry can degrade due to noise or the onset of violent oscillations. Waves in
the ocean can organize themselves into "trains" transporting energy. In the
1950s, nuclear resonance level experiments indicated a new type of universality,
whose mathematical explanation has only recently been explained. Scientists'
ability to predict dramatic behavior&lt;br/&gt;through the analysis of such
general nonlinear partial differential equations, or statistical theories, is
limited. However, there is a class of canonical models, under the heading
"integrable models", for a wide variety of physical settings. Their singular
behavior is a guide for the understanding of some complicated phenomena in
nature. Some of these are partial differential equations, others are statistical
models, but the unifying feature of these integrable models is that
researchers&lt;br/&gt;are making great progress in their analysis. McLaughlin's
research involves the detailed rigorous analysis of these models; he (with
collaborators) is developing methods to understand, predict, and control their b
ehavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;