* 0200992
* Hamiltonian and Celestial Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 112,200.00

PI: Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0200992&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian and Celestial
Mechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is devoted to research in
the general area of dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems theory with emphasis on
Hamiltonian and celestial mechanics. Several very &lt;br/&gt;different aspects
of the subject will be studied. Part of the project deals with the special
&lt;br/&gt;periodic solutions of the n-body problem arising from central
configurations. It is a &lt;br/&gt;long-standing open problem to determine how
many central configurations are possible, or &lt;br/&gt;even if the number is
finite. Techniques from algebraic geometry and computational algebra
&lt;br/&gt;will be used to attack this question. A second part of the project
involves the &lt;br/&gt;construction of isolating blocks in the phase space of
the three-body problem. It is known that &lt;br/&gt;it is possible to find
simple, explicit isolating blocks at the collinear Lagrange points &lt;br/&gt;of
the restricted three-body problem. These blocks can be used to study the
complicated &lt;br/&gt;invariant set nearby. The project is to carry out such a
construction near the &lt;br/&gt;collinear central configuration of the
unrestricted three-body problem. Here the &lt;br/&gt;dimension of the phase
space is higher and the geometry is much more complicated. A final part
&lt;br/&gt;of the project is concerned with understanding the mechanism of
Arnold diffusion for &lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian systems. The approach taken here is
based on the construction of an invariant &lt;br/&gt;Cantor set of annuli and
subsequent analysis of the resulting dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
gravitational n-body problem remains an active topic for mathematics
&lt;br/&gt;research three centuries after Newton proposed it. Over the years it
has been a &lt;br/&gt;stimulus for the development of new mathematics of wide
applicability. It is the classic &lt;br/&gt;example of a nonlinear mechanical
system and its solutions include orderly cyclical &lt;br/&gt;motions, multi-body
collisions, and irregular, chaotic behavior. The simplest &lt;br/&gt;solutions
are the rigidly rotating orbits arising from the central configurations.
&lt;br/&gt;Central configurations are special arrangements of the masses such
that the gravitational &lt;br/&gt;forces can be exactly balanced by centrifugal
forces when the configuration rotates. Although &lt;br/&gt;these solutions are
dynamically very simple, the problem of finding or even counting the
&lt;br/&gt;central configurations turns out to be very difficult when there are
four or more masses &lt;br/&gt;involved. Part of this project is about how to
deal with very complicated algebraic problems &lt;br/&gt;such as this, perhaps
using the help of computers. The central configurations are &lt;br/&gt;important
landmarks which provide a starting point for further analysis. It turns out that
&lt;br/&gt;there are many other interesting solutions near the simple, rigidly
rotating ones. One &lt;br/&gt;way to trap and study these nearby orbits involves
the construction of so-called &lt;br/&gt;isolating blocks. The geometry of these
blocks provides qualitative information about the &lt;br/&gt;solutions inside
and can also form the basis of numerical methods for approximating these
&lt;br/&gt;solutions. Finally, there is the problem of understanding chaotic
dynamics in &lt;br/&gt;mechanical systems and how such behavior can lead to
large-scale instability. Instability in &lt;br/&gt;celestial mechanics can give
rise to such phenomena as the slow drifting of the orbital &lt;br/&gt;parameters
of planets or asteroids. It also occurs in a variety of other mechanical
systems. &lt;br/&gt;This phenomenon of Arnold diffusion is only partially
understood at present. The new &lt;br/&gt;approach which will be pursued here
seems promising but much work remains to be done before &lt;br/&gt;it can be
applied to complex systems like the n-body problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;