* 0200186
* Topics in Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2008
* Andreas Seeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 375,000.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0200186 PI: Andreas Seeger

ABSTRACT

The proposed research will be concerned with several interrelated topics in
Fourier analysis. In particular it is proposed to work on precise regularity
properties of oscillatory integral and Fourier integral operators with
degenerate canonical relations. The mapping properties are governed by the
geometry of the canonical relations. Here we are, in particular, interested in
the cases that come up when studying averaging operators associated to curves in
higher dimensions. Other projects include the behavior of singular maximal
functions and rough singular integrals on classes of integrable functions, the
mapping properties of wave operators on nilpotent groups, and questions
concerning the failure of weak amenability of Lie groups.

The research project is focused on some fundamental question in Fourier
analysis, with an emphasis on estimates for various oscillatory integral
operators. Such estimates are in particular crucial for understanding the
qualitative and quantitative behavior of Radon transforms and related Fourier
integral operators. These operators arise in various areas of mathematics, such
as partial differential equations, complex analysis and integral geometry, as
well as in non-mathematical applications such as tomography and medical imaging.
As an example we mention that X-ray tomography involves inverting a Radon
transform operator; i.e. one seeks to determine an image from knowledge about
the averages of a function for a prescribed family of lines. The operators
involved in inverting this restricted X-ray transform tend to be Fourier
integral operators as considered in this proposal.

