* 0200165
* A Phase Transition Approach for Predicting Cascading Failure in Networked Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Christopher DeMarco, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 80,000.00

As the scale of engineered systems such as electric power grids, communication
networks, and the internet expands, and as society's dependence upon reliable
operation of these networks increases, it is vital that system engineers seek a
better understanding of how small scale failures of individual elements may
propagate to produce global system-wide failures. The work proposed here is
motivated largely by the electric power systems application, and the challenge
in bringing analytic stability techniques to bear on the problem of cascading
line and generator tripping. The goal is to capture the role of transient
dynamic response following a specified initiating disturbance, and examine
subsequent ("cascading") element failures that are induced when operating
thresholds for individual elements are exceeded along the state trajectory. This
approach will exploit "Hamiltonian-like" structure that appears in power system
dynamics and related classes of networked systems, in which the differential
equations governing behavior are often closely related to an easily identified
storage function. By relating element failure to thresholds of maximally
allowable energy storage in network elements the work will seek to develop a
tractable, smooth model for element failure that is amenable to Lyapunov type
stability analysis. It will be argued that cascading element failure can then be
captured as a sequence of transitions between potential basins about (possibly)
stable equilibria, with each equilibrium defined by a partially degraded network
configuration.