* 0200012
* Chow Groups of Projective Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Chad Schoen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

This project is concerned with the geometry of algebraic &lt;br/&gt;varieites.
It builds on past experience which indicates that &lt;br/&gt;much can be learned
about the geometry of a given algebraic &lt;br/&gt;variety by studying its Chow
group. The Chow group is obtained &lt;br/&gt;from the free abelian group on all
subvarieties of a given variety &lt;br/&gt;by modding out by the relation of
rational equivalence. For &lt;br/&gt;algebraic curves the Chow group is a close
relative of the &lt;br/&gt;Jacobian. While the Chow group is known to have good
functorial &lt;br/&gt;properties, it is often very difficult to compute. Thus it
is &lt;br/&gt;difficult to gain access to the subtle and valuable information
&lt;br/&gt;that it frequently contains. This investigation focuses on three
&lt;br/&gt;different aspects of the problem of computing Chow groups. First
&lt;br/&gt;the torsion subgroup of the Chow group is being studied with an
&lt;br/&gt;emphasis on the quotient by the subgroup generated by cycles
&lt;br/&gt;algebraically equivalent to zero. Secondly, the
relationship&lt;br/&gt;between the Chow group and singular cohomology with
rational &lt;br/&gt;coefficients is being investigated. The Hodge Conjecture is
an &lt;br/&gt;important concern here. The theory of Abelian varieties and
&lt;br/&gt;techniques from classical algebraic geometry will be brought to
&lt;br/&gt;bear on this problem. The third line of investigation involves
&lt;br/&gt;the relationship between the Chow group and singular cohomology
&lt;br/&gt;with integrer coefficients. An ancient guidepost here was the so
&lt;br/&gt;called Integral Hodge Conjecture. It has turned out that the
&lt;br/&gt;Integral Hodge Conjecture is false in some instances. The extent
&lt;br/&gt;of its failure is poorly understood, so the principal investigator
&lt;br/&gt;and a PhD student are working to clarify
this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To a significant extent, the value of basic research
in algebraic &lt;br/&gt;geometry results from the tendency of mathematicians to
reduce &lt;br/&gt;problems in various other fields of mathematics to problems in
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry. This tendency is due to the ultimate
&lt;br/&gt;simplicity of algebraic geometry, where remarkably effective
&lt;br/&gt;approaches to certain geometric problems have been
developed&lt;br/&gt;with minimal reliance on infinite processes. While the
initial &lt;br/&gt;translation of a problem from the physical world into
mathematics &lt;br/&gt;frequently involves limits, derivatives, integrals, and
further &lt;br/&gt;notions involving infinite processes which go well beyond
ordinary &lt;br/&gt;calculus, mathematicians have learned to search for hidden
aspects &lt;br/&gt;of these problems which are essentially of an algebraic or
finite &lt;br/&gt;nature. Neither the task of translating real world phenomena
into &lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems, the task of discovering a hidden
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;core in a problem formulated using infinite processes, nor
the &lt;br/&gt;task of solving this core problem using algebraic geometry
is&lt;br/&gt;often easy. Nonetheless, this lengthy process has led to profound
&lt;br/&gt;insights. For example, algebraic geometry and some of the
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic varieties studied by the principal investigator are of
&lt;br/&gt;great interest to physicists in their current attempts to unify
&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanics with the theory of gravity.