* 0200487
* Proposal in Support of the Travel of Young U.S. Researchers to Participate at the 17th ISCRE
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* James Wei, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2003
* USD 25,000.00

The field of Chemical Reaction Engineering is key in the development of
efficient, environmentally friendly and effective manufacturing. Promoting the
exchange of ideas among leading researchers in this field will not only
favorably impact the future growth of the Chemical Reaction Engineering
discipline but should ultimately result in more efficient and cleaner
technologies and an improved way of life for the society as a whole. The
international symposium in Chemical Reaction Engineering (ISCRE) is the premier
meeting in the field, which takes place every two years and sets the tone for
progress in the field. Its impact has been without any doubt tremendous as
measured by the number of citations the ISCRE proceedings have received, the
increased industry-university interactions that is has fostered, and the
improved education and exposure of young researchers in the field. With the Asia
Pacific region hosting the upcoming ISCRE 17, it is hoped that this premiere
event for Chemical Reaction Engineering (CRE) researchers will provide a step-
jump for the participation of researchers in that region, taking a historic step
towards the globalization of ISCRE. The meeting of US academic and industrial
researchers with an insight into the fast growing CRE community in that region
an opportunity that was not available in previous
ISCRE's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's travel support for ISCRE 17 will make it
possible for up to twenty five young researchers from the US to attend the
meeting covering registration and defraying some of the travel and lodging
expenses. NSF funding will allow these researchers to profit by listening to
state-of-the-art review talks and research papers and from the opportunity to
interact with their fellow researchers in the area. The public at large will
significantly benefit by the advancement of the Chemical Reaction Engineering
field as a whole and the use of the new ideas generated for the development of
more efficient and environmentally friendlier technologies for the production of
fuels, materials and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;