* 0200357
* Discrete Random Structures and Additive Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Van Vu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 70,000.00

The research component of this proposal involves two overall&lt;br/&gt;topics,
which the P.I. has been investigating in the past few&lt;br/&gt;years. The first
is the study of random objects such as random&lt;br/&gt;graphs, random matrices
and random walks. This study is one of the&lt;br/&gt;central topics in modern
combinatorics with vital connections&lt;br/&gt;several fast developing areas
such as theoretical computer science&lt;br/&gt;and statistical physics. The P.I.
and his colleagues consider&lt;br/&gt;several open questions about various
models of random graphs, &lt;br/&gt;with the main focus on random regular
graphs. They also attack &lt;br/&gt;several problems on random walks on graphs
and the spectra of &lt;br/&gt;random matrices. Some of these questions have high
potential in &lt;br/&gt;practice and are very exciting from the computer science
point of &lt;br/&gt;view. For instance, one of the key questions of the proposal
is &lt;br/&gt;to find a fast algorithm to generate a random graph. The second
&lt;br/&gt;topic of the proposal is additive theory. Here the P.I.
considers&lt;br/&gt;questions about the length of the longest arithmetic
progression &lt;br/&gt;in various sum sets. For instance, a typical question is
the &lt;br/&gt;following: Given m integers from 1 to n, what is the length of
the &lt;br/&gt;longest arithmetic progression obtained by the partial sums of
&lt;br/&gt;these integers. He also studies a fundamental problem about thin
&lt;br/&gt;basis, which went back to a problem posed by Sidon more than sixty
&lt;br/&gt;years ago. Here is a sample question: What is the smallest density
&lt;br/&gt;of a set P of primes so that every natural number can be
&lt;br/&gt;represented as a sum of at most 100 elements of P
?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Random objects such as random graphs and random walks
have been&lt;br/&gt;widely used to model real-life processes for a long time
(think of&lt;br/&gt;the movement of a particle, for instance). The newest and
perhaps &lt;br/&gt;most exciting example is the Internet graph, which has been
&lt;br/&gt;modelled as a random graph where the number of connections to each
&lt;br/&gt;node (site) satisfies certain laws. Therefore, the study of random
&lt;br/&gt;objects is not only theoretically challenging but also has high
&lt;br/&gt;potential in practical applications. A large part of the P.I.'s
&lt;br/&gt;work is to develop a better understanding of random graphs to
&lt;br/&gt;answer very fundamental questions such as "how does the graph
&lt;br/&gt;expand ?" or "how does the graph change if more
edges&lt;br/&gt;(connections) are added ?" or "how to simulate a random graph
by&lt;br/&gt;computers". Despite their simplicity, these questions have
been&lt;br/&gt;open for many years and their answers might require the
development&lt;br/&gt;of entirely new ideas and methods. The second part of the
P.I.'s&lt;br/&gt;work deals with classical questions in number theory, motivated
by&lt;br/&gt;results and questions of great mathematicians such as
Waring,&lt;br/&gt;Erdos, Freiman and Sidon. The work in this part would lead to
a&lt;br/&gt;better understanding of the additive properties of
natural&lt;br/&gt;numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;