* 0200752
* Painleve Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Aimo Hinkkanen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,000.00

PI: Aimo Hinkkanen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign DMS-0200752

Abstract:

The six Painleve differential equations are prototypes of second order
differential equations which do not have movable singularities. In this project,
the principal investigator will study the following fundamental problems for the
Painleve equations and Painleve-related analysis. Firstly, the task of obtaining
rigorous proofs for the Painleve property of the solutions to Painleve equations
in the remaining open cases. Secondly, the question of finding sharp upper and
lower bounds for the usual order of growth of single-valued meromorphic
solutions, and for other natural measures of growth for multi-valued solutions,
as well as the determination of the cases where less than maximal growth occurs.
Thirdly, applications motivated particularly by differential geometry lead to
the question of classifying Painleve-type differential equations which are
allowed to have movable branch points subject to restrictions on their
multiplicity. The principal investigator will work towards such a classification
and to determine whether certain particular equations arising in applications
have this property.

Over the last ten years, after a quiet period of many decades, an enormous
amount of literature has appeared on the Painleve equations and their
generalizations, due to a great number of interdisciplinary connections and
applications that have been found. On the theoretical side, the Painleve
property is related to the concept of integrability for non-linear ordinary and
partial differential equations. Other applications in pure mathematics include
differential geometry and random matrix models. On the interdisciplinary side,
the applications of Painleve equations include the following: the Ising and
antiferromagnet models in physics, statistical mechanics in elasticity, quantum
field theory and topological field theory, general relativity and cosmology,
supersymmetric gauge theories in physics, resonant oscillations in shallow
water, Hele-Shaw problems in viscous fluids, plasma physics, superconductivity,
nonlinear optics and fiber optics, polymers, and polyelectrolytes. This provides
a clear manifestation of the enabling power of mathematics in science and
engineering, and of the value that theoretical understanding and precise problem
solving in mathematics can add to modeling and theory building elsewhere. Work
performed under this proposal will lead to a greater understanding of and
concrete results for this class of differential equations which is being used in
numerous applications in other areas of mathematics as well as in other sciences
and engineering.

