* 0200788
* Tomography and Integral Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 120,725.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT: Tomography and Integral Geometry &lt;br/&gt;PI:
Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0200788&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Quinto will pursue problems in tomography and
the mathematical analysis of Radon&lt;br/&gt;transforms. He will develop and
refine singularity detection algorithms (including limited data Lambda CT and
wavelet methods) and apply them to electron microscopy and limited data
industrial and medical X-ray tomography, with the goal of testing the algorithms
on&lt;br/&gt;real data and using them in scanners. Professor Quinto will
continue to develop a boundary detection method that is applicable to Sonar in
shallow water, and he will begin to develop these methods for synthetic aperture
Radar. The theoretical underpinnings will be based on Professor Quinto's pure
mathematical research. Radon transforms have an intimate relation to harmonic
analysis, partial differential equations, and complex analysis, and he will use
integral geometry to prove theorems in these fields. The principal investigator
will prove uniqueness and support theorems for Radon transforms defined by
spreads of polynomials, including spherical&lt;br/&gt;transforms in Euclidean
space and other settings. He and Professor Agranovsky will use these results to
characterize zero sets of solutions of the wave equation on crystallographic
domains and other sets. Zero sets, where the solution is zero for all time, are
important and difficult to characterize. He will prove uniqueness theorems for
Radon transforms on spheres and other surfaces and use these to solve Morera and
mean value problems on manifolds. He will&lt;br/&gt;prove support theorems for
X-ray transforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research encompasses both applied
and pure mathematics: tomography and integral geometry. The pure research will
be used to develop, understand, and justify the applied&lt;br/&gt;algorithms,
and the applied problems will motivate much of the pure research. Computed
tomography (CT) algorithms will be developed for the nondestructive evaluation
of rockets and other objects. The algorithms will allow scientists to detect
cracks in rocket bodies, air pockets in rocket fuel, and delaminations in rocket
exit cones. Limited data algorithms will be developed for electron microscopy as
a part of a joint industrial project. The goal is to produce an algorithm that
reliably produces accurate pictures for a SIDEC electron microscope. He will
develop pure mathematics that will show how well the algorithms work and where
their limitations might show&lt;br/&gt;up. These pure mathematical underpinnings
are required to ensure that his (or any other) reconstructions are correct and
are not lucky guesses. SONAR data can be modeled as averages over spheres (the
spherical wave fronts of the sound) and Professor Quinto will
prove&lt;br/&gt;theorems about these averages. He will use these theorems to
develop simple algorithms to map the ocean floor and to find boundaries of
objects in the ocean and to apply to Radar. This pure mathematics is intriguing
in its own right. Professor Quinto will prove theorems about spherical averages
which will be used to understand the wave equation (the equation that describes
how sound and light behave). The wave equation describes the motion of a drum
head, and he will&lt;br/&gt;specify which points on the drum do not move at all.
Finally, he will prove theorems he will apply to complex and harmonic analysis,
fields in pure mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;