* 0200785
* Selmer Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2009
* Ralph Greenberg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2009
* USD 418,814.00

The investigator intends to pursue a diverse set of projects related
to&lt;br/&gt;Selmer groups, elliptic curves, modular forms, p-adic L-functions
and&lt;br/&gt;Iwasawa theory. Selmer groups have traditionally been an important
tool&lt;br/&gt;for studying the Mordell-Weil group of an elliptic curve over a
number&lt;br/&gt;field. They have also played an important role in proving
special cases&lt;br/&gt;of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture which
provides a relationship&lt;br/&gt;between arithmetic properties of an elliptic
curve E and the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;the Hasse-Weil L-function for E. In recent
years it has become clear that&lt;br/&gt;certain natural generalizations of the
Selmer group should provide similar&lt;br/&gt;conjectural relationships to the
behavior of much more general kinds of&lt;br/&gt;L-functions. Iwasawa theory
provides a framework for studying these&lt;br/&gt;conjectures by allowing the
L-functions to vary in families defined by&lt;br/&gt;congruences modulo powers
of a prime p. This leads to the notion of a&lt;br/&gt;p-adic L-function and to
the formulation of analogous conjectural&lt;br/&gt;relationships relating the
behavior of such p-adic L-functions to the&lt;br/&gt;corresponding Selmer
groups. The investigator, together with several&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, intends
to study this kind of conjectural relationship in&lt;br/&gt;some new settings:
(1) p-adic analogues of classical Artin L-functions,&lt;br/&gt;(2) families of
L-functions associated to certain families of Galois&lt;br/&gt;representations
of varying dimension. In addition, the investigator&lt;br/&gt;intends to study
relationships between Selmer groups associated to modular&lt;br/&gt;forms and
ideal class groups of certain number fields and to study
some&lt;br/&gt;unresolved questions about the derivatives of p-adic
L-functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental questions in the theory
of numbers is the study&lt;br/&gt;of solutions of an algebraic equation. The
difficulty of this question&lt;br/&gt;depends on the degree of the equation and
the number of variables. It&lt;br/&gt;has been understood since antiquity how to
study this question when the&lt;br/&gt;degree is one or two and the number of
variables is also one or two.&lt;br/&gt;However, the question becomes much more
subtle when one considers&lt;br/&gt;equations of degree three, even if the
number of variables is just two.&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental conjecture concerning
this kind of equation was formulated&lt;br/&gt;in the 1960s by Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer. Although considerable progress&lt;br/&gt;has been made since
then, the conjecture remains unresolved. Such equations&lt;br/&gt;define a class
of curves known as "elliptic curves." The study of their&lt;br/&gt;properties
has proved to be of importance in crytography - designing codes&lt;br/&gt;for
the secure transmission of information. Professor Greenberg intends
to&lt;br/&gt;continue his study of "Selmer groups" which have been a traditional
tool in&lt;br/&gt;understanding the arithmetic properties of elliptic curves and
in studying&lt;br/&gt;the conjecture of Birch and Swinnnerton-Dyer. The ultimate
goal is to&lt;br/&gt;achieve a deeper understanding of the solutions to the
algebraic equations&lt;br/&gt;that define an elliptic curve, and to develop a
more general point of view&lt;br/&gt;concerning conjectures analogous to the
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;