* 0200346
* Simulations and Novel Methods for Microwave Processing of Polymers and Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Andre Benard, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 04/30/2006
* USD 372,000.00

Microwave processing of polymer composite materials is an increasingly important
technology for the polymer industry and its customers. Polymer composites
combine the best properties of its constituent parts, namely a polymer matrix
along with a suitable filler such as glass, to achieve a new material that has
superior properties to the original materials, including low cost. Desirable and
achieved properties of polymer composite materials include improved strength and
temperature tolerance among others. Microwave processing, as compared to
convection processing, has been shown to yield superior mechanical properties as
well as be more efficient in terms of energy requirements and time-to-
manufacture. Microwave processing of polymer composites is similar to microwave
heating of food in the ubiquitous microwave ovens. The electromagnetic energy
within the microwave oven interacts with the material being processed and heats
it throughout the volume rather than via surface heating. The temperature change
causes a change in polymer composition (hence the curing process). This coupling
between electromagnetic energy, temperature rise, and composition changes is not
well understood resulting in unexplained over- and under-cured regions in the
composite. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Departments of Chemical Engineering and
Materials Science, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Mechanical
Engineering are combining expertise in polymer processing, microwave energy, and
thermal propagation to investigate the fundamental interaction between
electromagnetic energy absorption, temperature change, and composition change.
In addition, development of a multi-port microwave applicator is planned that
will significantly reduce the cost of applicator construction due to the use of
lower power microwave sources than is used in practice today. Both theoretical
modeling of these coupled phenomena as well as experimental verification of
results will be pursued. It is anticipated that the results of this project will
be an improved microwave applicator and processing protocol that will
significantly improve industrial polymer composite processing methods. The
principal investigators are actively participating in a program at MSU to
provide education and mentoring to underrepresented minority and women
engineering students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;