* 0200566
* Mappings with Little Smoothness
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Mario Bonk, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 227,163.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0200566&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mario
Bonk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of
non-smooth phenomena is one of the &lt;br/&gt;main subjects of contemporary
Geometric Function Theory.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to study
metric structures &lt;br/&gt;on spaces and appropriate nonsmooth classes of
mappings&lt;br/&gt;between these spaces such as bilipschitz,
quasisymmetric,&lt;br/&gt;quasiconformal, and quasiregular mappings. Many basic
&lt;br/&gt;questions in this area are open. For example, a
&lt;br/&gt;satisfactory characterization of two-dimensional metric
&lt;br/&gt;spheres that are quasisymmetric to the standard&lt;br/&gt;two-
dimensional sphere is unknown. This problem is relevant&lt;br/&gt;in connection
to Thurston's hyperbolization conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the field relies
on a combination of &lt;br/&gt;geometric and analytic methods that were recently
&lt;br/&gt;established in the analysis of metric
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular question of how to map surfaces has
a &lt;br/&gt;long history. Cartography aims to preserve particular
&lt;br/&gt;features of a surface under suitable mappings. This &lt;br/&gt;has
lead to major mathematical developments. In the &lt;br/&gt;nineteenth century
basic problems of surveying and &lt;br/&gt;geodesy motivated Gauss to build up a
systematic theory&lt;br/&gt;of curved surfaces which laid the foundation of
modern &lt;br/&gt;differential geometry. For the investigation of
wrinkled&lt;br/&gt;and fractal objects new mathematical tools
are&lt;br/&gt;required. A clear understanding of the mathematical
&lt;br/&gt;concepts for describing nonsmooth phenomena will
benefit&lt;br/&gt;research in other areas and lead to practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;For example, methods for attacking the theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;questions of quasiconformal parametrizations of
spheres&lt;br/&gt;were also used for finding algorithms for mapping the
&lt;br/&gt;surface of the human brain. One of the aims of the project
&lt;br/&gt;is to involve graduate students in this promising and
&lt;br/&gt;important area of mathematical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;