* 0200774
* The Combinatorics of Affine Algebras and their Applications to Mathematical Physics and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Anne Schilling, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2006
* USD 121,987.00

The PI intends to undertake a combinatorial study of
structures&lt;br/&gt;arising from affine algebras with applications to
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;physics, representation theory and
q-series.&lt;br/&gt;The primary combinatorial objects are crystal graphs which
are&lt;br/&gt;colored directed graphs. They provide a
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;description of the deep theory of crystal bases of
modules over&lt;br/&gt;quantized universal enveloping algebras developed by
Kashiwara&lt;br/&gt;and Lusztig: As the quantum parameter q tends to
zero,&lt;br/&gt;these bases are described precisely by the crystal graphs
encoding&lt;br/&gt;nearly all the essential algebraic data. Despite their
importance,&lt;br/&gt;little is known about the combinatorial structure of
crystals&lt;br/&gt;corresponding to finite-dimensional modules of affine
algebras.&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes a method to undertake such a combinatorial
study.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will have applications to q-series,
branching&lt;br/&gt;functions and fusion coefficients in conformal field theory
and&lt;br/&gt;statistical mechanics, and the theory of symmetric
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project in combinatorial
representation theory with &lt;br/&gt;applications to mathematical (theoretical)
physics. Representation&lt;br/&gt;Theory is the area of mathematics most
intimately involved with&lt;br/&gt;studying the nature of symmetries, of any
sort, whereever they occur.&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorial representation theory refers
to a methodology that&lt;br/&gt;uses explicitly computable formulas. About a
decade ago it was&lt;br/&gt;realized that certain models in the area of physics
known as&lt;br/&gt;statistical mechanics have symmetries that are not yet
completely&lt;br/&gt;understood. This project carries out
a&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial study of the structure of those classes of
symmetries&lt;br/&gt;that can be represented by "colored directed
graphs."&lt;br/&gt;Remarkably, the structures that occur have applications
in&lt;br/&gt;many diverse areas of mathematics and physics,&lt;br/&gt;such as
statistical mechanical models, representation theory,&lt;br/&gt;the theory of
symmetric functions and combinatorics. For example,&lt;br/&gt;they lead to
formulas which encode the&lt;br/&gt;particle structure of the underlying
physical model.