* 0200306
* Collaborative Research:   Resource and Demand Allocation in Dynamic Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Xiuli Chao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 07/31/2006
* USD 189,930.00

In this project we focus on the class of capacity planning and resource
allocation problems in which customers view waiting times as one of their major
concerns. The objective is to develop a methodology for joint optimal capacity
planning and demand allocation for such problems. An important phase in this
project is to develop an understanding of customer reactions to capacity
allocation rules. The project will be conducted through the following steps: (i)
Develop mathematical models for the joint capacity planning and demand
allocation problem. (ii) Determine structural properties of the main sub-
components of the problem, viz., capacity planning and demand allocation,
including customer's individual optimization for any given capacity allocation.
(iii) Develop optimal combined capacity planning and demand allocation
algorithms for use in diverse settings. The expected output of this project
includes theoretical insight as well as algorithms for capacity planning and
demand allocation in dynamic environments that will be of use to manufacturing
managers, supply chain managers, distribution systems planners, and service
operations managers.

Growing global competition and rapid changes in information technology are
forcing companies to pay more attention to customer needs and system
responsiveness; service delivery has become a key factor in improving a
company's competitive position. Many US companies have expanded both nationally
and internationally not only to take advantage of tariff, labor and other
incentives but also to provide better customer service. These firms, both
manufacturing and service, operate over a wide-spread geographic area and face a
dynamic environment in which there are random changes in demand within and
across geographic boundaries. However, capacity planning alone will not
guarantee success in such global diversification ventures. In most realistic
situations, even though customers can be served by any one of many regional
facilities, some customers may have a natural affinity for being served at a
specific facility because of time or cost considerations. On the other hand, as
the capacity at one location is expanded, more customers are attracted from
other regions to this location for service. The overall effect of these inter-
region flows can deteriorate the performance at some facilities while other
facilities remain underutilized. This project develops methodologies and
understanding for these capacity allocation problems by taking into
consideration how customers react to the firm's allocation decisions.Growing
global competition and rapid changes in information technology are forcing
companies to pay more attention to customer needs and system responsiveness;
service delivery has become a key factor in improving a company's competitive
position. Many US companies have expanded both nationally and internationally
not only to take advantage of tariff, labor and other incentives but also to
provide better customer service. These firms, both manufacturing and service,
operate over a wide-spread geographic area and face a dynamic environment in
which there are random changes in demand within and across geographic
boundaries. However, capacity planning alone will not guarantee success in such
global diversification ventures. In most realistic situations, even though
customers can be served by any one of many regional facilities, some customers
may have a natural affinity for being served at a specific facility because of
time or cost considerations. On the other hand, as the capacity at one location
is expanded, more customers are attracted from other regions to this location
for service. The overall effect of these inter-region flows can deteriorate the
performance at some facilities while other facilities remain underutilized. This
project develops methodologies and understanding for these capacity allocation
problems by taking into consideration how customers react to the firm's
allocation decisions.