* 0200445
* Using the Dispersive Properties of Photonic Crystals for Optical Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Shanhui Fan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Our objective in this proposal is to explore the use of the spatial and temporal
dispersion characteristics of photonic crystals and related structures for
optical communication applications. Photonic crystals are artificial
microstructures where the index of refraction is strongly modulated at a length
scale comparable to the wavelength. They provide a new mechanism for the
manipulation of light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, several unique
characteristics of photonic crystals make them a particularly intriguing
material system for novel components in optical communication systems. The
crystals exhibit strong spatial dispersion characteristics. These
characteristics have been exploited in the super-prism effect. The crystals also
possess large temporal dispersion effects, such as large group delay, strong
chromatic dispersion, and significant polarization dependency. Thus, photonic
crystals may hold tremendous potential in performing some of the critical
functionality in optical communications, such as tunable optical delay, dynamic
dispersion compensation and mitigation, and wavelength division multiplexing and
demultiplexing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the potentials of photonic
crystals, however, it is critically important to understand how photonic crystal
structures can be engineered to meet the stringent requirements of optical
communications. For example, a fundamental challenge for high bit rate
applications is to achieve significant dispersive effects with a large enough
bandwidth that is sufficient to cover the signal of interest. For wavelength
division multiplexing, for example, it is important to provide sufficiently low
dispersion constant over the wavelength range of interest. Understanding how to
go about designing such structures will require a deeper understanding of device
principles that could give such behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We therefore
propose to undertake a project that will systematically examine some of the
fundamental dispersive properties of photonic crystals and related structures,
in the context of optical communication applications. The proposed activities
will be theoretical and computational in their nature. A key objective here,
however, is to produce designs of novel and functional structures that are
experimentally feasible, and to answer questions that are of immediate
experimental relevance and importance. In doing so we seek to directly impact
wide ranges of experimental efforts that are already ongoing in this emerging
area of photonic crystal technology. &lt;br/&gt;