* 0200747
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Behavioral and Ecological Interactions of Lemurs and Raptors in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/28/2003
* Charles Janson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/28/2003
* USD 12,000.00

Lemurs have presented a puzzle to scientists trying to understand their social
behavior, because they do not conform to the general social patterns found in
most monkeys and apes. One of the possible explanations for this difference
assumes that Madagascar (the home of modern lemur species) has fewer and less
dangerous predators than other areas where primates live. Anecdotal studies have
questioned this assumption, but there are few systematic data concerning
predation on lemurs. This study of the behavioral and ecological interactions of
lemurs and raptors in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar is designed to
provide information on 1) the specific ecological interactions between lemurs
and diurnal birds of prey, and 2) anti-predator behaviors of lemurs in response
to distinct predator species. The first question will be addressed by measuring
the actual rate of mortality on lemurs imposed by the four largest diurnal birds
of prey in Madagascar (Buteo brachypterus, Accipiter henstii, Polyboroides
radiatus, Eutriorchis astur). Each of these raptors will be the focus of nest
observations, prey remain collections, and radio-tracking studies designed to
measure the number of lemurs killed by each raptor species, the area over which
this mortality occurs, and the prey population size. In addition, two
experiments will address the behavioral responses of lemurs to the existing
predator guild. The first experiment involves predator vocalization play backs
to three species of lemurs with varying body sizes: the diademed sifaka
(Propithecus diadema edwardsi), the rufous lemur (Eulemur fulvus rufus), and the
gentle lemur (Hapalemur griseus). The second experiment consists of exposing
three independent groups of diademed sifakas to model avian and terrestrial
predators. The analysis of both raptor and lemur data will provide a clear
understanding of the ecological influence of raptor predation on lemurs as well
as the behavioral responses of lemurs to predation risk.