* 0200877
* Complex Hyperbolic Geometry, Arithmetic, and Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Carlson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 277,499.00

The principal investigators study the complex hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;geometry of
the moduli spaces of cubic surfaces and cubic &lt;br/&gt;threefolds. For stable
cubic surfaces over the complex numbers, &lt;br/&gt;previous work of D. Allcock
and the investigators gives a period &lt;br/&gt;map from the moduli space to the
quotient of the four-ball by a &lt;br/&gt;lattice defined over the Eisenstein
integers, which is an &lt;br/&gt;isomorphism between these two spaces and which
takes the subspace &lt;br/&gt;of moduli of singular surfaces to a configuration
of hyperplanes &lt;br/&gt;in the ball. The investigators now study the
arithmetic &lt;br/&gt;properties of cubic surfaces whose periods are Eisenstein
rational &lt;br/&gt;points. For stable cubic threefolds over the complex
numbers, &lt;br/&gt;there is a period map from their moduli space to the
quotient of &lt;br/&gt;the ten-ball by a lattice also defined over the
Eisenstein &lt;br/&gt;integers. The investigators study detailed properties of
this &lt;br/&gt;period map in order to prove that this map is an isomorphism
&lt;br/&gt;between the two spaces (after some blowing up and down) which
&lt;br/&gt;carries the subspace of moduli of singular threefolds to a
&lt;br/&gt;hyperplane configuration in the ball. The main technical point
&lt;br/&gt;under study is the computation of the differential of the
&lt;br/&gt;restriction of the period map to each stratum that parametrizes
&lt;br/&gt;equisingular varieties. The extension of the Griffiths residue
&lt;br/&gt;calculus to this situation turns out to be quite involved and to
&lt;br/&gt;require new techniques in commutative
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of cubic equations has been a
central theme in &lt;br/&gt;mathematics, whith deep implications for
mathematics, science and &lt;br/&gt;engineering. In the sixteenth century cubic
equations in one &lt;br/&gt;variable were solved by finding a formula for its
solutions &lt;br/&gt;analogous to the well-known formula for the solutions of
quadratic &lt;br/&gt;equations. This formula led to the introduction of complex
&lt;br/&gt;numbers, which are now a standard tool in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries it was realized that
&lt;br/&gt;quadratic equations in any number of variables could be
&lt;br/&gt;understood, and that, for a fixed number of variables, all
&lt;br/&gt;quadratic equations are essentially equivalent by a change of
&lt;br/&gt;variables. It was also realized that cubic equations in two or
&lt;br/&gt;more variables are not all equivalent by change of variables.
&lt;br/&gt;The different equivalence classes are now called the moduli space.
&lt;br/&gt;The moduli space of cubic equations in two variables is the
&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic plane of non-Euclidean geometry. This connection has led
to many&lt;br/&gt;discoveries, from special functions used to solve problems in
physics and&lt;br/&gt;engineering, to advances in number theory and
cryptography. The aim of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to study the special non-
Euclidean geometry that has recently been&lt;br/&gt;discovered on the moduli
spaces of cubic equations in three and four&lt;br/&gt;variables. The reason for
carrying this study is not only the solution of&lt;br/&gt;the problems posed in
the proposal, but also the expectation that this study&lt;br/&gt;of cubics in
more variables will continue to be a point of departure for new&lt;br/&gt;ideas
that will affect other areas of mathematics, science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;