* 0200628
* Harmonic Analysis and PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 102,630.00

PI: Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0200628&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal
several problems are proposed, all in the field of&lt;br/&gt;PDE. Most of these
problems are in the sub-field of non-linear&lt;br/&gt;PDE, and some in linear
PDE. The non-linear problems&lt;br/&gt;arise naturally from Physics
and&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and the interaction of Physics and Geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;The linear problems are also tied in with&lt;br/&gt;Geometry and
Physics. There&lt;br/&gt;is a strong focus in this proposal on various
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;features of solutions to PDE, their level lines, nodal
lines&lt;br/&gt;of eigenfunctions, smoothness of solutions and so on.
&lt;br/&gt;We have selected the problems in part because we view many of them as
having very natural connections with classical Harmonic analysis, and in fact we
have made some start on solving them using techniques from classical Harmonic
analysis. This is described in the body of the proposal. Some of the problems
that arise from Physics in our proposal are connected with the phenomena
of&lt;br/&gt;vortices. Here we continue work that was funded by previous
grants.&lt;br/&gt;The vortices we study are those that arise from fluid flow
on&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional spheres and on the plane. Taking the continuum
limit of the &lt;br/&gt;point vortex distribution leads us to a new technique
for solving the prescribed &lt;br/&gt;Gauss curvature equation which also gives
a tremendous insight into conformally invariant PDE's. Problems are also
posed&lt;br/&gt;that stem from the Schrodinger equation and Geometry and
its&lt;br/&gt;influence on the spectrum of elliptic
operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We single out an important
component of the proposed research&lt;br/&gt;proposal. In todays environment it
has become important to&lt;br/&gt;study so-called smart materials, more
principally composites.&lt;br/&gt;Because of their lightness they are preferred
materials&lt;br/&gt;to use for their strength and lightness. In this
proposal&lt;br/&gt;we study as one problem the vibrational
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;of composites. In particular how should one build
objects using&lt;br/&gt;composite materials so as to minimize their basic
vibrational characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;Intuitively the larger the natural
frequency with which&lt;br/&gt;an object vibrates, the more it is susceptible to
stress&lt;br/&gt;and breakage. For example one question one can ask is, if we
need to &lt;br/&gt;build a symmetric object like a washer does it&lt;br/&gt;mean
the composite has to be arranged symmetrically respecting&lt;br/&gt;the symmetry
of the washer? We find that in our research for example that&lt;br/&gt;this
necessarily does not minimize the stresses that can be caused by
vibration&lt;br/&gt;and we need to arrange the composite in a non-symmetric
way&lt;br/&gt;to construct the washer. This is not the only problem we study in
our&lt;br/&gt;proposal but also problems in Differential Geometry and
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;