* 0200591
* Topics in Quantum Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Marc Rieffel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 272,612.00



Abstract Rieffel

Over the past several years I developed a theory of quantum metric spaces,
within the setting of algebras of operators on Hilbert space. My theory includes
an analog of the classical Gromov-Hausdorff distance between metric spaces. I
gave several applications of these ideas, notably to the convergence of matrix
algebras to coadjoint orbits of compact Lie groups. I propose to continue to
strengthen this theory, and to apply it in several directions suggested by the
many situations in the physics and mathematics of quantization where one has a
sequence of quantum spaces which appear to be converging to another space,
either quantum or classical. As a major new direction I will try to develop an
analogous theory for the quantum versions of the superstructure of vector
bundles, connections, Yang-Mills actions, etc. I will also try to extend my
theory beyond the quantum analog of locally compact spaces, so as to attempt to
deal with the approximations of quantum field-theory models, especially those of
integrable systems, say by quantum lattice models. Our nation's technological
and economic success has at its foundation the mathematical models of the world
around us which scientists develop in order to understand how to use the flood
of data which flows from the laboratories of the experimental scientists. But
human beings and computers can only deal with finite collections of numbers at a
time. Thus in applying these mathematical models it is almost always necessary
to approximate the infinite variability of our world by finite collections of
numbers. It is then crucial to understand how valid any given approximation is.
With respect to individual calculations this matter has received extensive
study. But less study has been made of how complex models as a whole can be
approximated well by simpler models as a whole. Relatively little is known about
such "global" approximations in the case of the models of quantum physics, which
is the part of physics which governs chemical and biochemical reactions, the
functioning of semi-conductors, and many other key technologies. In the
classical realm there is an important form of global approximation called
Gromov-Hausdorff distance. I have developed a quantum analog of it, and
successfully applied it to a few examples. I propose to strengthen this theory,
and to apply it to a broader class of examples, so as to better understand how
to effectively approximate various models of quantum phenomena of current
interest.