* 0200619
* SGER:  The Geographical Dimensions of Terrorism:  A Research Agenda for the Discipline
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2001,10/31/2003
* Douglas Richardson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2003
* USD 84,796.00

The September 11,2001, terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the
Pentagon prompted immediate and longer-term concerns about the nature of
vulnerabilities to terrorism and the more general nature of societal responses
to environmental, biological, chemical, and terrorist security threats. As
different scientific communities have assessed the "new realities" revealed by
the terrorist attacks and subsequent promulgation of anthrax through the mails,
geographers have identified a broad range of ways in which they can contribute
to deeper understandings of the causes, consequences, and responses to
terrorism. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will expand the examination
of geographic dimensions of terrorism-related research through two related sets
of activities. First, faculty and students from Hunter College of the City
University of New York, the University of Colorado-Denver, and the University of
South Carolina will conduct a pilot project to assess the role and utility of
geographic information in emergency management and response to the World Trade
Center attack. This pilot study will briefly summarize the knowledge base on the
use of geographic technology in hazards response and what has been learned to
date. It will evaluate local experiences in providing spatial data in support of
rescue, relief, and recovery efforts; and it will include a broader survey on
the use of geographical technologies during the immediate-response phase for the
first three weeks following the disaster. A combination of web-based sources,
media accounts, and personal interviews will be used to gather the necessary
data. The second part of this project will include the conduct of a workshop
during late 2001 or early 2002 to formulate a more substantive research agenda
on the geographical dimensions of terrorism. Using the pilot study as a backdrop
for discussion, participants identified through their extant research and from
submissions evaluated by workshop organizers will develop a general research
agenda that provides a clearly focused set of research themes, needs, and tasks.
The agenda will be widely disseminated to the geographic research community and
to related disciplines. The outcomes of the workshop include: a published book
or article on the material prepared for the workshop, establishment of multi-
institutional research collaboratives, and the enhancement of the research
infrastructure of the discipline to address important public policy needs and
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have both immediate and longer-
term benefits. The pilot study will coalesce knowledge about the ways that
geographic information technologies were used in response to the September 11
attacks, and it will address wider-ranging issues associated with the
anticipation of and responses to cataclysmic events. Th workshop will provide a
forum for the development of a more fully articulated research agenda, and it
will be a setting to stimulate dialogue among academic researchers, private-
sector practitioners, and federal, state, and local government officials. The
resulting agenda and expanded networks should facilitate the capabilities of
geographers to respond to this pressing national concern.&lt;br/&gt;