* 0200325
* Automorphic L-Functions and Langlands Functoriality
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 465,960.00

Recent striking results establishing the existence of the functorial symmetric
powers of degree 3 and 4 for cusp forms on GL(2) as automorphic forms on GL(4)
and GL(5), as well as transfer of generic cusp forms from odd special orthogonal
groups to general linear groups, by the investigator and his collaborator, has
opened a new front in automorphic forms and number theory. They have resulted in
surprising new estimates towards Ramanujan--Selberg and Sato--Tate conjectures,
together with a large number of impressive, definitive and new results in number
theory, automorphic forms and geometry obtained by other mathematicians. The
investigator explores extensions of these to higher powers of forms on GL(2) as
well as transfers of generic forms on other classical groups and their simply
connected similitude coverings. The well-known and still open case of transfer
from GSp(4) to GL(4) then becomes a special case of this. Beside exploring new
ideas of Langlands on transferring beyond endoscopy, a situation which is
already present in the third and fourth symmetric powers, he plans to
investigate any possible extension of his method to infinite dimensional groups.
He has a solid approach to establishing the stability of root numbers necessary
for these transfers, by means of his method, and studies Bessel functions and
the full generality of all the root numbers defined from his method. Stability
of a subclass of these root numbers is the last serious problem in establishing
these transfers. The investigator is also working on a number of problems
concerning poles of local intertwining operators as well as those of automorphic
L-functions coming from his method. Much of this work is carried out in
collaboration with collaborators.

The theory of automorphic forms is a very powerful, exciting and promising part
of modern mathematics. Through a number of deep conjectures, mainly due to
Robert Langlands of the Institute for Advanced Study (Langlands program), it
tries to unify objects from different parts of mathematics such as number
theory, analysis and geometry. Wiles' proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, which is a
consequence of relating plane curves defined by equations of degree three with
rational coefficients to functions on complex upper half plane, provides an
excellent example of this vast program. The investigator's recent work with his
collaborators has led to new, striking and surprising correspondences of this
sort with many consequences in number theory and geometry. While this has
resolved some very long standing and significant problems, many more important
questions need to be answered. In this project, the investigator uses methods of
analysis, i.e., the study of continuous objects, that he has developed over his
career and have been fundamental in the recent progress, to establish new
correspondences of this kind between objects of a discrete nature with many
applications to different parts of number theory and geometry. The project
involves many collaborations and training for graduate students and postdocs.