* 0200746
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: High Resolution Spectroscopy of Free Radicals Using Laser Magnetic Resonance
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Michael Jackson, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2006
* USD 17,400.00

0200746&lt;br/&gt;Jackson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for US-UK
cooperative research in physical experimental chemistry involves Michael Jackson
and students at Unviersity of Wisconsin La Crosse and John M. Brown at Oxford
University's Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory. The objective is to
perform high-resolution spectroscopy in the far-infrared region using laser
magnetic resonance (LMR). LMR is a technique for the detection of transient
species in the gas phase and the study of their rotational or vibrational-
rotational spectra. The researchers propose to investigate several important
molecular species, including chlorine monoxide, which is found in the upper
atmosphere, and the super oxide anion radical, which is one of the most
important biological free radicals and a major factor in the aging process,
auto-immune diseases and tissue rejection. They will examine these species at
high sensitivity from the visible to microwave regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
US investigator brings to this project expertise in LMR studies in the far-
infrared region. This is complemented by British expertise in geometrical and
electronic structures of small unstable molecules (free radicals). The study
will advance understanding of the structure and behavior of free radicals of
interest to the fields of atmospheric chemistry, astronomy, biology and
biomedical research. Students from a predominantly undergraduate teaching
institution will gain international experience and benefit from training in LMR
spectrometer system and studies of free radicals using LMR experimental
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;