* 0200327
* Modeling of the Ultra-Precision Machining Process Using New Combined Molecular Dynamics/Monte Carlo (MD/MC) Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Lionel Raff, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 281,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of techniques for the simulation
of machining at the atomic level, known as, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
The following three important areas of simulation that would have a significant
impact on our understanding of the cutting process will be considered. They are:
(1) simulations of machining at conventional cutting speeds, never before
attempted due to long processing times involved with conventional MD
simulations, (2) simulations of machining of semiconductor materials, such as
silicon, germanium with a diamond tool. Also, included under this category are
the simulations of machining of iron with a diamond tool to investigate the
chemical nature of wear and simulations of machining of bcc (body centered
cubic) and hcp (hexagonal close packed) materials (in addition to fcc (face
centered cubic) metals currently being modeled), using the Modified Embedded
Atom Method (MEAM), and (3) use of parallel processing in a distributed
computing environment (or Beowulf cluster) to significantly reduce the
computational time per run so that large size work pieces (up to 1 million
atoms) or lower cutting speeds can be considered. The hybrid Molecular
Dynamics/Monte Carlo (MD/MC) approach enables addressing of the machining
problem at conventional cutting speeds. In MC simulations, time (or the cutting
velocity) is not an explicit variable as one is concerned with a series of
equilibrium states. However, it is involved indirectly through the temperature
in the cutting process. If one knows the temperature distribution at
conventional cutting speeds a priori, then this information can be used as an
input to the MC moves.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work proposed under this grant
will enable determination of mechanical properties of semiconductor materials at
nanoscale for application to microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and for
ultraprecision machining of a wide range of materials (both metals and
semiconductor materials). It may be noted that experimental techniques require
very expensive high precision, high rigidity machine tools in a temperature
controlled environment and costly single crystal diamond tools. The simulations
can provide adequate information such that only a few tests to verify the MD
simulation results are necessary. The new hybrid MD/MC approach also enables use
of larger size workpieces (up to a million atoms) and cutting speeds close to
conventional.