* 0200710
* Research on the  Anderson metal-insulator transport transition and otherphenomena in disordered systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Abel Klein, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 192,002.00

The subject of this research proposal is the Anderson metal-insulator transport
&lt;br/&gt;transition and other phenomena in disordered systems. A new approach
to the Anderson &lt;br/&gt;metal-insulator transition based on transport instead
of spectral properties will be &lt;br/&gt;investigated. In addition, several
related topics will be investigated. Constructive &lt;br/&gt;criteria for
localization in random media will be developed; an application is planned
&lt;br/&gt;for the Landau Hamiltonian with a random potential. Local Poisson
statistics for the &lt;br/&gt;strong insulator spectrum of Anderson-type
Hamiltonians in the continuum will be &lt;br/&gt;studied. The spectrum of the
Anderson model on the Bethe lattice will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;Localization at
low disorder in one or two dimensions will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fortysome years have passed since P.
Anderson's seminal article on localization of &lt;br/&gt;electrons in random
media, but our mathematical understanding of the metal-insulator
&lt;br/&gt;transition is still very unsatisfactory. In three or more dimensions
a transition is &lt;br/&gt;believed to occur from an insulator regime,
characterized by localized states, to a &lt;br/&gt;very different metallic
regime characterized by extended states. The energy at which &lt;br/&gt;this
metal insulator transition occurs is called the mobility edge. The standard
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical interpretation of this picture is that there should be a
transition in the &lt;br/&gt;spectrum of the random SchrAdinger from pure point
spectrum (localized states) to &lt;br/&gt;absolutely continuous spectrum
(extended states). But up to now there are no &lt;br/&gt;mathematical results on
the existence of continuous spectrum and a metal-insulator &lt;br/&gt;transition
(except for the special case of the Anderson model on the Bethe lattice). A
&lt;br/&gt;new approach to the Anderson metal-insulator transition is proposed
based on transport &lt;br/&gt;instead of spectral properties. It is motivated by
the fact that the intuitive physical &lt;br/&gt;notion of localization has a
dynamical interpretation: an initially localized wave &lt;br/&gt;packet should
remain localized under time evolution, and delocalization may be
&lt;br/&gt;interpreted as nontrivial transport. The main goal of this proposal
is to show the &lt;br/&gt;existence of such a transport transition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;