* 0200283
* Direct Write of Novel Optical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Matthew Campbell, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2006
* USD 350,000.00

The recent increase in demand for information bandwidth has created the need for
improving current technologies for data, voice and video transmission. The
telecommunications industry has increasingly emphasized the development of
fiberoptic networks to meet this demand. One key to creating this infrastructure
is the production of economical fiberoptic components, such as wave guides and
Bragg gratings. Current manufacturing techniques for optical components and
fiber preforms are limited to vapor deposition techniques and photolithographic
processes. This research is to advance the field of optical component
manufacturing through innovative direct-write processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to develop a novel manufacturing process based
on laser sintering of materials produced from sol-gel processing techniques.
Research tasks include: (1) characterizating the chemistry and processing of
sol-gels; (2) design, construction, and testing of a workstation for combined
sol-gel preparation and laser densification of multi-layer optical components;
(3) developing a real time controller for the workstation; and (4) fabricating
three-dimensional optical components to demonstrate the process. We expect
fundamental science-based results in the areas of unique sol-gel materials and
chemistry, repeatability of sol-gel processing, materials characterization,
models for optical property control, machine design of sol-gel deposition and
densification, and laser processing methods for micron and sub-micron materials.
We also expect overall deliverables of a repeatable direct-write process and
example 3D optical components. Collaboration with an industrial partner, 3M
Corporation, will provide fundamental understanding of the industry needs and
capabilities, leading to a higher potential for future commercialization. These
unique research experiences will provide direct educational benefits to both
graduate and undergraduate students in systems design engineering and optical
product realization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe our approach will lead to
innovative optical component designs, not producible by current vapor deposition
techniques. These components will provide higher performance and enable the
telecommunications industry to better meet the needs of society.&lt;br/&gt;