* 0200226
* Existence of Solutions to Hyperbolic Differential Equations in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Hans Lindblad, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 111,300.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Hans Lindblad, Univ. of Cal. San Diego&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0200226&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lindblad's research
concerns basic mathematical questions for systems &lt;br/&gt; of nonlinear
hyperbolic equations in mathematical physics. &lt;br/&gt; These include several
important equations in classical field theory &lt;br/&gt; and continuum
mechanics as well as in classical physics, e.g.&lt;br/&gt; Einstein's equations
in general relativity and the equation of&lt;br/&gt; fluids and elastic bodies.
&lt;br/&gt; These basic questions are:&lt;br/&gt; (i) Do we have local existence
and uniqueness of solutions &lt;br/&gt; in a certain class? &lt;br/&gt; (ii) Do
we have blow-up of solutions? (e.g. black holes in general&lt;br/&gt;
relativity)&lt;br/&gt; (iii) What is the long time behavior of
solutions?&lt;br/&gt; More specifically, Lindblad is mainly working on two
projects.&lt;br/&gt; One on proving the well-posedness &lt;br/&gt; for a class
of problems that occur in fluid dynamics and general&lt;br/&gt; relativity, in
particular proving the well-posedness for the free &lt;br/&gt; boundary problem
of the motion of the surface of a fluid in vacuum.&lt;br/&gt; A long term goal
is to study the long time behavior of astrophysical&lt;br/&gt; bodies such as
gaseous stars as well as the surface of the ocean.&lt;br/&gt; Another project is
to study global solutions of equations related to &lt;br/&gt; Einstein's
equations. A long term goal is to simplify and generalize &lt;br/&gt; the global
existence results for Einstein's equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; These two
problems are related to the question of whether &lt;br/&gt; the fundamental
equations in physics have global solutions. &lt;br/&gt; Solution to these
questions could have important consequences. For&lt;br/&gt; instance, it is
conceivable that one could use the knowledge obtained from the&lt;br/&gt;
solutions of Einstein's equations to permit the use of gravitational&lt;br/&gt;
waves to observe the Universe. Understanding the properties of&lt;br/&gt; and
controlling the interface between two fluids could have industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; To solve these problems Lindblad and his
collaborators are developing new techniques that could be useful for studying
many other problems as well. In particular, they are using geometric methods to
study hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt; differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;