* 0200465
* Computable Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Denis Hirschfeldt, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 68,607.00

In this project the principal investigator will apply methods&lt;br/&gt;from
computability theory to study the effective content and&lt;br/&gt;proof-
theoretic strength of various areas of mathematics. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, he
will concentrate on computable model theory and&lt;br/&gt;algebra, reverse
mathematics and effectiveness of combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;principles, and
effective notions of randomness and relative&lt;br/&gt;randomness. In computable
model theory, this project will&lt;br/&gt;continue the development of methods to
address issues raised by&lt;br/&gt;effectivizing model-theoretic notions. These
issues include the&lt;br/&gt;relationships between the different ways that a
given structure&lt;br/&gt;may be effectivized, the relationships between the
degree of&lt;br/&gt;effectivity of different models of theories with few models,
and&lt;br/&gt;the differences between the computability-theoretic
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;that can occur in general and those that can occur
within&lt;br/&gt;well-known classes of structures. Hirschfeldt will also
study&lt;br/&gt;computability-theoretic and proof-theoretic aspects
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial principles, exploiting the connections
between&lt;br/&gt;effective mathematics and the reverse
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;program. Finally, the principal investigator will study
the&lt;br/&gt;structure of (effectively approximable) reals under notions
of&lt;br/&gt;relative effective randomness defined through the use
of&lt;br/&gt;prefix-free Kolmogorov complexity of initial
segments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the effective content of mathematics
has received&lt;br/&gt;increasing attention in the last few decades. It is a
natural&lt;br/&gt;outgrowth of the efforts to understand and formalize the
notions&lt;br/&gt;of algorithm and computable function undertaken in the early
part&lt;br/&gt;of the twentieth century. It is of both pure mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;foundational interest, and has important connections
with&lt;br/&gt;computer science. This project aims to further our
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of how structure affects computability, and how
computability&lt;br/&gt;interacts with other fundamental notions of modern
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and foundations of mathematics, such as randomness
and&lt;br/&gt;proof-theoretic strength. Computability theorists have
developed&lt;br/&gt;a highly successful theory of relative computational
complexity&lt;br/&gt;of sets of numbers, which, in addition to its
intrinsic&lt;br/&gt;mathematical interest, has been influential in
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science. One of the goals of this project is to
continue&lt;br/&gt;the development of an emerging parallel theory of
relative&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic randomness, which can act as a theoretical
framework&lt;br/&gt;in which to consider questions such as: When should we say
that&lt;br/&gt;an infinite set is more random than another, and
what&lt;br/&gt;consequences does the relative randomness of sets have for
their&lt;br/&gt;relative computational complexity?&lt;br/&gt;