* 0200362
* Design of Contact-aided Compliant Mechanisms to Generate Sophisticated Motions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Suresh G. Ananthasuresh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2006
* USD 327,581.00

This grant provides funding for developing systematic optimization-based design
methodologies for contact-aided compliant mechanisms. Compliant mechanisms are
joint-less elastic structures that are not only easy to manufacture at macro and
micro scales but are also superior in performance to traditional rigid-body
jointed mechanisms. In this project, intermittent contact between different
portions of the elastic continuum of the compliant mechanism is utilized to
obtain non-smooth motions. Non-smooth motions to be considered in this research
include sudden changes in the slopes and curvatures of paths traced by relevant
points on the mechanism as well as force-deflection characteristics. The design
methodologies will be developed by exploiting the change of boundary conditions
that result when a point on the mechanism contacts another point or the rigid
surface and causes a sudden change in the kinematic and kinetostatic be havior
of the mechanism. The topology and the shape of the mechanism as well as the
rigid surface near the mechanism will be designed for desired non-smooth
behavior. Large deformation-based nonlinear elastic analysis, design sensitivity
analysis, and non-smooth optimization techniques will be utilized to achieve the
goals of this project.

The successful completion of this project will lead to general principles and
systematic design methodology for achieving non-smooth motions with single-piece
compliant mechanisms - a capability not possible today. One of the anticipated
goals of this project is to design a 'compliant crank', which makes conversion
of reciprocating translation input to continuous uni-directional full rotational
output with a single elastic structure. It will have an impact on micro scale
devices as well as macro scale products. On the theoretical side, the
optimization techniques to be developed in this research will contribute to
general area of non-smooth optimization. One of the educational contributions of
this project will be to make contact analysis and non-smooth optimization codes
available on the internet for general access by the students, practicing
engineers, and researchers.