* 0200321
* Surface-Emitting Active Photonic Lattices for Watt-Range Coherent Power
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Dan Botez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 07/31/2006
* USD 225,000.00

What is proposed is the study and use of periodic dielectric structures with
modulated optical gain, so called active photonic lattices (APLs), for the
realization of watt-range coherent, surface-emitted powers from two-dimensional
(2-D) horizontal-cavity devices with 2nd-order gratings of novel design. In
sharp contrast to conventional APLs, the proposed devices have gain in the low-
index lattice sites. In turn, long range (coherent) coupling via traveling waves
will become possible via resonant leaky-wave coupling between the low-index
lattice sites.

The proposed 2-D APLs combine antiguided phase-locked arrays with surface
emission from 2nd-order DFB/DBR grating structures. Unlike all previously
reported 2nd-order grating DFB surface emitters, the proposed structures employ
central grating phase shifts of around pi, which insure emission in an
orthonormal, single-lobe beam at no penalty in device efficiency. In addition,
the grating structure, besides insuring single-longitudinal-mode operation, will
act as a highly effective selector of a single lateral mode: the in-phase array
mode. As a consequence large-aperture (200mm x 1200mm) coherent sources of
nearly uniform 2-D guided-field profiles will be capable to operate in a stable,
single diffraction-limited beam to watt-range CW output powers.

First, a Bloch-function model will be developed for analyzing the proposed 2-D
APL-type device. Then, upon applying the model for device-design optimization,
the device structure will be fabricated by metal-organic chemical vapor
deposition, followed by grating fabrication via holographic interferometry and
wet chemical etching. To create the necessary grating p phase shift, a dual-tone
photoresist will be used. To create the phase-locked array (in the lateral
direction), narrow periodic trenches will be etched into the top surface, and
then high-index material (GaAs) will be regrown as to provide an antiguided
array. After depositing the necessary metallization on the device p-side, a
stripe window will be created in the device n-side metallization, to allow 1st-
order diffracted light to be emitted in a direction normal to the laser-chip
surface.

Initial work will be done on 20-element arrays to prove the concept of lateral-
array-mode selection via the 2nd-order diffraction grating as well as to confirm
enhancement in beam brightness due to the grating existence only in the
antiguided-array cores. 40-element arrays will then be developed. For effective
lateral-mode selection, longitudinally tapered DBR reflectors will be used. For
analysis of such intermodal discrimination the beam-propagation method will be
employed. Devices will be fabricated (by using standard photolithrography and
wet chemical etching in the DBR-grating (reflector) regions).