* 0200172
* Spin Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Sankar Das Sarma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 05/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract-0200172&lt;br/&gt;Sankar Das Sarma, U of MD College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding for comprehensive
theoretical and computational research on spin electronics involving active
control and manipulation of spin dynamics in electronic materials. The main
thrust of the proposal understands in quantitative details carrier spin
transport in semiconductors (although metals and superconductors are also
considered mostly in the context of semiconductor hybrid structures) from the
perspective of novel multifunctional spintronic device operation. The proposed
research will utilize a dual approach using microscopic atomistic frilly quantum
mechanical transport calculations based on modern condensed matter physics where
feasible, and macroscopic device simulation type phenomenological analyses based
on the drift diffusion equations for realistic and complex device
configurations. The goal of the proposed research is to develop the fundamental
knowledge base for simulating semiconductor spintronic devices by providing
quantitative theories for the mechanisms controlling spin injection into
semiconductors, spin relaxation and coherence, spin transmission across
interfaces, spin dependent scattering, spin-polarized tunneling, and spin-
polarized current flow in inhomogeneous (particularly bipolar) structures. The
proposed research will obtain qualitative and quantitative understanding of the
relationships between specific materials systems and prototypical device
structures and spin polarized transport behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks to carry out the generalization of the existing electronic
transport theories including both the microscopic atomistic transport theory
based on the Boltzmann equation approach, and the phenomenological device
modeling theories based on the drift diffusion approach, which form the
foundation of modern microelectronics device simulation studies allows arbitrary
spin-polarized densities and spin-polarized currents for both electrons and
holes in general bipolar systems in the presence of external an electric fields,
magnetic fields and possibly external radiation fields. The proposed theory will
include important microscopic processes such as surface interface roughness
scattering, spin-orbit coupling, magnetic scattering from impurities, band
structure effects, interface spin sensitivity, size quantization effects, and
quantum interference and phase coherence effects (when the situation demands).
The goal of the proposal is to develop the definitive fundamental transport
theory for spin electronics. The proposed research will utilize two graduate
students, who will he carrying out their PhD's in spintronics, thus developing
the human resource base for the projected spin electronics
technology.&lt;br/&gt;