* 0200510
* Collaborative Research: Full Size Experiments and Centrifuge Physical Models of Pile Foundations Subjected to Lateral Spreading: Comparative Study and Engineering Interpretation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Jorge Meneses-Loja, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2005
* USD 220,000.00

This research effort aims to study experimentally the effect of earthquake-
induced lateral spreading due to liquefaction on pile foundations, both in full
size and centrifuge model conditions. Comparable tests of instrumented single
piles and pile groups embedded in 1-and 2-layer soil profiles will be conducted
in slightly inclined laminar boxes subjected to base shaking at three
facilities: 1) The 100g-ton geotechnical centrifuge, laminar box and in-flight
shaker at RPI, 2) The 6m high laminar box and 1g shaking table at NIED, Japan
(largest laminar box in the world), and 3) the 1.9m high laminar box and 1g
shaking table at UCSD (largest laminar box in the US). Taking advantage of the
successful experience at RPI in this kind of testing, this research constitutes
the first opportunity for direct comparison of results in controlled
experimental environments between centrifuge and full sized tests to be
conducted at NIED. Additionally, centrifuge and full size NIED results will be
used to validate the medium-size experiments to be performed using the UCSD
shaking table and laminar box. Advanced data analysis techniques-including
system identification and visualizations-will be used to process and compare the
results from the three facilities, with engineering interpretations and computer
simulations.