* 0200457
* Spectrofluorometer with Stopped Flow Accessory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Frederick Dahlquist, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 141,649.00

Abstract for NSF Instrument Grant DBI-0200457

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Peter H. von Hippel of the Institute of
Molecular Biology at the University of Oregon, serving as Principal Investigator
for a group seven co-PIs, whose research groups will all use the new equipment
in their various research programs. The equipment to be purchased is a
Spectrofluorometer, which will make possible new and incisive studies of
protein-protein, protein-nucleic acid, and protein-ligand interactions involved
in the functioning and regulation of a variety of "macromolecular machines" of
physiological importance. A variety of sophisticated research problems will be
pursued using this facility, which will permit fluorescent measurements at very
low concentrations and within cells. The equipment will be coupled to a stopped-
flow kinetic device to follow biological reactions in milliseconds, and can be
used in either a steady-state or a time-resolved mode to measure fluorescence
quenching and anisotropy. Research problems to be studied include assembly and
regulation of DNA replication and transcription complexes (P. von Hippel
laboratory), energetics of signaling in bacterial chemotaxsis (Frederick
Dahlquist laboratory), structure and functional regulation of nuclear receptors
by hormones (Beatrice Darimont laboratory), development and characterization of
green fluorescent protein-based biosensors (S. J. Remington laboratory),
measurement of the mobility of mitochondria and other organelles in live cells
and studies of protein and nucleic acid dynamics in vitro (Andrew Marcus
laboratory), studies on the assembly of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II
transcription complexes (Diane Hawley laboratory), and analysis of protein
folding and assembly reactions (Brian Matthews laboratory). These research
projects, as well as those of other groups within the Institute of Molecular
Biology, will take advantage of the full range of capabilities of the new
fluorescence facility. All the research projects will focus on gaining increased
molecular understanding of the functional and regulatory systems of cells and
tissues, and the results will contribute both to our basic knowledge of
biological regulatory systems.