* 0200495
* Shape Memory Polymer Based Nano-Composites for MEMS
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Martin Dunn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 03/31/2005
* USD 264,763.00

This grant provides funding to develop shape memory polymer (SMP) reinforced
nanocomposites, a new class of materials for Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
(MEMS). The fundamental scientific challenges to be addressed by the proposed
research include the dispersion of nanoscale reinforcements in polymer matrix
materials, fabrication of micron scale MEMS from nanocomposites by micro-casting
and photopolymerization, and the realization and characterization of functional
shape memory properties at micron scales. The research will also investigate the
size scale and geometrical limits on the processing of nanoreinforced SMP-based
MEMS composites. The effect of volume fraction and type of reinforcement on
strain recoverability and stiffness (important for self-actuation) will also be
characterized and modeled. Mechanical characterization will be accomplished by
using novel test structures/materials that can be deformed by micro-actuation
via a micro-indentor or similar tool. Nanomechanical modeling that incorporates
the material nanostructure and unique polymer matrix properties will be used to
guide processing and mechanical characterization studies. Nanostructural
characterization, necessary to provide a property-processing link, will be
accomplished using electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed research on SMP-based
nanocomposites in Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) will have impact on
micro scale actuation in complicated environments for many biomedical and
microsensor applications. The primary goal of the research is to develop
fundamental tools/knowledge for the simultaneous engineering of nanomaterials
and microdevices as these are intrinsically linked, and can not be attacked
independently. The work will provide processing routes for microcasting and
photopolymerization of nanocomposites, and models that can be used to guide the
fabrication and design of nanocomposites. The research will also draw
undergraduate and high school students into science and engineering via the
unique interaction between design, nanomanufacturing, and characterization of
functional SMP nanocomposites. The research on these "active" nanomaterials will
also be integrated into the Summer Multicultural Access to Research and Training
(SMART) Program for underrepresented undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;