* 0200019
* Updating for Model-Based Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Daniel Inman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2006
* USD 241,000.00

Daniel J. Inman&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0200019&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title "Updating for Model-Based Simulation"
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general aim of
the research is to develop improved methods of model updating for normal and
damped flexible structures. The improvement is expected to be in the algorithms
themselves, in the numerical schemes that will realize them, and in tools for
evaluating the outcome of the updating method. Specific issues that will be
investigated are:&lt;br/&gt; Obtaining a physically meaningful updated model
using reference basis model method.&lt;br/&gt; Mode shape correction and order
matching.&lt;br/&gt; Deterministic and stochastic sensitivity
analysis.&lt;br/&gt; Robust updating and reliability issues.&lt;br/&gt; Method
validation and improvement by experiment.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
contribution is twofold. From a theoretical point of view such modification of
the reference basis method has a clear scientific merit. Secondly, each one of
the indicated issues corresponds to a genuine practical problem facing
industries seeking model-based simulation. Solution of these will lead to better
modeling and understanding of vibrating systems. To be more specific, it is our
belief that the parametric reference basis method is a very promising approach
to model updating and with the appropriate tuning it will perform better than
any other method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort is expected to impact
industry by providing algorithms to provide accurate simulation models, a long-
standing problem of importance. Secondly, the proposed effort will improve
graduate training of underrepresented groups, involve undergraduates in research
and promote the pursuit of academic careers. &lt;br/&gt;