* 0201409
* Urban Stream Corridor Management in the United States:  The Interaction of Ecology and Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Rutherford Platt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 208,829.00

Since 1950, metropolitan regions of the United States have nearly tripled in
population from 84 million (55% of U.S. total) to 226 million in 2000 (80%).
During the same period, the number of designated metropolitan regions grew from
169 to 347 and their aggregate land area doubled from 9% to about 19% of the
lower 48 states. As metropolitan regions have expanded, land development has
degraded and disrupted natural drainage systems, watersheds, wetlands, aquifers,
and coastal estuaries. In the process, natural stormwater detention, water
quality filtering, biotic habitat, water-based recreation, and scenic amenity
have been impaired. Efforts to replace these "Nature's services" through
technology, as with flood control projects and water treatment plants, have
proven costly, environmentally damaging, and sometimes ineffective. This dismal
process was challenged in the 1960s by scientists, environmentalists, and other
writers (e.g., Eugene Odum, Garrett Hardin, William H. Whyte, Barry Commoner,
Gilbert White, Ian McHarg, Luna Leopold, William Neiring, and John and Mildred
Teal). In response, certain cities and metropolitan regions have attempted in
McHarg's phrase to "design with Nature" rather than trying to overwhelm
biophysical constraints through technology. This shift is tentative,
geographically uneven, and poorly documented. But its results are evident in the
form of widely established stream corridor "greenways," "daylighting" of
channelized streams, floodplain and wetlands management, building regulations
for steep slopes, and urban forestry programs. These and related initiatives may
be subsumed in the broad rubric of "urban watershed management" for purposes of
this study.

Since watersheds typically embrace multiple political and ownership units,
watershed management requires creative use of partnerships, special districts,
and other regional strategies. Urban watershed management is also influenced,
for better or worse, by federal laws such as the Clean Water Act, the National
Flood Insurance Act, the Coastal Zone Management Act, and the Safe Drinking
Water Act.

This study will analyze and compare regional experience in urban watershed and
estuary management in light of scientific and institutional challenges. Research
questions that will guide the study include:

1. What alternative institutional models are available to overcome legal
fragmentation in urban watersheds and estuaries?

2. What indicators of "effectiveness" may be applied to the models identified in
Question 1?

3. How and to what extent do federal programs encourage or inhibit urban
watershed and estuary management?

4. What is the influence of the "property rights movement" and the "takings
issue" as constraints upon governmental efforts to retain natural functions of
urban watersheds?

The study will assess comparative regional experience in urban watershed
management through four broad tasks:

Task 1 -- Survey of State of Practice: A sample of state and regional resource
managers stratified by geographic area and discipline will be surveyed regarding
the above questions in relation to their respective geographic localities;

Task 2 -- Regional Workshops will be conducted in 3-5 representative
metropolitan areas to ascertain more detailed local and regional experience in
multi-objective management of urban watersheds, stream corridors, and estuaries;

Task 3 -- Detailed Case Studies will more closely analyze selected programs
identified in the earlier tasks that representative a spectrum of geographical
context and institutional strategies of broader significance;

Task 4 - Publication and Dissemination of Results through a book, scholarly
articles, and conference papers.

