* 0201468
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Site Effects, Seismic Compression, and Liquefaction in the June 23, 2001 Southern Peru Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2005
* Joseph Wartman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2005
* USD 131,454.00

0201468, Joseph Wartman, Drexel University "Collaborative Research:
Investigation of Site Effects, Seismic Compression, and Liquefaction in the June
23, 2001 Southern Peru Earthquake"

During the past 25 years, the largest seismic event worldwide was the Southern
Peru Earthquake of June 23, 2001 (Mw = 8.4). It damaged regions in and around
the cities of Moquegua, Tacna, Arequipa, Camana, and Ilo. A collaborative team
of United States and Peruvian researchers conducted a geotechnical
reconnaissance of the region shortly after the event. Among the key finding
were: (i) the concentration of structural damage in some areas suggested the
influence of site and possibly topographic amplification in the resulting damage
levels; (ii) considerable damage occurred to roadways and bridges in the
affected regions as a result of seismic compression, liquefaction, landslides,
and rockfalls.

Large magnitude seismic events such as the Southern Peru Earthquake provide an
opportunity to advance the state of geotechnical earthquake engineering practice
through the development and study of detailed case histories. These case studies
are invaluable for calibration of existing design procedures and seismic codes,
and they often serve as a springboard for developing new, more reliable analysis
procedures. The objective of this collaborative research between Washington
State University and Drexel University is to: (1) document and study site
amplification and topographic effects in the cities of Tacna and Moquegua; (2)
develop and analyze case histories of seismic compression of compacted fills;
and (3) assemble and evaluate case histories of liquefaction and associated
lateral spreading. The research plan takes advantage of the investigators'
current working relationship with the Catholic University of Peru, and from
their contacts with local officials from government, engineering societies, and
industry. The research involves several tasks: (a) development of representative
ground motions, (b) characterization of subsurface conditions by test borings,
shear wave velocity measurements, and laboratory experiments, (c) compilation
and development of detailed case histories, (d) analysis of the case histories,
and (e) timely dissemination of the data and findings. The case histories and
associated data will be freely available on a dedicated Internet site, which
will be developed in both English and Spanish to make it accessible to
individuals in both the Unites States and abroad.

This research will provide the profession with a series of case studies that may
be used for calibration or validation of existing design and analysis
procedures. It will also aid the development of new or updated analysis
procedures and building design codes and seismic guidelines. The findings will
have implications for the seismic safety community worldwide, and will be
particularly relevant to regions such as the Pacific Northwest and Alaska, where
the seismic hazard is controlled by subduction events.