* 0201415
* Transient thermo-mechanical interactions during slip at dissimilar material interfaces under extreme conditions.
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Vikas Prakash, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2006
* USD 319,274.00

ABSTRACT

The need for advanced tribo-systems with wear resistant sliding interfaces
pervades current technology, emerging technology, and much of the technology of
the foreseeable future. Whether in the foreground, as in the design of high-
temperature gas turbine engines, the development of highly reliable navigational
and tracking systems, and the performance of magnetic storage devices, or in the
background, as used in fusion reactors, tribology of sliding interfaces play a
critical role in the success of the technology. Better understanding of the
physics of material interaction under these harsh conditions is expected to lead
to the development of more efficient tribo-systems would benefit our society in
many ways.

In the proposed investigation we seek to capitalize on our experience gained
during the development of the plate-impact pressure-shear friction experiments
and the torsional Kolsky bar friction experiments, to better understand the
behavior of technologically important material interfaces under extreme
conditions. Key modifications will be made to these configurations in order to
provide a more direct access to the frictional interface such that local
critical interfacial quantities can be directly measured by using high-speed
digital photography and thermal imaging systems. In this way, these experiments
will not only provide information on quantities such as interfacial tractions
and slip history, but also on key local thermo-mechanical interactions in the
vicinity of the tribological interface. Interfacial quantities of interest
include but are not limited to local plastic strains, plastic strain rates,
temperature profiles, details of formation and growth of third body, kinetics of
formation and growth of molten interfacial layers, and the details of slip-waves
generated during the intense local thermo-mechanical interactions at the tribo-
pair interface. Detailed optical and scanning electron microscopy along with the
atomic force microscope will be used to examine the micro- and/or nano- changes
in the topology of the tribo-pair surfaces during the slip process. In addition,
X-ray diffraction and flourescence (EDS) will be employed to contribute to our
understanding of the changes in the microstructure and transfer of material
during the complex chemical/mechanical interactions that occur at and near the
sliding interfaces. Along with the experimental study finite element simulations
of the experiments will be conducted to correlate the experimental observations
with our present state of understanding of the high-speed slip phenomena.

The proposed approach is innovative and novel and entails considerable
experimental and computational challenges. It represents a marked departure from
experimental procedures to investigate dynamic friction in the past. The
proposed is expected to contribute significantly towards strengthening our
national capability by (a) contributing to the development of an experimental
methodology for characterization of high speed sliding behavior under extreme
conditions, (b) extending our present state of understanding of critical
mechanisms operative during high-speed slip at technologically important
material interfaces, and (c) by training graduate students at the interface of
solid mechanics and materials science in technologically important areas.