* 0201435
* Conformal Mappings and Loewner Evoluation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Donald Marshall, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 108,012.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0201435&lt;br/&gt;PI: Donald Marshall and Steffen
Rohde&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal mapping and
Loewner evolutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marshall and Rohde will investigate
conformal mappings generated &lt;br/&gt;by the Loewner differential equation,
and related topics. The&lt;br/&gt;Loewner differential equation describes the
flow associated with&lt;br/&gt;the conformal mappings onto a continuously
decreasing sequence of&lt;br/&gt;simply connected planar domains. It relates a
sequence of domains&lt;br/&gt;to a real-valued function, the driving term of the
equation.&lt;br/&gt;Schramm's recent discovery of the stochastic Loewner
evolution&lt;br/&gt;SLE, the Loewner equation driven by one-dimensional
Brownian&lt;br/&gt;motion, has opened up a new area of investigations
involving&lt;br/&gt;conformal mappings, probability theory and mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;The Loewner equation is also related to an algorithm
for&lt;br/&gt;numerical conformal mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal
mappings have applications in many areas, both within &lt;br/&gt;and outside of
mathematics, such as control theory, heat&lt;br/&gt;conduction, fluid dynamics,
and complex dynamics. They are often&lt;br/&gt;used to change coordinates from
one region to a simpler region&lt;br/&gt;like a disc. Regions with smooth
boundaries are well understood.&lt;br/&gt;However, the appearance of fractals in
many branches of science &lt;br/&gt;led to the natural problem of investigating
regions bounded by &lt;br/&gt;highly nonsmooth, fractal curves, from the
conformal mapping&lt;br/&gt;point of view. In recent years, fractal curves
generated by&lt;br/&gt;random processes arising, for instance, in statistical
physics,&lt;br/&gt;have received enormous attention. The core of Marshall's
and&lt;br/&gt;Rohde's research is to better understand random fractal
curves&lt;br/&gt;by means of conformal mappings, and conversely to study
some&lt;br/&gt;problems about conformal mappings by analyzing domains
bounded&lt;br/&gt;by fractal curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;