* 0201788
* Nanoscale Engineering of LDL-Retentive Substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Prabhas Moghe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2006
* USD 315,000.00

0201788&lt;br/&gt;Moghe&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular disease takes a staggering toll
of casualties among adult Americans each year. Two of the significant vascular
pathologies related to the abnormal accumulation of lipids are atherosclerosis
(the hardening of arteries due to build-up of low density lipoproteins (LDL)),
and macrovascular disease, typically correlated with insulin resistant diabetes,
which claims a million lives each year globally. Much research has been directed
at the molecular design of drugs to alleviate the disorders of lipid metabolism.
However, such drugs can be toxic to the liver and kidneys, and fail to
comprehensively treat lipoprotein transport and retention dynamics, particularly
at peripheral vascular sites. Thus, a comprehensive approach to treating lipid-
related vascular disease could involve use of molecules regulating lipid
metabolism as well as molecules that are suitably lipoprotein-philic and serve
as multifunctional carriers for processing lipoproteins in transit. Ultimately,
such carriers could be engineered to (a) sequester lipoproteins from
macromolecular depots such as proteoglycans that heighten atherogenic
tendencies; (b) reduce lipoprotein oxidation (which leads to unregulated uptake
of LDL by macrophages, transforming them into foam cells, the precursors to
atherosclerosis); and (c) enhance lipoprotein transport and clearance of mildly
oxidized lipoproteins (via macrophages, and the liver). However, to engineer
such carriers, an understanding of the chemical and geometric determinants of
lipoprotein-retentive carrier substrates is necessary. This proposal describes a
major research initiative toward this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proteoglycans of the vascular intima are bulky, negatively charged molecules
that present multimeric glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains, which can co-operatively
recruit low density lipoproteins, and encourage LDL hyperoxidation, which leads
to foam cell formation during atherosclerosis. As a competitive strategy for LDL
retention, the investigators propose to design novel diffusible, nanoscale
carriers that can present GAG-mimetic chemistry and retain LDL with high
affinity. To this end, two significant questions will be addressed: (a) Can the
GAG-mimetic chemistry and nanoscale topography of model substrates be designed
to synergistically recruit oxidized low density lipoproteins? (b) How can the
insights derived in (a) be applied toward the use of mobile nanocarriers for LDL
retention?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address (a), the investigators will
theoretically simulate and experimentally explore the ability of immobilized
gold nanoparticles (model substrates to test the LDL-reactivity of various
chemistries) and substrate arravs of gold/ZnO nanopillars. functionalized with
alkanethiols terminating in negatively charged groups (-COOH, -OSO3H), to
sequester LDL. The hypothesis is that at adequately high densities, and in
topographic substrate configurations affording inter-pillar cooperativity, such
chemistries can electrostatically sequester LDL through the positively charged
aminoacid residues from the apolipoprotein B-100 of the LDL. To address (b), the
investigators will explore the use of polymeric dendrimer-Iike hyperbranched
nanocarriers to present the most LDL-retentive chemistry observed in (a), in
various nanoarchitectural configurations, that is, by systematically
manipulating the valency, branching, and tethering of the molecular bait for the
lipoprotein.&lt;br/&gt;