* 0201383
* Spectral Study of Multidimensional Almost-Periodic Schroedinger Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Ioulia Karpechina, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 97,142.00

Abstract Karpeschins

The main area of Yu.Karpeshina's research in the previous years was the
perturbation theory for multidimensional Schroedinger operators with periodic
potentials. One encounters a small denominator problem, considering the
perturbation of the Laplacian by a periodic potential in the high energy region.
It comes from the fact that the Bloch eigenvalues of a multidimensional periodic
Schroedinger operator are located very densely in the high energy region. The PI
has developed a method of advanced perturbation theory to treat this small
denominator problem. Yu. Karpeshina showed that most of generalized
eigenfunctions of the multidimensional periodic Schroedinger operator in the
high energy region are close to the unperturbed ones: for every sufficiently
large energy there is an extensive set of solutions of the Schroedinger equation
which are close to plane waves.



The PI will prove that even in the almost-periodic situation a lot of
generalized eigenfunctions of the multidimensional Schroedinger operator are
close to unperturbed ones in the high energy region: for every sufficiently
large energy there is an extensive set of solutions of the Schroedinger equation
which are close to plane waves. The main difficulty to overcome is the small
denominator problem, which is much more intricate in the case of almost-periodic
potentials then in the periodic case, due to particularly complicated nature of
wave propagation processes in solids with non-local deviations from regular
structure. The PI suggests an effective approach to the small denominator
problem. The methods developed by the PI for the multidimensional periodic
Schroedinger operator will be combined with basic ideas of the KAM (Kolmogorov-
Arnold-Moser) theory in order to produce a new technique which works for almost-
periodic potentials. Schroedinger operators with almost-periodic potentials are
used in physics to describe solids with non-regular inner structure, e.g.
alloys, ceramics, glasses, polymers. The spectral study of these operators leads
to understanding of the mechanism of electrical conductivity in such materials.
The goal of the project is to understand the phenomenon of the insulator-metal
transition. The insulator-metal transition means that a material behaves as an
electrical insulator if it stays below a certain temperature and abruptly starts
to act as a conductor when the temperature surpasses a certain value
characteristic for a given material. The understanding of the phenomenon of
insulator-metal transition is extremely important for applications, particularly
in electronics industry.



