* 0201457
* Zeta-Functions, L-Functions, and Random Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Steven Gonek, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,015.00

DMS-0201457 Steve Gonek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator and his colleagues are studying problems in
analytic&lt;br/&gt;number theory centered mainly on the Riemann-zeta function
and L-functions,&lt;br/&gt;and relations between their zeros and the primes. Two
projects focus on the&lt;br/&gt;remarkable, recently discovered applications of
random matrix theory to&lt;br/&gt;the zeta-function. Keating and Snaith's
characteristic polynomial model of&lt;br/&gt;the zeta-function is providing
heuristic answers to many previously&lt;br/&gt;intractable problems in analytic
number theory. However, a serious drawback&lt;br/&gt;of the model is that it
does not contain the primes. Instead, they have to&lt;br/&gt;be inserted in an
ad hoc manner with each new application. The investigator&lt;br/&gt;and his
colleagues have a new model that explicitly integrates the primes&lt;br/&gt;and
zeros in a most natural way. They are applying it to a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;problems, such as moment and order estimates for the zeta-function,
and&lt;br/&gt;they expect it to give them new insights into the connections
between the&lt;br/&gt;zeros and the primes. A related project explores the
relations between the&lt;br/&gt;Gaussian Unitary Ensemble Conjecture on the
zeros, the distribution of&lt;br/&gt;primes and almost-primes, and mean-value
theorems involving the Riemann&lt;br/&gt;zeta-function. They also study
geometrical aspects of the zeta-function,&lt;br/&gt;such as its curvature near
the critical line, and the size of gaps between&lt;br/&gt;zeros. Two final
problems lie in an altogether different area of number&lt;br/&gt;theory. These
concern additive patterns of elements in the multiplicative&lt;br/&gt;group of a
finite field and the related question of the value distribution&lt;br/&gt;of
incomplete exponential sums containing multiplicative
characters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project in the area of mathematics
known as number theory. The fundamental questions of interest in number theory
have to do with the structure of numbers, and in particular the prime numbers,
as these are the fundamental building blocks of arithmetic and, therefore, of
much of mathematics. Many of the most important questions in this area are so
intractable that it is impossible even to guess correct answers to them.
Recently, a remarkable partnership has developed between theoretical physicists
and analytic number theorists, which is succeeding in answering some of these
questions. At the center of this collaboration is a model of something called
the Riemann zeta-function, which is a special mathematical function known for
over a century to encode within its properties a great deal of information about
prime numbers. This model is based on the theory of random matrices, objects
previously used to model complicated physical systems such as heavy nuclei.
Although the model has been quite successful, it has the serious drawback of not
containing the prime numbers which, after all, are the principal objects of
interest. The investigator and his colleagues have now developed a model that
does integrate the primes and zeros in a most natural way, and a main goal of
this project is to explore further applications of our new model. A related
project concerns arithmetic and analytic consequences of a widely believed
conjecture about the zeros of the zeta-function. Using recent developments in
the field, we also investigate geometrical aspects of the zeta-function such as
its curvature, and gap sizes between its zeros. Two problems in a different area
of number theory concern the structure of finite fields, objects with important
applications to coding theory and cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;