* 0201211
* Self-Assembly of Highly Immiscible Polymers Using Balanced Surfactants
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Nitash Balsara, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2003
* USD 50,001.00

SELF-ASSEMBLY OF HIGHLY IMMISCIBLE POLYMERS USING BALANCED SURFACTANTS

The PI's objective is to create a library of surfactants for controlling the
nano-scale self-assembly in mixtures of highly immiscible polymers. This will
enable the creation of new nano-structured polymer materials. It may also enable
reusing commingled polymeric waste. The proposed approach represents a risky
departure from the large body of previous experimental and theoretical work in
this field which relied of the surfactancy of A-B copolymers for organizing
mixtures of A and B homopolymers. It is now recognized that these types of
copolymers can only organize interfaces if the homopolymers are weakly
immiscible. The surfactant that will be uses in the study is a balanced A-C
block copolymer. The notion of balance is adapted from the rich literature on
surfactancy in aqueous systems. Nonionic surfactants with balanced hydrophobic
and hydrophilic character have been successful in creating nano-scale
organization in oil/water mixtures in spite of their high degree of
incompatibility. The goal is to apply this principle to polymers. The proposed
experiments will be conducted on mixtures of highly immiscible polyolefins,
polybutene (PB) and polyisobutylene (PIB). The PI will use a polybutene-block-
head-to-head polypropylene (PB-PP) copolymer as a surfactant. The objective is
to demonstrate that PB/PIB/PB-PP blends exhibit the rich self-assembly
characteristics found in aqueous systems. The PI chose this system because the
magnitude and sign of the temperature dependence of the PB/PP and PIB/PP Flory-
Huggins interaction parameters are (approximately) equal and opposite,
respectively. Model polymers required for this study will be synthesized by
anionic and cationic polymerization. Self-assembly will be studied by small
angle neutron scattering, light scattering, and electron microscopy.

IMPACT STATEMENT

This proposed research on balanced surfactants holds the potential of
introducing radically new technology for controlling the morphology of polymer
blends. It will enable the creation of new blended materials from industrially
important polymers such as polyisobutylene (a polymer of considerable current
importance because of its use in the manufacture protective garments for working
in chemically and biologically contaminated areas). Industrial production of
nanostructured blends of electrically conducting and non-conducting polymers may
also be enabled by the proposed research. The approach of using balanced
surfactants is inspired by the efficacy of synthetic and natural surfactants in
aqueous systems. However, the scientific challenge of applying principles
learned in aqueous systems to hydrocarbon polymers is considerable because of
the difference in fundamental intermolecular interactions. Interactions with
water molecules are dominated by their permanent dipole and specific
interactions such as hydrogen bonding. The SGER proposal seeks to explore the
possibility of designing balanced surfactants in the absence of these
interactions.