* 0201353
* Advanced Engineering Frameworks for Dynamic Foundation Interaction With Granular Soils Under Multi-Directional Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Ronald Pak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2008
* USD 302,076.00

0201353, Ronald Pak, U. of Colorado-Boulder&lt;br/&gt;"Advanced Engineering
Framework for Dynamic Foundation Interaction with Granular Soils under Multi-
Directional Loads"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major source of difficulty in
obtaining consistent predictions of the dynamic behavior of foundations on sandy
and gravelly soils under multi-directional excitation is the inadequacy in the
conceptual and analytical framework for the dynamic contact problem, considering
the complex nature of granular materials. This problem is the foundation of many
important applications in dynamic soil-structure interaction, and geotechnical
and earthquake engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action is to support a
comprehensive research program to: (i) develop, by means of centrifuge modeling,
an enlarged experimental data base with significant parametric variations, so as
to delineate the spectrum of dynamic characteristics of the embedded and surface
foundation response for a variety of soils, foundations, and loading parameters;
(ii) develop and implement, using the new comprehensive data base, a dual set of
analytical frameworks. The first provides a simple and conceptually succinct
engineering format to address the special characteristics of the dynamic
behavior of granular materials not accounted for in current approaches. The
second provides an in-depth understanding of the granular continuum mechanics
problems underlying the dynamic physical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
these developments, an up-to-date reassessment of existing field and laboratory
experimental data can be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;