* 0201459
* Projected Phase-Plane Control of Flexible Structures with Applications to Hard Disk Drives
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* Lucy Pao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 05/31/2007
* USD 222,310.00

In this project, controllers are being developed for maneuvering flexible
structures, with particular application to disk drive systems, where the
flexibility of the read/write arm are being addressed. The control approach
separates the non-flexible and flexible dynamics of the system. Because of the
desire for fast read/write access times in disk drives, the approach starts with
the time-optimal control for the non-flexible dynamics. Depending on how complex
these non-flexible dynamics are, this time-optimal control may be solved
analytically or numerically. The notions of input shaping are then used to
address the flexible dynamics of the system, where a technique is being
developed that incorporates the ideas of input shaping and time-optimal control
to derive a feedback control law that causes flexible systems to track desired
projected phase-plane trajectories that are constructed based upon state
responses to shaped time-optimal control inputs. The research ideas proposed
provide a clear methodology for deriving a complete theory for designing
feedback controllers for multi-modal flexible structures, including non-ideal
effects such as back EMF, inductance, and slew rate limitations. The PI's
involvement with the Colorado Center for Information Storage (CCIS) ensures
interaction with disk drive companies (such as Maxtor Corporation and Seagate
Corporation) so that the techniques developed can be transferred successfully to
industry. The results of this research are expected to make an impact in the
disk drive industry and hence ultimately an impact on every computer user.
Further, because several aspects of the basic approach are more general in
nature, it is expected that the proposed research will impact other fields where
structural flexibilities must be controlled.