* 0201668
* Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Space and Community Interaction in Late Holocene Coastal California: Archaeological Perspectives from the Northern Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Jon Erlandson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2004
* USD 11,945.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jon Erlandson, MS Torben Rick will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation research, excavating five archaeological sites on
California's Northern Channel Islands that date within the last 4,000 years.
Native peoples of the southern California Coast and Channel Islands were among
the most populous and culturally complex hunter-gatherers in the world. During
the historic era, Chumash and Tongva peoples in the region lived in large
villages or towns, some with as many as 1,000 residents, had hierarchical
sociopolitical organization, and used shell bead money to purchase a variety of
goods and services. The Northern Channel Islands also contain the earliest
evidence of maritime peoples in North America and a spectacular record of
coastal hunter-gatherers that spans the last 12,000 years. This continuous
archaeological sequence, along with the excellent preservation of Channel
Islands archaeological sites, provides a unique opportunity to investigate the
evolution of cultural complexity among hunter-gatherers with great time depth
and relatively high precision. The archaeological sites where research will be
conducted are extremely well preserved villages that contain dense accumulations
of shellfish, fish and sea mammal bones, a variety of artifacts, and three of
the sites also contain circular depressions that are the remains of house
structures. These sites provide an important laboratory for documenting aspects
of community and household life among coastal peoples in the region. Excavation
and mapping of these villages will provide a means to assess the evolution of
Chumash society, with a specific focus on how communities and households
structured and maintained hierarchical sociopolitical organization. This project
will increase our understanding of community and household archaeology, maritime
adaptations, the evolution of complex hunter-gatherers, and the relationships
between environmental and cultural changes. Ultimately, the data gathered will
enhance our understanding of the causal mechanisms behind the development of
hierarchy, social inequality, and other highly significant evolutionary changes
in human behavior.

