* 0201590
* Multi-scale Modeling of Hybrid Fiber-reinforced Composite Overlays for Structural Repair and Retrofit
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* John Bolander, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 08/31/2004
* USD 138,255.00

The introduction of short discontinuous fibers into hydraulic cement composites
can improve material toughness, strength, resistance to shrinkage cracking, and
durability. The degree to which such improvements are achieved depends on many
factors, including fiber type, fiber dosage, properties of the matrix, phase,
hygral and thermal loading conditions and the spatial distribution of the
constituents. Enhancing performance is paramount for repair and retrofit
technologies that utilize such materials, including fiber-reinforced composite
overlay systems. However, direct quantitative relationships between the basic
material parameters and the desired composite performance measures are still
lacking. One of the main complicating factors is the multi-scale, three-
dimensional nature of cement composite materials, damage processes and transport
mechanisms. The proposed research addresses the need for model-based simulation,
experimentation and visualization procedures that tie the material parameters
(including those of the fiber components) to performance measures defined at the
structural scale. While the focus here is on overlay systems for structural
repair and retro fit, the proposed methods have general application toward
optimizing the use of fiber-reinforced cement composites within the civil works
infrastructure. The project involves interactive, iterative comparisons between
model-based simulation results and data from in-house experimentation.

The numerical model development, including development of pre-and post-
processing modules, and experimentation will be conducted. First, the basic
numerical algorithms will be coded on locally available computer facilities. As
the algorithms near maturity, large scale simulations will be performed using
both in-house high-performance computing resources and resources at the National
Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure (NPACI) based at the San
Diego Supercomputer Center.