* 0201934
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expanding the Boundaries of Conservation Science: Community Based Wildlife Protection in the Maasai Ecosystem, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Matthew Turner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 10,165.00

Community-based-conservation (CBC) projects are being initiated to protect
wildlife corridors and connect ecological processes across landscapes. The
conservation of wildlife in the Maasai Ecosystem of northern Tanzania relies on
this approach for protection of migratory species outside of national parks on
lands predominately occupied by Maasai pastoralists. The objective of this
research project is to explore how the geographical knowledge of local Maasai
residents contributes to scientific dialogues regarding CBC initiatives in the
region that are based in both conservation biology and GIS (Geographic
Information System) mapping. The project, therefore, involves a critical
engagement with both local Maasai geographical knowledge and Western
conservation science, to propose alternative wildlife conservation measures for
the Maasai Ecosystem. The project explores theoretical questions regarding the
value and place of indigenous knowledge within science and the politics of
resource management, within the context of a political ecology research
approach. The project first will ask what a Maasai geography of the region looks
like, by exploring Maasai knowledge claims concerning historical as well as
contemporary patterns of local ecology, wildlife resource use patterns, Maasai
resource use patterns, Maasai-wildlife interactions, and Maasai notions of
territoriality. The project will then investigate how dialogues of negotiation
and translation can be built between Maasai knowledge and Conservation science
by creating a final "text" of negotiation, based on in-depth ethnographic field
work, ecological analysis, and participatory GIS mapping. Natural and social
science techniques will include integrated use of in-depth interviews, key-
informant led transects, group meetings, participant observations, ecological
transects, air photo interpretation. In this manner, information obtained
through social science methods will be continually reinforced and cross-checked,
both geographically and with ecological methods. "Traveling" interviews with
Maasai key informants will provide the most essential and innovative method
used. By traveling with Maasai during their daily and seasonal land-use
activities, ethno-botanical ecological sampling will be coupled with
participatory observation and in-depth interviews to gain an understanding of
Maasai resource use patterns and knowledge of local ecology. Ecological
fieldwork will be conducted at specific sites deemed valuable for wildlife
conservation purposes (as proposed by both conservation agencies and local
Maasai) to delineate wildlife presence, wildlife-livestock interactions, and
vegetation coverage at these sites. Participatory GIS mapping will be utilized
to map information obtained through these combined methods. The challenges of
translation and the politics of negotiating between competing knowledge claims,
an essential component of the project, will be directly addressed throughout the
project through self-reflective ethnography, participant observations, and
additional interview questions.

By investigating the process of incorporating/integrating local knowledge claims
into conservation planning and GIS mapping, this project will directly address
the social and ecological complexities involved in building new 'participatory'
conservation geographies in human landscapes. By utilizing participatory GIS,
the project will contribute to a better understanding of the capabilities of GIS
as a technique for the translation and negotiation between different knowledge
claims. The urgency with which CBC and participatory GIS mapping projects are
being pursued throughout the developing world makes this research question a
timely one for policy makers and academics alike. The project informs the
theoretical frameworks of political ecology, science studies, GIS and critical
cartographic theory, and conservation biology. Studies of local knowledge are
often separated from critical reviews of science, and critical science studies
is often theoretically removed from scientific productions. By combining the
insights of science studies with a politically sensitive investigation of local
knowledge and an ecological analysis of local land use, this study will
transcend such disciplinary boundaries and open new doors for investigation into
human-environment relations. As such, this project will contribute to a better
understanding of the various ways in which we mediate the middle ground between
conservation and development, people and nature, Western Scientific and local
knowledge claims. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.