* 0201015
* Collaborative Research:  Evaluation of 2D vs 3D Multielectrode Resistivity for the Characterization of Shallow Karst
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Mary Roth, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2005
* USD 76,749.00



CMS-0201015 PI: Mary Roth Institution: Lafayette College Title: "Collaborative
Research: Evaluation of 2D vs 3D Multielectrode Resistivity for the
Characterization of Shallow Karst"

Sinkholes in areas with soluble bedrock (e.g., limestone and dolomite) are a
cause of cost overruns during construction and of structural failures. These
areas can be found in 15% of the United States and estimated costs of failures
caused by sinkholes in eastern central Pennsylvania since 1975 exceed 30 million
dollars. The frequency of these problems can be reduced by improving methods for
locating subsurface voids that cause sinkholes. Two-dimensional earth-
resistivity testing has been demonstrated to be useful, but because 2D geometry
is assumed, this method has limited ability to determine void size and
orientation. Features adjacent to the 2D resistivity line and directly below the
line affect the results. Three-dimensional resistivity tests are time-consuming
and do not provide sufficient detail for geotechnical investigations unless
thousands of electrodes are used. In this project, interpretation of resistivity
data is being improved by comparing two field methods. The first method
incorporates multiple 2D resistivity lines into three-dimensional models. The
second method develops large 3D data sets from multiple smaller, overlapping 3D
surveys. Both approaches should be able to determine void geometry by developing
a 3D resistivity model from data collected with a practical number of
electrodes. To test the methods, the geometry of a natural subsurface cave is
being mapped and resistivity results over the cave are compared to actual cave
geometry. The project will result in an improved investigation strategy for
sites located in sinkhole areas. Two additional features of this project should
be noted. First, the project is being conducted at a site that has been used by
other researchers. Further characterization of the conditions at the site will
encourage additional collaboration to test new investigation methods. Second,
the project involves collaboration of an undergraduate institution with a
graduate institution. Such collaboration will encourage students to obtain post-
graduate education.