* 0201266
* Microlensing Theory: Applications to Stellar and Galactic Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Andrew Gould, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2006
* USD 188,951.00

AST 0201266 Gould

Microlensing observational capabilities are continuing to expand rapidly in
several directions: for the first time, microlensing is being used to look for
planets and probe the atmospheres of stars. Microlensing surveys toward M31 are
returning their first substantial lists of candidate events. Within the next
decade, microlensing should give us a detailed picture of the galactic bulge
mass function down to 0.01 solar masses. These developments are presenting both
new theoretical challenges and new observational opportunities. At the same
time, they lay the basis for a strong interplay between microlensing and
Galactic-structure studies.

Dr. Andrew Gould, at Ohio State University, will build on these developments
with two specific projects. 1. Characterization and Resolution of Binary and
Planetary Degeneracies. Microlensing by binary and planetary systems often gives
rise to dramatic caustic-induced jumps in the light curve, that both signal the
presence of the binary or planet, and can be exploited to learn about the
atmosphere of the source star being lensed. However, to fully extract this
information, an unambiguous reconstruction of the geometry of the lensing system
is required. Dr. Gould has demonstrated that even with the spectacular
improvements in microlensing photometry, binary light curves can be subject to
multiple interpretations. He has already solved the problem of classifying (and
so understanding how to break) these degeneracies for the larger subclass of
binary-lensing events. He will now do an analogous study of the smaller, but
more difficult (and often more valuable) subclass. Similarly, he has already
solved the problem of classifying the larger subclass of planetary degeneracies,
and will now tackle the smaller, more difficult subclass. 2. Pixel Lensing of
M31. Dr. Gould will continue his ongoing program of microlensing observations of
M31, and will continue to give the data so acquired to competing groups. Good
temporal coverage remains the weakest link in this subfield, so Dr. Gould's
access to the MDM 1.3m and 2.4m telescopes can be of critical importance. Of
almost equal importance to the scientific results to be obtained, is the
training of the graduate students who will do a substantial part of the work.
Dr. Gould has developed a very intensive and interactive mode of training
students with extremely successful results, and that will continue with this
award. ***