* 0201566
* Problems in Quantum and Classical Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Thomas Kennedy, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 132,199.00

---------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tom Kennedy, University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;DMS
0201566&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of
the project concerns self-avoiding walks in two &lt;br/&gt;dimensions and their
relation to Schramm's stochastic Loewner evolution &lt;br/&gt;process. Schramm's
process is believed to describe the scaling limit of&lt;br/&gt;a variety of two-
dimensional models, including the self-avoiding walk.&lt;br/&gt;The pivot
algorithm provides a fast method for simulating &lt;br/&gt;self-avoiding walks.
Recently, the principal investigator has &lt;br/&gt;found a new implementation
of this algorithm that is as much &lt;br/&gt;as eighty times faster in two
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;This will be used to test both the conjectured conformal
invariance of &lt;br/&gt;the self-avoiding walk and its equivalence with
stochastic Loewner &lt;br/&gt;evolution. A version of the weakly self-avoiding
walk in which the &lt;br/&gt;penalty for self-intersections decays with the
length of the loop &lt;br/&gt;produced by the self-intersection will be
investigated by simulations and &lt;br/&gt;perturbative means. The second part
of the project concerns &lt;br/&gt;excited states in quantum spin systems.
Recent work by the principal &lt;br/&gt;investigator has developed a method for
studying the dispersion&lt;br/&gt;relation of one quasi-particle states and
interface states in one dimension. &lt;br/&gt;The method is based on assuming a
certain ansatz for the wave function &lt;br/&gt;of the states and then proving
there is indeed an eigenstate of this&lt;br/&gt;form by a contraction mapping
argument.&lt;br/&gt;This method will be used to study interface states in two
dimensions and &lt;br/&gt;the excited states above these interface states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-avoiding walks are random walks which are not allowed
to visit&lt;br/&gt;the same place more than once. They provide a model for
linear polymers &lt;br/&gt;in a dilute solution. The interest in this model is,
however, much broader &lt;br/&gt;since it is one of the simplest models that
exhibits critical phenomena and &lt;br/&gt;in two dimensions conformal
invariance. Recently there has been &lt;br/&gt;an explosion of conjectures
relating the self-avoiding walk and other &lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional models to a
new two dimensional stochastic&lt;br/&gt;process, called stochastic Loewner
evolution, introduced by Schramm.&lt;br/&gt;Part of the project will study many
of these conjectures &lt;br/&gt;for the self-avoiding walk by Monte Carlo
simulations and &lt;br/&gt;by perturbative methods. The simulations will be done
with &lt;br/&gt;a recent implementation of the pivot algorithm by the principal
investigator&lt;br/&gt;that is much faster than previous
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;This fast algorithm will also be used to study
versions of &lt;br/&gt;the self-avoiding walk that are important in physical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Another part of the project is devoted to studying the low
energy excitations&lt;br/&gt;in a variety of quantum spin systems. These are
models of the behavior&lt;br/&gt;of the electron spins in crystals. At low
temperatures the electron&lt;br/&gt;spins tend to align. However, several
domains may form within which &lt;br/&gt;the spins are aligned, but between
which the spins point in &lt;br/&gt;opposite directions. &lt;br/&gt;The
interfaces between these domains will be studied by an &lt;br/&gt;approach which
has proved very successful for studying &lt;br/&gt;one quasi-particle states. In
particular, the nature of the excitations &lt;br/&gt;just above the interface
states will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;