* 0201815
* Strengthening of Infill Masonry Walls with Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2004
* Antonio Nanni, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/2004
* USD 131,004.00

The worldwide engineering community has identified failures of unreinforced
masonry (URM) walls as one of the major causes of material damage and loss of
human life during seismic events. The development of effective and affordable
retrofitting techniques for masonry members is an urgent need. Fiber Reinforced
Polymer (FRP) composites may provide attractive solutions for the strengthening
of URM walls subjected to in-plane and out-of-plane loads resulting from high
winds or earthquakes. Reinforced concrete (RC) or steel frames with infill URM
walls are a common construction practice. Interaction of infill walls with the
structural frame has often been neglected to simplify the design. Ignoring the
contribution of the infill wall does not necessarily indicate a conservative
design. Infill walls can greatly stiffen a flexible frame and significantly
affect the horizontal load distribution to different structural members of the
building. Strengthening of existing walls must account for this behavior.

The proposed project will focus on the study of the shear behavior of infill
masonry walls strengthened with FRP bars and laminates. The former is a novel
technique denominated FRP structural repointing. FRP structural repointing
consists of inserting FRP bars into the masonry bed joints. The FRP bars can be
embedded either in an epoxy-based paste or a cementitious paste. Preliminary
tests on masonry specimens strengthened by this technique have shown promising
results. In addition to increasing in-plane wall capacity, structural repointing
is less intrusive than FRP laminates because the masonry aesthetics are
preserved. Two series of walls will be tested. The first series, Series A, will
assess the shear behavior of URM walls strengthened with FRP composites to
determine the most efficient strengthening schemes in terms of structural
performance. The walls belonging to Series A will be constructed with concrete
masonry units (CMU). The specimens will be tested under in-plane cyclic loading.
The test setup configuration will ensure the occurrence of shear failure. The
most efficient strengthening schemes tested in Series A will be selected for the
strengthening of the infill walls in Series B. This series will investigate the
shear behavior of infill walls and their interaction with the surrounding
structural RC frame. The infill walls will be surrounded by a RC frame and
tested under in-plane cyclic loading. After failure due to in-plane loading, the
specimen will be moved to a shake table where it will be subjected to out-of-
plane acceleration to observe the out-of-plane stability of the wall. Analytical
and numerical models will be developed to verify and understand the experimental
findings using both complex and simple idealizations. The analytical results
will be used to implement design protocols for the shear strengthening of URM
infill walls to be used by practitioners.

This project will represent a milestone in the development of affordable and
effective retrofitting techniques for existing infill walls. Within the
constraints of funding and time, it will integrate the three phases of
experimentation, analysis, and design to provide scientists and professionals
with a clear snapshot of the advantages and characteristics of a highly
promising new technology.