* 0201582
* U.S. Switzerland Cooperative Research: Monolithic High-speed Photoreceivers, Wavelength and Polarization Sensors on Si
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/2006
* USD 32,760.00

0201582&lt;br/&gt;Unlu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award involves
researchers and graduate students at two national centers of photonics research:
Boston University's Photonics Center and the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology's (Lausanne) new Microelectronics System Laboratory and National
Competence Center for Research in Photonics. The project is led by M. Selim Unlu
in the US and Yusuf Leblebici and Marc Ilegems in Switzerland. The research is
aimed at the fabrication on the same chip of integrated opto-electronic
transreceivers, and the development of input and output signals transmitted over
a bundle of optical fibers or on a single fiber. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international cooperative program brings together researchers with complementary
expertise. Professor Unlu and his students work on design, fabrication and
characterization of optoelectronic devices with specific expertise in resonant-
cavity enhanced (RCE) photodector structures. These structures will be
fabricated using double -SOI silicon process. Silicon is recognized as the
material of choice for large-scale integration in electronics and computing. US
expertise is complemented by Swiss experience in clock/data recovery (CDR)
circuitry development. The investigators propose to integrate RCE and CDR on the
same chip. The expected product is a commercially viable single chip for
applications in high-speed, optical telecommunications and data transmissions
using fiber channels. &lt;br/&gt;