* 0201437
* SGER: Relocation of a Multicollector VG-354 from Lawrence Livermore National Lab to Florida International University
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2003
* Andrew Macfarlane, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2003
* USD 8,718.00

The funds provided in this award will be used to relocate a thermal ionization
mass spectrometer (TIMS) from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to the
Department of Earth Sciences at Florida International University. The TIMS is a
very versatile and powerful instrument used to measure ratios of isotopes in
natural and man-made materials, and it has applications in scores of scientific
disciplines. Since its purchase by LLNL, this mass spectrometer has seen
relatively light use, and it will be replaced there by a newer instrument. At
FIU, the TIMS will be installed in an academic research lab where it will see
heavy use from faculty and students alike involved in geological, archaological,
environmental and forensic research. The faculty at FIU who will supervise the
use of this instrument, including the PI, have been using TIMS machines for many
years, but have had to travel to labs in far distant locations to use them.
Projected uses of this instrument at FIU include:

The isotopic and chemical fingerprinting of the sources of elements in ores,
glasses, ceramics, metal alloys and other materials for archaeological and
forensic research. Isotope ratios of several elements vary greatly in different
natural sources, so that analysis of natural and man-made materials can indicate
the sources from which it was made. Analyses of natural ores can reveal the
original geological sources or the contained metals, and illuminate the
processes that formed the ores. Analyses of archaeological artifacts such as
metal alloys and ceramics can reveal where the geological raw materials were
obtained that were used in their manufacture, and therefor how the technologies
developed and spread. Forensic analyses of glass, metals and paint can trace the
origins of materials found at crime scenes.

The precise dating of rocks provides a framework for geological events such as
volcanic eruptions, mountain building events and the formation of ore deposits.
Such analyses are essential for understanding how many types of rocks form, when
and how mountain building events have taken place, and how major deposits of
metals like copper, silver and gold form and where they are most effectively
found. They are also essential for providing the baseline information on the
geological variability of natural materials that forms the context of
archaeological and forensic studies.

This instrument can also be used to determine the sources of lead contamination
in soils and blood in urban areas of Miami-Dade County. Recent studies have
shown that blood lead poisoning of children is a serious problem in some older
areas of urban Miami-Dade County. Potential sources of this lead contamination
include soil contamination from leaded gasoline, lead-based paint, and
atmospheric fallout from incinerators and other remote sources. Measurement of
lead isotope ratios in soils, paint, Everglades peat samples, and blood samples
will allow us to determine the isotopic fingerprint of each source, and which
source is the dominant contributor to blood lead contamination.