* 0201351
* Lasers in Medicine and Biology Gordon Conference - July 14-19, 2002 at Kimball Union Academy in Meriden, NH
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2002
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 11/30/2002
* USD 5,000.00

0201351&lt;br/&gt;Richards-Kortum&lt;br/&gt;Funding is sought to enable graduate
students, post-doctoral fellows and young investigators to participate in the
Lasers in Medicine and Biology Gordon Conference Kimball Union Academy, Meriden,
NH July 14-19, 2002. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference is to include
investigators from academia, government agencies, national laboratories, and
industry in examining emerging applications of lasers and optical sciences in
medicine and surgery. Particular emphasis is given to technological advances
close to clinical application and/or commercial development. Sessions include:
Optical Coherence Tomography; Nanotechnologies for Optical Sensing, Imaging, and
Manipulation; Biological Applications of Micro-optical Devices; Combined Imaging
Methodologies; Fluorescence Methods for Biomedical Diagnostics; Advances in
Optical Microscopy; Intra-vital Imaging and Microscopy; Wavefront Sensing and
Adaptive Optics in Vision Correction; and Photodynamic Therapy. Seven of the
nine program sessions include at least one talk with substantial applications in
the area of early diagnosis. An important feature is to bring students and post-
doctoral fellows in biomedical engineering together with academic engineers and
scientists, clinicians, and members of industry to discuss and define the most
important questions and problems to be solved in this field. Two special
symposia will facilitate the discussion process. The first symposium, "Career
Paths in Biomedical Engineering", features short presentations from clinicians
and engineers in academia, industry, and government to provide career advice to
graduate students and post- doctoral fellows. The second symposium highlights
new technologic developments on the cusp of clinical viability. A special issue
of the Journal of Biomedical Optics is to be devoted to "Optical Detection:
Clinical and Industrial Advances". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is of high
intellectual merit with the program being organized so as to focus on emerging
medical technologies holding a high likelihood of making broad and important
impacts on medicine and surgery.