* 0201231
* Constitutive Modeling of Inherent Sand Fabric Anisotropy and Numerical Applications within Critical State Soil Mechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Yannis Dafalias, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2007
* USD 197,042.00

PI: Yannis Defalias Institution: University of California at Davis Title:
"Constitutive Modeling of Inherent Sand Fabric Anisotropy and Numerical
Applications Within Critical State Soil Mechanics" It is well known that natural
soil deposits are inherently anisotropic due to their deposition and its effect
on the ensuing fabric. In particular, for sandy soils the fabric induced
inherent anisotropy may have dramatic effects on the mechanical response of the
soil to subsequent loading in the range of plastic deformations. Otherwise
identical sand samples (same sand, same void ratio, etc.) may behave in totally
different ways if prepared by different methods; or, if they are identically
loaded in different directions, as if they were samples of very different
densities. The constitutive modeling of such inherent sand fabric anisotropy and
its effect in the numerical analysis of geo-structures is the main objective of
this research award.

In order to address the main objective, a sand constitutive modeling platform
will be required. This platform is based on an existing sand constitutive model
(Manzari and Dafalias, 1997; Li and Dafalias, 2000) within the framework of
Critical State Soil Mechanics (CSSM), which despite its simplicity has been
proved capable of modeling the sand response under a large variation of
densities, confining pressures and monotonic or cyclic loading conditions with
the same set of model constants, but, with one exception. It cannot account for
the effect of inherent initial anisotropy due to fabric formation. And such
effect is often truly drastic, as shown experimentally.

The incorporation of anisotropy in the theory of plasticity has a well
understood theoretical framework in terms of the so-called joint isotropic
invariants, but if used in its utmost generality, it will produce extremely
complicated constitutive models which are not feasible tools for practical
applications and analysis. In order to avoid such complications, the inherent
anisotropy effect will be introduced in the chosen constitutive platform by a
very simple method. The main theoretical tool, motivated by micromechanical
observations on particles and voids orientation distribution, will be the
introduction of a scalar-valued anisotropy parameter A, which will effect some,
but not all, of the basic features of the platform constitutive model in order
to achieve the simulation of anisotropic behavior. A number of different avenues
will be investigated, and preliminary results show that this is a very promising
approach, despite its simplicity. In the process the fundamental premise of CSSM
on the uniqueness of the Critical State Line in the void ratio-confining
pressure space is questioned, and instead, its dependence on fabric via the
anisotropic parameter A is proposed. Once the inherent anisotropy has been
successfully modeled, the second important step will be to evaluate its effect
at the level of the response of a geotechnical structure subjected to different
loadings and analyzed by numerical implementation of the proposed constitutive
model. It is expected that the effect inherent anisotropy has on the dilative
and contractive characteristics of sand, will have a dramatic effect on the
overall geo-structural response under monotonic and cyclic loading.

Besides the plausible impact of the research findings on the specific area of
soil constitutive modeling and analysis, some broader impact characteristics
will emerge. It is of great importance to increase our ability to use
simulations of natural phenomena in the modern era of computations, in order to
address societal needs for optimum and safe design of infrastructures. Such
phenomena are not only geo-mechanical, but the latter are integrated in a larger
network of other systems. Thus, the poor performance of a simulative component
such as a geo-mechanical simulation, is detrimental to the overall performance
of the larger system of phenomena simulations (e.g. in seismic design). The
provision of a reliable soil modeling approach that accounts for the important
issue of fabric effect, is in fact a contribution to better overall performance
of this broader system of simulations of natural phenomena. Another broader
impact the successful completion of this award will have, is educational at
large scale. Despite the advanced character of the research, the central idea of
the dependence of the critical state line on a scalar-valued measure of fabric
anisotropy has an inherent simplicity that can easily be conveyed to
undergraduate students of geotechnical engineering and constitute a standard
addition to textbooks of soil mechanics everywhere. Finally, its incorporation
in many different modeling techniques the geotechnical profession uses (and not
only the modeling platform used in this research) will be a simple matter once
the main findings are published and distributed.