* 0201808
* A System of Data Assimilation Based on Parallel Second Order Adjoint and Reduced Rank Kalman-Filter Methods
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2008
* Ionel Navon, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2008
* USD 433,321.00

Four-dimensional variational analysis (4-D Var) is the most advanced data
assimilation system currently employed in operational numerical weather
prediction centers. While the scheme has many strengths and advantages, one
shortcoming is that the error covariance matrix is fixed. The Kalman filter (KF)
approach alleviates this shortcoming by explicitly propagating the error
covariance matrix for model variables so that it is flow dependent. However, the
computer memory requirement for the KF approach is very large, rendering it
unfeasible in operational applications. To address this problem, this project
will study the feasibility of developing a reduced rank Kalman filter to be
coupled with the 4-D Var system. Namely, the 4-D Var scheme will be used to
perform the analysis but the background cost function will use a flow-dependent
error covariance matrix for the subspace defined by the leading Hessian singular
vectors. The research will be built on an advanced numerical weather prediction
model for which the second order adjoint system will be developed. A comparison
of the reduced rank Kalman filter with the ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) will be
made using the ECMWF analysis data and satellite observations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;4-D Var remains the leading-edge technology for data assimilation of
NWP systems. This research has the potential to improve 4-D Var applications in
the operational environment.