* 0201770
* Ferroelasticity and Hysteresis in Mixed Conducting Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Nigel Browning, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 551,594.00

In this proposal we aim to build on our recent discovery of ferroelasticity and
hysteresis in mixed ionic-electronic conducting (MIEC) lanthanum cobaltite
(LaCoO3) perovskites and generate a fundamental understanding of the origin of
this behavior. The effect of the external loading on the elastic hysteresis and
ferroelastic behavior of perovskites will be characterized by the compression
tests. The main hurdle is to demonstrate unambiguously that pressure induced
domain reorientation, followed by phase transformation, occurs in a compression
loading. Unique in situ techniques in electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction
will be employed to analyze the lattice distortions and defect structures,
domain and domain wall microstructures, and vacancy ordering/clustering that
occurs during the paraelastic to ferroelastic phase transition in lanthanum
cobaltite perovskites as a function of pressure, temperature and composition.
Therefore, the proposed research will allow us to investigate different first or
second order phase transitions, order-disorder transitions, nonmetal-metal
transitions, and martensitic transitions, which could lead to the possible
toughening of perovskites and an increase in the stability and reliability of
these materials both at room and high temperatures. A more complete
understanding of the effect of pressure, temperature, and composition on the
phase and microstructural stability of perovskites will subsequently be
achieved. As a basic understanding of the ferroelastic properties of these
materials is not currently available, such research is essential to understand
the origin of elastic instabilities and the mechanical properties of MIEC
materials used for high-temperature syngas reactors, oxygen sensors, catalysts,
and solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that
the results of the proposed research will involve new fundamental insights into
ferroelasticity and hysteresis in mixed ionic electronic conducting perovskite
materials. The proposed project will also be an ideal basis for Materials
Engineering students to actively participate in project-based learning. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will undertake research and present their
results at technical meetings. It is expected that both undergraduate and
graduate students' research will result in high-profile publications and
prestigious conference presentations. Special efforts will be made to attract
underrepresented students to careers in materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;