* 0201037
* Probability and Statistics Problems Concerning DNA Sequence and Genome Evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Richard Durrett, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,962,122.00

Research supported by this grant will focus on mathematical and statistical
analyses of genome rearrangements and the interaction of natural selection and
spatial population structure in shaping genome diversity. Statistical methods
will be developed to study the evolution of DNA sequences due to large scale
processes: inversions within chromosomes, reciprocal translocations between
chromosomes, transpositions that move genes, chromosome fissions and fusions,
and duplication of whole genomes. Major goals are to obtain statistical
estimates of the number of events with associated measurements of uncertainty,
test hypotheses concerning for example, constancy of mutation rates among
lineages, and to compare the likelihood of various genome duplication scenarios
in Arabidopsis thaliana, maize, and other organisms. Mathematical results and
statistical techniques will also be developed to distinguish the causes of
observed levels and patterns of DNA sequence variation across genomes,
concentrating on the effects of the fixation of advantageous mutations
("selective sweeps") and of spatial population structure. Statistical work will
include the development of composite likelihood methods for data from large
genomic regions for which full likelihood or Bayesian methods are not tractable.

Research supported by this grant will focus on quantitative studies of variation
in genomes within and between organisms. Two scales are considered. The first is
the evolution of genomes due to large-scale processes which rearrange gene order
on chromosomes or exchange genetic material between them. An understanding of
the rates and sizes of these changes will be important for improving comparative
maps between species. These maps which, for example, identify the mouse
homologues of human genes or give the relative order of genes in cattle and
sheep are important in medicine and agriculture. A second scale is the level of
DNA variation observed within species. Mathematical and statistical studies will
focus on distinguishing the effects of adaptation (natural selection) and
spatial (geographical) population structure on shaping patterns observed in DNA
sequence data from humans and other organisms. These results will provide
insights into how organisms respond genetically to novel environments and
challenges (including pathogens and environmental stress), and can help identify
those genes important in that adaptation. These approaches will be important for
understanding the enormous genome diversity detected in humans and most other
organisms. An important component of the proposed activities is the training of
researchers at the interface between biology and mathematics. This grant is made
under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.