* 0201371
* Honeycomb and Re-entrant Periodic Architectures for Vibration Hazard Mitigation and Improved Performance of Structural Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Panagiotis Tsopelas, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 12/31/2006
* USD 309,795.00

This award will focus on the analysis of the dynamic behavior and wave
propagation characteristics of cellular solids with deterministic periodic
architecture. The resulting periodic assembles generate frequency bands and
directions where elastic waved do not propagate (stop bands) and the
corresponding vibrations and sound radiation are substantially reduced. The
scalable geometry of deterministic periodic architectures allows for their
application as innovative vibration control/hazard mitigation systems both to
small-scale and large-scale structural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particular
emphasis will be placed in the analysis of honeycombs with re-entrant
architectures. Their unique mechanical properties will be fully investigated
emphasizing their potential for vibration hazard mitigation as well as impact
energy absorption. Efficient use of the intervening space will be also addressed
for improving performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a
multidisciplinary and collaborative research effort, where analytical
computational and experimental work will be interlaced. The PIs will collaborate
throughout the duration of the project in teaching common courses and in
developing a new advanced course in Passive and Active Structural Control. This
team effort will foster both civil and mechanical engineering students'
multidisciplinary background. The concept and the results of this award will be
progressively introduced in several courses of instruction in order to expose
the students to innovative research ideas and their applications. The student
will be given hands-on experience that will contribute to the growth of their
technical and professional skills.&lt;br/&gt;