* 0201430
* RUI: Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems &amp; Applications:  An Operator Theoretic Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Lawrence Fialkow, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 87,515.00

PI: Lawrence A. Fialkow, SUNY New
Paltz&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0201430&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research concerns an approach to
the multidimensional truncated power &lt;br/&gt;moment problem based on an
extension theory for the associated moment matrix. &lt;br/&gt;When this matrix
admits an infinite, positive, finite rank moment matrix &lt;br/&gt;extension,
this approach yields an explicit formula for a finitely atomic
&lt;br/&gt;representing measure supported on the joint spectrum of a normal
tuple of &lt;br/&gt;operators corresponding to the extension. The aim of this
research is to &lt;br/&gt;determine concrete conditions on the moment data which
permit the desired &lt;br/&gt;extension. Much of this research concerns,
specifically, the multivariable &lt;br/&gt;truncated K-moment problem, where the
support of a representing measure is &lt;br/&gt;required to be contained in a
prescribed closed set K. For K an algebraic &lt;br/&gt;variety, this research
concerns a new conjecture for solving the moment problem &lt;br/&gt;in terms of
concrete algebraic and geometric invariants closely related to the
&lt;br/&gt;moment data. For K semi-algebraic, this research seeks to apply the
abstract &lt;br/&gt;solution of the truncated K-moment problem due to Curto-
Fialkow to specific &lt;br/&gt;semi-algebraic sets such as the closed unit disk.
A direct application of this &lt;br/&gt;study concerns the multidimensional
cubature problem in Numerical Analysis. By &lt;br/&gt;applying the moment matrix
extension technique in the context of cubature, this &lt;br/&gt;research seeks
to construct minimal cubature rules for sets such as the disk,
&lt;br/&gt;square, triangle, or annulus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One aspect of this
research, the Quadrature Problem, concerns the efficient &lt;br/&gt;measurement
of the size of an irregular area, or the measurement of the weight &lt;br/&gt;of
a volume whose density is unevenly distributed. We seek to identify a small
&lt;br/&gt;number of test points (or nodes) within the body in such a way that
by measuring &lt;br/&gt;the density just at these few points, we may closely
approximate the overall &lt;br/&gt;size or weight of the body. In the case of a
linear body, such as a thin rod, &lt;br/&gt;the quadrature problem was solved
with the fewest number of test points by the &lt;br/&gt;mathematician Carl
Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855), using a technique now known as &lt;br/&gt;Gaussian
Quadrature. At the present time, surprisingly few minimal-node
&lt;br/&gt;quadrature rules are known for shapes in the plane or in
3-dimensional space, &lt;br/&gt;even for basic sets such as a disk or sphere. In
order to study the Quadrature &lt;br/&gt;Problem, we actually study a more
general problem, the Multidimensional &lt;br/&gt;Truncated Moment Problem. Many
real-world systems can be described by a sequence &lt;br/&gt;of physical
attributes called moments, such as mass, weight, momentum, etc.,
&lt;br/&gt;which relate to the physical space underlying the system. The
truncated moment &lt;br/&gt;problem asks whether a system is uniquely determined
by its sequence of moments, &lt;br/&gt;and also whether the moments of a system
can be computed by studying the system &lt;br/&gt;at just a finite number of
nodes in the underlying space. In this research, we &lt;br/&gt;develop
algorithms for recognizing when such a sequence of nodes exists, and for
&lt;br/&gt;efficiently computing them. In this way, we may describe a system in
terms of &lt;br/&gt;just a finite number of points in the underlying space.
&lt;br/&gt;