* 0201001
* Invariant Characteristics of Networks and Patterns and Their Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Gemunu Gunaratne, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 195,000.00

0201001&lt;br/&gt;Gunaratne&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteoporosis is a major socio-
economic problem in western societies. Since excessive use of therapeutic agents
can have adverse consequences, non-invasive diagnostic tools to determine the
need for intervention are essential for bones from older adults is the inner
porous region whose structure is reminiscent of disordered cubic networks. The
strength of a bone depends on several facets of this network, including its
connectivity, the anisotropy, and the level of bone turnover. It is extremely
difficult to account for these&lt;br/&gt;factors and complex interactions
between them in clinical studies or in experiments on ex-vivo bone samples. We
have introduced a model of porous bone, and propose to use it to develop a more
comprehensive understanding of mechanical causes underlying bone decay. The
insights gained from this study can be used to identify novel diagnostic tools
to determine the need for therapeutic intervention. In particular, such
properties cannot depend on most details of the porous bone; i.e., they need to
be invariant characteristics. The model system was used to derive a new
expression that relates the strength of a bone to its effective density. It will
be tested using previously published data on human bone. Analysis of the model
also provided a diagnostic (based on linear response) of the strength of
networks. Tests will be conducted to determine how accurately it can predict the
strength of bone samples. We also propose to study effects of factors like
anisotropy on bone strength, and to develop methods to estimate these factors
in-vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second problem proposed is an application of a
characteristic that quantifies the level of disorder in a pattern. The form of
this measure was deduced by requiring its invariance under all rigid (i.e.,
Euclidean) motions of the pattern. We propose to use it to estimate the
roughness of a surface on a nano-meter scale by characterizing the disorder in a
speckle pattern formed by reflecting a laser beam from the surface. Such a
characterization is expected find application in (for example) the auto
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;