* 0201760
* 2nd International Summer School on Biocomplexity, July 14-21, 2002, in Hanover, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Metin Akay, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 06/30/2004
* USD 50,900.00

The biological sciences have become more quantitative and information-driven
since the emergence of computational and mathematical tools have facilitated
collection and analysis of vast amounts of biological data. Complexity analysis
of biological systems provides knowledge for the organization, management and
mining of biological data by using advanced computational tools. The biological
data are inherently complex and non-uniform and collected at multiple temporal
and spatial scales. The investigations of complex biological systems and
processes require an extensive collaboration between biologists, mathematicians,
computer scientists and engineers to improve our understanding of biological
processes from genes to systems. The objectives of this summer school are to
expose undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral biological science and
bioengineering students to relatively new mathematical and computational
approaches and challenges in integrative biology; knowledge discovery from
biological data mining; new directions in computational biology, bioinformatics
and molecular engineering research; and to facilitate rapid diffusion of these
mathematical and computational tools in the biological sciences. These methods
will be helpful, also, to both students and post-doctoral fellows in computer
science and mathematics who are interested in pursuing research in biology and
bioengineering, since the summer school provides exceptional insights into
fundamental challenges in biology. The summer school uses lectures, oriented
toward biological science students, by expert faculty, and will focus on
biological data mining and knowledge discovery that can be used to understand
highly interconnected and complex biological systems. In addition to these
lectures, the summer school will employ 3 two-hour panel discussions, with
active participation of undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral fellows,
focused on future developments in computational biology, bioinformatics and
molecular engineering and science. In addition, students will present the
results of their projects in a culminating poster session, which will facilitate
discussion of both the biology and computational approaches. The summer school
will stimulate further interdisciplinary research and collaborations among
engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical researchers, and
will help in identifying new, challenging directions in complex biological
science and bioengineering research.