* 0201333
* Sensitivity and Elasticity in Population Models, in Markov Chains, and in Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Michael Neumann, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2005
* USD 89,982.00

Problems are posed in three areas of application of linear algebra
in&lt;br/&gt;which the theories and methods of nonnegative matrices and of
generalized&lt;br/&gt;inverses of matrices play very significant roles. The
areas are (i)&lt;br/&gt;population models in mathematical biology, (ii) the
algebraic measurement of the&lt;br/&gt;connectivity of graphs, and (iii) finite
homogeneous Markov chains in probability and statistics. In all these areas
nonnegative matrices and/or their associated&lt;br/&gt;M--matrices are used to
represent the basic model according to weights or probabilities connecting
between states or vertices. The sensitivities and elasticities of the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors, as well as other properties, of such matrices are
used to analyze and understand the behavior of the models and their response to
changes in the input data. Generalized inverses are needed because they enter
into expressions for the derivatives, when they exist, of the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of matrices as functions of the entries and thus generalized
inverses help in measuring the effects of various types of perturbation on the
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physical phenomena can be modeled by
mathematics, and mathematics is a primary tool for understanding and predicting
the behavior of the phenomena. Take the simple-looking problem of a population,
be it of humans or of animals or of germs, that is divided according to age. At
each age the females may have a different birth rate and at each age members of
the population may have a different probability of survival to the next age
group. If one knows the initial distribution of the population into the
different age groups, then can one predict the short and long term evolution
trends of the population?! Could it be that the population can reach in time a
situation that is called an equilibrium? This is a situation in which the sizes
of each age group may continue to change, but the relative size of each age
group to the other age groups does not change. There are many problems of this
sort which the fields of mathematics called Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory can
help model and solve. In this project matrix methods are applied to investigate
the behavior of three models, one from population growth, one from a networking
problem, and one from physical systems that is governed by probability rather
than by surety.