* 0201454
* Macroscopic Behavior and Field Fluctuations in Random Heterogeneous Materials: Theory and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Pedro Ponte Castaneda, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/2006
* USD 190,631.00

Macroscopic Behavior and Field Fluctuations in Heterogeneous Materials:

Theory and Applications

This project is concerned with heterogeneous material systems with nonlinear
constitutive behavior and complex, random microstructures that evolve in time.
Because of their scientific and technological importance, the focus will be on
viscoplastic systems including porous and other composite materials, as well as
polycrystals. There are three principal themes that will be investigated in the
context of multi-scale modeling of these material systems: (i) macroscopic, or
effective behavior, (ii) field fluctuations, and (iii) microstructure evolution.
Close interactions with experimentalists and numerical analysts will ensure the
practical relevance of the work, as well as the development of numerical tools
for eventual industrial use.

The effective behavior serves to characterize the average response of
heterogeneous materials at a sufficiently large length scales, and can be
estimated by means of suitable homogenization techniques. Although
homogenization estimates are already available for composites and polycrystals,
it is proposed here to make use of the "second-order'" method that has been
developed recently by the PI. This method has been found to deliver accurate
estimates for some model, two-dimensional problems and it is proposed to apply
it to model the effective behavior of three-dimensional viscoplastic composites
and polycrystals using experimentally measured microstructural information. This
"second-order'" method has the further advantage that it automatically delivers
estimates for the "second moments" of the field fluctuations. The field
fluctuations can be used to measure the strain and stress heterogeneities in the
constituent phases of a composite, or grains in a polycrystal. Such information
can be useful to model the development of twinning and other instabilities in
polycrystals, as well as incipient failure in composites. The field fluctuations
can also be used to generate more accurate (and smoother) predictions for
texture evolution. Analogous investigations can also be carried out in the
context of porous materials, where the microstructure (pore size, shape,
orientation and distribution) is also known to evolve during a typical
deformation process, such as extrusion or hot forging.

Parts of this work will be carried out in close collaboration with three
C.N.R.S. laboratories in France. Complementary numerical and experimental
investigations will be carried out in these laboratories, which will be
supported by the CNRS in France. A separate proposal will be submitted to the
Division of International Programs for additional travel expenses under the
NSF/CNRS cooperative scheme.

