* 0201305
* A Wireless Embedded Sensor System to Monitor and Assess Corrosion in the Tendons of Prestressed Concrete Girders
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2002,02/28/2006
* Henrique Reis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/2006
* USD 386,402.00

The nation's civil transportation infrastructure of structural concrete bridges
is aging and deteriorating - principally as a result of the corrosion of the
steel reinforcement tendons that give these structures their strength. Current
estimates place the total cost of inspection, rehabilitation, and replacement of
existing corroded structures in the US at $210 billion. Assessing the condition
of the steel reinforcement is still based primarily on qualitative visual
inspections and anticipated design lives, since the steel is typically buried
beneath 1 to 2 inches or more of concrete. A multi-disciplinary team of three
researchers, with expertise in the areas of non-destructive evaluation (NDE),
wireless communication, and structural modeling have joined with bridge
designers and managers from their state department of transportation to develop
a wireless embedded sensor system to examine corrosion of tendons in prestressed
concrete girders. The results of this project have the potential to deliver
advanced, accurate information about the internal condition of steel
reinforcement as well as the efficacy of new materials and rehabilitation
methods and could save the nation billions of dollars annually. The research
plan consists of three thrust areas and a demonstration project. In Thrust 1, a
corrosion detection and monitoring method will be developed that uses embedded
sensors. Thrust 2 will integrate the internal sensors with wireless systems for
the harsh, embedded environment of a concrete girder. Thrust 3 involves the
development of a software program for relating embedded sensor data to changes
in significant structural characteristics. Finally, in cooperation with the
Illinois Department of Transportation, the embedded sensor system will be
installed in a prestressed girder during fabrication so that in-field
measurements can be taken over an extended period of time to validate the
effectiveness of this new embedded sensor system. This research will illustrate
the importance of integrating technologies and expertise from several fields in
solving complex information flow problems, not only for the structural health-
monitoring and assessment community, but also for other areas where the link
between any kind of sensor data and decision-making is not well-defined. The
development methodology implemented in this project can also be applied to other
problems to produce sensor systems that provide cost-effective and useful
information to resource managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;