* 0201423
* Birational Geometry and Rational Connectedness
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Aise de Jong, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 61,069.00

This project concerns birational geometry of complex varieties &lt;br/&gt;and
the study of rationally connected varieties. The main &lt;br/&gt;objective is to
study spaces of rational curves on rationally &lt;br/&gt;connected varieties,
with the goal of constructing new birational &lt;br/&gt;invariants of these
varieties and determining the relationship &lt;br/&gt;between these varieties
and unirational varieties. The secondary &lt;br/&gt;objective is to develop
further some of the techniques and tools &lt;br/&gt;of algebraic geometry: to
develop techniques for determining when &lt;br/&gt;moduli stacks are rationally
connected, to construct and study &lt;br/&gt;new compactifications of the space
of smooth rational curves in &lt;br/&gt;projective space, and to refine the
Behrend-Manin stratification &lt;br/&gt;of the Kontsevich moduli stack so that
it detects mutliple covers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems of polynomial equations
in some collection of variables &lt;br/&gt;arise in every branch of mathematics,
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;Determining the solutions of these systems
of equations is of &lt;br/&gt;paramount importance. "Unirational varieties"
precisely correspond &lt;br/&gt;to those systems of equations where the set of
solutions is most &lt;br/&gt;easily described -- the set of solutions is the set
of all outputs &lt;br/&gt;of some sequence of polynomials with arbitrary inputs.
So it is &lt;br/&gt;very important to recognize which systems of equations
correspond &lt;br/&gt;to unirational varieties. From the point of view of
geometry, a &lt;br/&gt;closely related notion is "rational connectedness". This
notion &lt;br/&gt;is far simpler to recognize in practice. Potentially both
notions&lt;br/&gt;are equivalent. If one could prove that both notions
are&lt;br/&gt;equivalent, this would give a simpler way to recognize which
&lt;br/&gt;systems of equations correspond to unirational varieties. The
&lt;br/&gt;investigator intends to continue his research of this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;