* 0201445
* Experimental Investigation of Thrust Surfaces with Deterministic Micro Asperities
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Lyndon Stephens, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract - revision 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surfaces at the micro/nano scale are
comprised of many peaks and valleys (asperities) that together determine the
surface roughness. It has long been shown that if one could control the size,
shape and distribution of the asperities, then the lubrication properties of
such surfaces could be enhanced substantially. The objectives of this project
are to experimentally quantify the effects of micro asperity pattern/geometry on
hydrodynamic lubrication in conformal contacts, and to evaluate the
effectiveness of a modified LIGA MEMs fabrication process in manufacturing
controllable and repeatable micro-asperities of a specified geometry
(deterministic micro asperities). Thrust bearing samples will be fabricated with
various asperity patterns and geometries (e.g. - hexagons, cylinders, squares)
with heights in the range of 500 nm to 50 mm. The friction coefficient, film
thickness, load capacity and operating temperature of the thrust surfaces will
be measured and the data compared to existing theoretical models. The thrust
surfaces will also be analyzed using 3-d surface metrology and SEM techniques.
The project results can be used by future researchers for further model/theory
refinement and by industry engineers for the design of innovative bearing and
seal systems. The research and education infrastructure will also be enhanced by
making the results available to students and researchers via the world wide web.
A sample industrial application of the expected results indicates a long term
cost savings in excess of 160 M$ and an energy savings in excess of 1.2 Trillion
BTU/yr, showing a potential benefit to businesses and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;