* 0201600
* Torus Maps and Cocyclic Subshifts
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Jaroslaw Kwapisz, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 71,719.00

PI: Jarek Kwapisz, Montana State
University&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0201600&lt;br/&gt;Torus Maps and Cocyclic
Subshifts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes research in two areas:
&lt;br/&gt; rotation sets for maps of tori and symbolic dynamics of cocyclic
subshifts.&lt;br/&gt;The first is motivated by classical questions about the
flow on invariant tori in &lt;br/&gt; Hamiltonian systems or systems of coupled
relaxation oscillators and concentrates&lt;br/&gt; on maps of a two-torus that
are isotopic to the identity. The rotation set is a compact and convex subset of
the plane that roughly collects all the average winding vectors (frequencies)
exhibited by the orbits of the system. The PI's goal is to establish results on
a priori degeneracy&lt;br/&gt; of the rotation set to a single point and to
understand the extent to which &lt;br/&gt; the dynamics must then be equivalent
to that of the rigid rotation. The tools involved include the number theory of
the rotation set, hierarchies of dynamical tilings, geometric topology, quasi-
conformal estimates, and renormalization techniques. Cocyclic subshifts are a
new class of algebraically defined dynamical systems obtained as the supports of
locally constant matrix cocycles on the full shift over a finite alphabet. They
generalize sofic systems and &lt;br/&gt; play a role in the symbolic dynamics
based on the Conley index similar &lt;br/&gt; to the role of subshifts of finite
type in the context of Markov partitions.&lt;br/&gt; The PI will study the
interplay between the algebra of the cocycle and the&lt;br/&gt; dynamics of its
subshift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Nonlinear oscillatory behavior is typical of
many systems encountered in science and&lt;br/&gt; technology. The examples
include plasma particles (in magnetic fields of the sun&lt;br/&gt; or plasma
containment devices), electrical currents (in electronics or living
tissue),&lt;br/&gt; Belousov-Zhabotinsky type chemical reactions, convection
currents (in a heated fluid),&lt;br/&gt; and planets of our solar system. Many
realistic models are impossible to solve&lt;br/&gt; analytically and may be
accurately followed on a computer only for a limited time. &lt;br/&gt; The
theory of rotation sets tries to remedy this problem by studying the
fundamental&lt;br/&gt; properties of systems of coupled oscillators in an
abstract setting so that qualitative &lt;br/&gt; predictions of the long time
behavior can be made for broad classes of models.&lt;br/&gt; Symbolic dynamics
deals with infinite sequences of zeros and ones &lt;br/&gt; and is motivated by
problems of telecommunication, where routinely &lt;br/&gt; data is encoded by
such sequences and the volume is huge enough&lt;br/&gt; to justify the
idealization to infinite sequences. Loosely speaking, the main goal is to
understand the relation between the properties of the sequences and the design
of the (mathematical or physical) device generating them. The cocyclic subshifts
arise from a new kind of device capable of matrix multiplication. They
generalize the so called subshifts of finite type, which are&lt;br/&gt;
generated by finite state automata and are a standard tool in coding
information&lt;br/&gt; for magnetic recording. Cocyclic subshifts are also used
to detect chaos in dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;