* 0201080
* RUI: Galois Structures in Local Number Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2002,09/30/2006
* G. Griffith Elder, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2006
* USD 117,224.00

This award supports the investigator's work in algebraic number theory and his
collaboration with colleagues. The proposed projects revolve around two central
questions in the theory of local number field extensions: What are the
invariants that determine the Galois module structure of ideals (and also that
of the higher unit groups)? What is the effect of twists by characters of Galois
representations on these structures? In addition, this award provides support
for undergraduate research.

Number Theory is an area of mathematics that begins with the properties of the
whole numbers and is currently applied to problems in cryptography and coding
theory. Efforts to resolve questions such as Fermat's Last Theorem, have led
mathematicians to expand the set of numbers they consider (i.e. beyond the whole
numbers, beyond the rational numbers). Fundamental properties of these sets,
called algebraic number fields, and the fundamental properties of their
localizations, are the focus of the investigators research. The Galois group
captures the symmetries of an algebraic number field. Using the Galois group,
the investigator proposes to investigate subsets of basic importance ? additive
ones that generalize the integers and multiplicative ones that generalize
plus/minus one. Beyond supporting the research described above, this award will
support undergraduate students who are engaged in number theoretic research with
the investigator.

