* 0201551
* Fabrication, Nanomechanical Properties, and Surface Functionality of Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Gabor Somorjai, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 360,044.00

Advances in nanomanufacturing greatly depend on basic understanding of how to
control building blocks of materials. Polymers have attracted significant
attention in recent years, largely due to the rapid emergence of biotechnology
and microelectronics. However, basic knowledge of the surface properties of
polymers, often affecting component functionality more profoundly than bulk
properties, and in-depth understanding of underlying deformation mechanisms at
the nanoscale is very sparse. The central theme of this research is to bridge
this gap by performing nanomechanical testing and surface chemical analysis on
micrometer-thick polymer specimens manufactured by spin casting. The model
polymers selected for study are polyurethane elastomers, comprising two
insoluble monomers of relatively low and high glass transition temperatures,
referred to as soft and hard segments, respectively. The principal objective is
to examine the surface nanomechanical properties and adhesion (friction)
characteristics in terms of polymer composition, contact load, elongation
strain, and time under fixed elongation. The surface texture and material
properties of pre-strained nanocomposite specimens will by studied by atomic
force and surface force microscopy, while the surface chemical behavior at
different strain levels and time under constant elongation will be analyzed by
sum frequency generation vibrational spectroscopy.

The information derived from this research will enhable enginnering of
chemomechanical behavior of polymer nanocomposites, with direct implications to
the manufacturing of nanodevices exhibiting tailor-made properties and multi-
arrays/bio-implants possessing either hydrophilic or hydrophobic chemical
behaviors, depending on the surface composition and applied strain. In addition,
this project will provide the opportunity to two graduate students to become
invovled with interdisciplinary research dealing with polymer mechanical
property evaluation and chemical analysis at submicron scales using surface-
specific state-of-the-art microsocpy and spectroscopy techniques. Such
combination of surface-sensitive instrumentation is one of the strengths of this
proposal. Results from this research will be incroporated in the content of a
graduate course taught annualy by the PI, which currently addreses only bulk
polymer behavior. This initiative will also enable the development of
collaborations with industry involved with polymer biomaterials research and
development, thereby increasing the application range of the obtained basic
knowledge regarding the evolution of surface mechanical properties and chemical
characteristics of strecthed polymer nanocomposites.