* 0201510
* Next Generation Wind Tunnel for Aerodynamic and Atmospheric Boundary Layer Simulation and Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2005
* USD 160,000.00

This project is to design and build a wind tunnel for aerodynamic and
atmospheric boundary layer simulation and testing at Iowa State University. It
address the need for investment in wind hazard research and education
infrastructure by building a facility that represents a new generation of
boundary layer wind tunnels designed for more realistic simulation of extreme
winds. Extreme wind loads result from extreme weather events (gust fronts,
thunderstorms, hurricanes) where non-stationary gusts, transitional flow
structures and rapid wind directionality changes might play a significant role.
The current state-of-the-art boundary layer wind tunnels cannot simulate such
events. The usual assumption in current practice is that atmospheric wind is
adequately simulated with stationary mean and turbulence flow properties.
Adequate modeling of small-scale turbulence is important and requires a
capability to generate high velocities in a relatively large test section. The
wind tunnel design in this project incorporates two test sections (2.44m x 1.83
m and 2.44 m x 2.21 m) with capabilities to generate gusts, active turbulence,
and a high velocity of 50m/s. It will be part of the Wind Simulation and Testing
Laboratory that also includes a tornado simulator, a microburst simulator, and
an open circuit wind tunnel