* 0201736
* Undergraduate Design Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2002,01/31/2008
* Steven Barrett, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 01/31/2008
* USD 127,915.00

0201736 Barrett The purpose of this project is to provide a meaningful design
experience for University of Wyoming, College of Engineering students that will
directly aid individuals with disabilities within the state of Wyoming. This
activity will provide a vital link between the University's talented students
and individuals with assistive technology needs. Students will create and
provide prototype, custom designed devices that will enhance the quality of life
for the individual. Also, this program will educate new design engineers on the
special needs of community members with disabilities. The project has the
following objectives:

Provide engineering students a multi-disciplinary, meaningful, community service
experience

Provide persons with disabilities assistive devices to empower them to achieve
the maximum individual growth and development and afford them the opportunity to
participate in all aspects of life

Provide engineering students education and awareness on the special needs and
challenges of persons with disabilities

Provide undergraduate engineering students exposure to the biomedical field of
engineering.

The College of Engineering has partnered with three organizations that provide
education and service related to disability. The organizations are the Wyoming
Institute for Disabilities (WIND) assistive technology program, Wyoming New
Options in Technology (WYNOT) and their Sports and Outdoor Assistive Recreation
(SOAR) project along with the university's Special Education program.
Individuals with disabilities will be linked with a team of engineering students
to provide a prototype custom-designed assistive device specific to their needs.