* 0201094
* Biological Fluid Dynamics in Morphogenesis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2009
* Sharon Lubkin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 821,273.00

This research will develop models of the mechanical aspects of shape change in
(1) cylindrical fiber-reinforced hydrostats, (2) pattern formation by traction
forces in mesenchymal tissues during development and remodeling, and (3)
glandular branching morphogenesis. In this Stokesian multiphase area of
biological fluid dynamics, there is no inertia, but there are forces across
interfaces and transfers of forces between the fluids and fibers embedded in the
fluids. In some applications, the models have multiple viscous fluids separated
by active interfaces, and in others, the models have a single fluid whose motion
and material properties are coupled with the motion of contractile fibers. The
models will be used to gain a better understanding of the anisotropic behavior
of cylindrical hydrostats (trunks, tentacles, and tongues). They will be used to
increase understanding of the mechanical instabilities and pattern formation
which can emerge when cells modify their extracellular matrix by moving through
it or pulling on it. They will also be used to help define the developmental
implications of mechanical hypotheses about how branched tubular structures
(like lungs) form in the body. Some results will generate interpretations of
theories, some will suggest experiments to test the implications of theories,
and some will suggest industrial applications of biomechanical principles. The
project will also develop the finite difference numerical methods necessary to
solve the partial differential equations arising from modeling the physical
forces in these tissues. The development of robust three-dimensional algorithms
for the solution of biological fluid dynamics problems will be key to the
effective modeling of dozens of problems in the mechanics of cell motion and
tissue remodeling.

This project involves several biomedical problems in the dynamics of tissues. At
all stages of an organism's existence there are mechanical forces at work. How
does a completely round egg get to be a very complicated-looking human being,
with limbs and eyes and ducts and glands and a wrinkled brain? There are genes
that switch on and off, but that is not the whole story. An airplane has
switches too, but to understand how it really works, we need to study fluid
mechanics - the physical forces that lift, stabilize, and occasionally disturb
the craft. Fluid dynamics is equally relevant to biology. As an organism - or
part of it - is growing, it creates physical forces, and is shaped by physical
forces. The science of Tissue Dynamics is relatively new, and requires expertise
in many areas. A biological modeler, a numerical analyst, a developmental
biologist, and an industrial researcher have teamed up to study the biomechanics
of tissues which are changing their shape, size, strength, orientation, and
function. Results of the work should increase our understanding of processes in
developmental biology, wound healing, cancer, vascular health and disease, and
many other areas of biomedicine involving tissues. This grant is made under the
Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
Health.