* 0201293
* A Novel Mechanism To Make Microfluidic Components and Systems Requiring No Mechanically Moving Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Zonglu Susan Hua, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2006
* USD 190,000.00

PI's Name, Institution: Zonglu Susan Hua, SUNY-Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0201293&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: A Novel Mechanism to Make Microfluidic
Components and Systems Requiring No Mechanical Moving
Parts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The research is focused
on developing a novel mechanism for actuation that would enable fabrication of
various microfluidic components that require no moving mechanical parts. The
novel actuation mechanism is based on electrochemistry to generate bubbles,
which acts as control elements of a microfluidic system. This method is
intrinsically low power in nature, requires a simple on-chip electronics
circuitry, and the control elements are self-repairing. Detailed studies are
being performed on making valves, pumps, switches, and fluid logic system. The
experimental studies are being complemented with fundamental investigation of
bubble formation, including bubble nucleation and collapse as a function of
pressure, applied voltage, flow rate, and interface conditions between the
bubble and microchannel walls. These studies are of fundamental as well as
technological interest in fields ranging from microbiology, biotechnology, and
drug delivery, to combinatorial and analytical chemistry. The educational,
training, and outreach includes hands-on experience by graduate as well as
undergraduate students, along with specific high school summer program targeted
at women and minorities. It is providing students with important training in
areas such as microfabrication technology, thin film growth, metrology, device
fabrication, testing, and characterization.&lt;br/&gt;