* 0201237
* Basic Mechanisms of Radiation Effects in Heterostructure Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,09/30/2008
* Andreas Weisshaar, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 179,275.00

Radiation reliability of semiconductor devices is an important area of concern
with the rapid growth in the number of satellites launched for military and
commercial space-applications. Given the high cost of launching and maintaining
a satellite-base resource, it is very important to give a careful consideration
of the reliability of the sophisticated electronic systems on board the
satellite. Similarly, all the electronic systems, especially the safety
equipment used in nuclear reactor and weapon environment must operate reliably
even in the case of an accidental exposure of the equipment to a burst of
neutrons.

Radiation effects in silicon devices have been studied extensively. In
comparison, the current knowledge of radiation effects in III-V compound
semiconductor (e.g. GaAs) based heterostructure devices is very limited. It is
well known that these devices exhibit superior performance especially at higher
speeds/frequencies than the conventional silicon devices. Hence, increasing
numbers of GaAs and related III-V compound semiconductor devices are being used
in satellite-based high speed communication systems.

The objective of this project is to conduct research on the radiation effects in
two important types of heterostructure devices: (a) High Electron Mobility
Transistors (HEMTs) and (b) Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors (HBTs). Both
types of devices are extensively used in a number of GaAs RF circuits and high-
speed digital integrated circuits. The following three different types of
radiation sources will be used in this investigation: (1) protons (2) electrons
and (3) neutrons. The current status of our knowledge on the effects of the
above types of radiation on the devices of interest and the specific details of
the work to be conducted are discussed in the main body of the proposal.

Some key elements of research issues addressed in this program are:

o Conduct experimental investigations of the characterization of the radiation-
induced defects in the different layers of the device and the performance
degradation of the devices (HEMTs and HBTs) under different types of radiation.
o Develop a systematic understanding of the relationship between the
characteristics of radiation-induced defects, the basic mechanisms and
degradation of the performance of the devices. o Develop a complete model for
the prediction of device degradation in actual radiation environment given the
knowledge of the radiation-induced defects in the constituent materials of the
device structure.

A major impact of this research plan will be on the development of new
device/circuit designs for greater reliability against radiation effects. The
proposed program will also educate a new generation of device engineers with
specialized skills in the design, fabrication and analysis of advanced
heterostructure devices meant for applications in radiation environment. This is
expected to result in advanced III-V compound semiconductor devices with
improved radiation reliability.