* 0201364
* Asset Condition Evaluation Techniques for Improved Infrastructure Reporting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Dulcy Abraham, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/2005
* USD 209,995.00

This project develops an innovative framework that incorporates asset condition
evaluation techniques for more effective infrastructure reporting. The research
design includes the development of a life-cycle model for condition assessment
of wastewater infrastructure, prioritization of the scheduling of maintenance
and rehabilitation, including "demand" for such infrastructure, and developing
and maintaining an up-to-date inventory of wastewater infrastructure.

Traditionally, governmental agencies at the local and the state level have used
cash accounting methods to report infrastructure assets (roads, bridges, water
and sewer facilities, etc.) In this method of financial reporting of
infrastructure, the value of existing physical assets does not appear on
financial reports. The rapid rate of deterioration of municipal infrastructure
assets is forcing owners to examine the state of their assets and plan for the
future. With the issuance of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board's
Statement 34 (GASB 34) in June 1999, local and state agencies are now required
to report on the existing value of the agency's capital assets. This will entail
developing consistent methodologies for condition assessment, deploying asset
management systems, and preparing estimates of future demands and enhancements.

The framework developed through this project will help municipalities take
advantage of the GASB 34 modified approach to infrastructure reporting. It can
contribute to improvements in the assessment and management of underground
infrastructure systems since municipalities will be able to evaluate the cost-
effectiveness of long-term rehabilitation of assets versus replacement of
assets. There will also be a shift in focus from capital formation to an
emphasis on rehabilitation. This project will be done in cooperation with the
Department of Public Works, City of Indianapolis, Indiana. This collaboration
will be an asset not only in providing access to data for the development of the
comprehensive models, but also for testing the results and transferring them to
state and local governments.