* 0201530
* Proximity-Coupled Normal Metals and Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Venkat Chandrasekhar, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

This individual investigator award supports a project that will investigate the
electrical and magnetic properties of metallic heterostructures fabricated from
superconducting (S), normal metal (N), and ferromagnetic (F) elements. The goal
is to explore the nature of the interaction between ferromagnetism and
superconductivity in FS structures, and to investigate the influence of long-
range phase coherence on the thermal transport in NS heterostructures.
Electrical transport properties of FS heterostructures, will be used to attempt
to verify the existence of long-range superconducting correlations in a
diffusive ferromagnet placed in contact with a superconductor. In addition,
effects of finite spin polarization in the ferromagnet on the transport
properties of FS structures will be studied. Using a novel local thermometry
technique, effects in the thermopower of NS devices, as well the thermal
conductance of NS structures, will be explored. Samples will be fabricated by
electron-beam lithography and measured at millikelvin temperatures using various
low temperature cryostats, including a dilution refrigerator and a 3He
refrigerator. The students and post-docs trained on this project will gain
experience with both microfabrication and low temperature techniques. Thus
becoming well-prepared for careers in industry, academia or government
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors are materials that show a
number of unusual electrical and magnetic properties at low temperatures, the
best known property being their ability to carry an electrical current without
resistance. These properties form the basis for a number of useful applications,
such as very high field magnets. When a superconductor is placed in good contact
with a conventional normal metal such as copper or gold, or a ferromagnet like
iron or nickel, the interaction between the two different elements results in
new effects with potential device applications. The goal of this project is to
investigate the electrical and thermal transport properties of normal metals and
ferromagnets placed in close proximity to a superconductor. Electrical
properties of structures incorporating ferromagnets and superconductors will be
studied to investigate the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in
very small devices. In addition, heat transport in a normal metal placed in
contact with a superconductor will be explored. These measurements will help us
gain further insight into the interaction between superconductors, ferromagnets
and normal metals on very small size scales. The samples for these experiments
will be fabricated using advanced electron-beam lithography techniques, and
measured using sophisticated techniques at temperatures near absolute zero.
Post-doctoral associates and graduate students trained on this project will be
exposed to a number of experimental techniques which will be useful in future
careers in either industry or academia. &lt;br/&gt;