* 0201936
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Production and Reproduction:  The Energetics of Lactation Among Tropical Horticulturists in the Lower Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Darna Dufour, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,880.00

The goal of this research is to understand how physically active women living in
the lower Brazilian Amazon adapt to the increased energy demands of lactation
and the impact of their choices on their own health and the health of their
infants. Lactation is the most energetically demanding portion of reproduction
and successful reproduction is a most important aspect of adaptation. How women
meet this additional energy demand is important from both evolutionary and
health perspectives. In developed countries women often meet the additional
demands of lactation by increasing their dietary intake or decreasing their
activity levels. However, these options may not be available to women living in
developing nations, especially those who practice subsistence agriculture. In
the latter case, women may be more reliant on their body fat stores or on making
metabolic adaptations that would allow them to decrease their energy
expenditure. In order to understand the adaptive strategies being used by these
women, data on their dietary intake, energy expenditure and body composition
will be measured during early, peak and late lactation. In addition to these
biological data, cultural data will also be collected to identify potential
cultural practices that may impact women during this period of time. By studying
the energetics of lactation in women with physical activity patterns closer to
those of our ancestors, we have the opportunity to increase our understanding of
human reproductive biology and the flexibility of our reproductive system. In
addition, this study will provide information on the health of women of
reproductive age, as well as on their diets and activity patterns, which can
inform potential development projects in the area.