* 0201063
* Integrative Models of Microorganism Motility
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Lisa Fauci, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,487,766.00

This project concerns the fluid dynamics and force-generating mechanisms of
microorganisms, with applications ranging from dynein activation in a eucaryotic
flagellum to the motility of pathogenic spirochetes. Computational models are
developed that couple the internal molecular motors and elastic mechanisms of
motile microorganisms with a viscous, incompressible fluid. A unified
computational approach is adopted to model the internal axoneme mechanics of
cilia and spermatozoa, the action of the internal periplasmic flagella of
spirochetes, as well as mucociliary interactions. In addition to modeling the
dynamics of a single organism, the collective hydrodynamic interactions of
groups of organisms and their environment can be examined. The moving boundary
problem posed by a flexible, swimming organism is very difficult to analyze,
even when an organism's waveform is assumed to be known. In fact, the waveform
of a microorganism is an emergent property of the coupled nonlinear system
consisting of the organism's force-generating mechanisms, its passive elastic
structure, and the external fluid dynamics. The investigators develop a
mathematical model and a numerical method designed to study this coupled
mechanical system. Modern methods in computational fluid dynamics are used to
create a controlled environment where the measurement and visualization of
locomotive effects can be made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motion of
microorganisms in fluid is of fundamental importance in physiology. Human
reproduction requires the successful journey of spermatozoa through both the
male and female reproductive tracts. The robust locomotory ability of pathogenic
spirochetes enable these bacteria to efficiently move through viscous fluids and
mucosal surfaces. A multidisciplinary research team of mathematicians,
computational scientists and experimental biologists coordinates their efforts
to investigate the fundamental mechanics of cell motility in a number of
systems. These systems include cilia and flagella, spirochetes (such as those
that are the causative agents of Lyme disease and syphilis), bacterial biofilms
and mucus-ciliary transport in the respiratory tract. A greater understanding of
how the internal biochemistry and biophysical mechanisms of microorganisms are
coupled to the fluid environment in which they move can have an impact on drug
design for bacterial infection as well as infertility treatment. This project
draws ideas from many disciplines such as fluid mechanics, scientific computing,
cell biology, and numerical analysis. Our multidisciplinary approach enables
significant progress in the understanding of microorganism motility.
Furthermore, the algorithms and methods developed are useful in studying other
biofluiddynamic problems and contribute to expertise in high performance
computing. &lt;br/&gt;