* 0201542
* Nonlinear Dynamics of "Triggering Controllers"
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Brianno Coller, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Masayoshi Tomizuka
* 08/31/2003
* USD 101,790.00

The investigator proposes to study the nonlinear dynamics and
control&lt;br/&gt;of a class of canonical fluid systems: flow over a backward
facing&lt;br/&gt;step, flow separation from two sharp convex corners of a bluff
body,&lt;br/&gt;and high frequency flutter of one or multiple airfoils.
Here,&lt;br/&gt;"Control" should not be interpreted in the traditional sense.
Recent&lt;br/&gt;"control" efforts have focused on triggering instabilities in
the&lt;br/&gt;fluid shear layers; by creating certain vortex dynamic
interactions,&lt;br/&gt;system performance often improves dramatically. The
proposed research&lt;br/&gt;seeks to gain an understanding of the nonlinear
dynamic processes and&lt;br/&gt;the bifurcation structure of the systems, so
that it may be possible&lt;br/&gt;to synthesize such triggering controllers
systematically, rather than&lt;br/&gt;relying on ad hoc trial and error. The
approach consists of&lt;br/&gt;constructing low order vortex models that capture
essential features&lt;br/&gt;of the systems, and then performing normal form and
bifurcation&lt;br/&gt;analyses. It is believed that lessons learned from the
three&lt;br/&gt;canonical problems to be studied here will be applicable to a
broad&lt;br/&gt;class of fluid flow problems whose performance is sensitive
to&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear vortex dynamics within shear layers. The project
will&lt;br/&gt;support close collaboration between the PI and United
Technologies&lt;br/&gt;Research Center, whose engineers/scientists are searching
for&lt;br/&gt;practical ways of incorporating triggering controllers into
several&lt;br/&gt;products. Furthermore, the proposed project will form a focal
point&lt;br/&gt;around which to generate several undergraduate research
projects. The&lt;br/&gt;PI has observed that such experiences, in which
undergraduates make&lt;br/&gt;meaningful contributions, often buoy their
motivation and desire for&lt;br/&gt;pursuing advanced degrees.&lt;br/&gt;