* 0201173
* Modeling evolution of quantitative traits with finite locus effects in structured populations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2008
* Judith Miller, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 12/31/2008
* USD 608,180.00

Recent advances in quantitative genetics show that there is a distribution of
locus effects on quantitative traits, with some loci (henceforth called QTLs)
explaining a large proportion of the genotypic trait variance and others having
minor but detectable effects on phenotype. For QTL results to be incorporated
into existing theory, a crucial task is to develop models of quantitative trait
variation that allow for a finite number of loci with finite effects. In this
project, such models are developed and analyzed. Our theoretical work focuses on
diffusion models, i.e. models in which both time and allele frequencies are
continuous. The models developed are compared with previously-derived models,
with the results of simulations, and with experimental data, with the aim of
identifying models useful for predicting quantitative trait evolution in natural
and agricultural populations. The results of the analysis and simulations are
used to create statistical tests for the action of selection on quantitative
traits in populations. &lt;br/&gt; Quantitative traits are among the most
conspicuous features of organisms, features that we immediately recognize.
Examples abound, including the height of humans, the number of ears on a corn
plant or the weight of piglets in a litter. The study of quantitative traits and
their genetic basis is fundamental to our understanding of evolutionary biology
as well as to applied genetics such as animal and plant breeding. Using recently
developed technology, it is now possible to identify regions of the genome that
contribute to quantitative traits. Such "QTL mapping" studies have revealed
discrepancies between the data and classical theories intended to explain the
contribution of individual genes to such traits. This project aims to extend our
theoretical understanding of quantitative traits, and to use the theory
developed to create practical statistical methods for analyzing quantitative
trait data. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition
sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science
Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the
National Institutes of Health.