* 0201004
* A Novel Electrical Microfluidics System Actuated by Biological Cell Motors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 04/30/2006
* USD 309,504.00

0201004&lt;br/&gt;Tung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next trend in micro and nano
technology is in the direction of integrating micro and nano systems with active
bio-elements and means of information transduction. Along this line, the PI's
propose to design, fabricate, and test a novel electrical microfluidics pump
actuated by biological cell motors. The proposed micro pump will be realized
through the integration of a harmless strain of E. coli cells with a MEMS-based
microfluidics channel. Each E. coli cell consists of several flagella driven at
the base by a rotary motor. If the cell is attached to a surface by a single
flagellar filament, the motor turns the whole cell body at a high rotational
speed. The proposed design utilizes this mechanism to transport liquid in a
microfluidics channel through viscous pumping. According to a preliminary fluid
mechanics simulation, the proposed cell motor pump can deliver a flow rate of
almost 0.25 nanoliter per minute. Electro-rotation will be used to electrically
control the cell rotational speed and thus the flow rate. With this novel
control scheme, it is envisioned that the proposed integration of cell actuation
biology and MEMS will result in an intelligent microfluidics system for next
generation applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following objectives have been
established for the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design and fabricate
MEMS microfluidics channel: A series of fluid dynamics simulations will be
conducted to investigate the dependence of the volumetric flow rate in a
microfluidics channel on the distribution and rotational speed of cell motors.
Based on the results, a microfluidics channel system will be fabricated using
MEMS processing techniques on a silicon substrate. The sidewall of the channel
will consist of gold pads for cell attachment and metal electrode for
controlling cell rotation through electro-
rotation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrate cells with microfluidics channel: Gold
will be used as the interface material between the cells and the microfluidics
channel. Two mature technologies will be adapted to attach the cells to a gold
patterned substrate. One involves generation of a suitable substrate for
attachment of the flagellar filaments. The second concentrates on engineering
flagellar filaments that will provide good ligands for
attachment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;