* 0201993
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Women and Environmental Identity in the Yucatan: Effects on Resource Access and Environmental Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2002,10/31/2003
* B. Turner, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 10/31/2003
* USD 11,980.00

This doctoral dissertation research project explores the relationships among
women's environmental identity, agency, and agricultural and resource extractive
practices in the southern Yucatan peninsular region of Mexico. The project also
examines whether and under what circumstances there can be a coincidence between
women's interests and conservation interests, in a particular location - the
rural farming communities bordering the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve. This
location is undergoing an intensification of agricultural land-use in
conjunction with state and non-governmental organization efforts to protect and
manage the forest. Conservation and development projects target women's groups
organized at the community level, encouraging the adoption of sustainable
agricultural practices and sustainable forestry uses. The central thesis of this
research project is that some women's groups respond to the presence of these
projects through an active adoption of an environmental stewardship identity and
that this response is associated with access to formal programs whose projects
of sustainable development affect opportunities and constraints on the wellbeing
of women and their households. The management of environmental identity is part
of a broader strategy to achieve individual and household food security and
pursue improvements in consumption by taking advantage of "alternative"
practices promoted by formal programs. The research focuses on the following
questions: (1) How do women's groups around the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve
respond to local conservation and development projects? Is one response the
active management of group environmental identity? (2) Why do some women's
groups self-identify as environmental stewards and adopt more sustainable
practices, while others do not? And (3) what is the impact of these responses on
(a) women's access to natural resources, (b) agricultural and extractive
practices adopted by the groups, and (c) the wellbeing of participating women?
The project is structured into two primary components: personal interviews of
smallholder women whose households are engaged primarily in farming, and an
ethnographic study of six women's groups active in the project area, with a
range of histories, activities, and degree to which the group self-identifies as
"green." For the personal interviews, the researcher will interview a random
sample of women, stratified to include thirty-five households with participation
in "green" women's groups and thirty-five households without participation. A
farm visit will accompany each interview, and the researcher will statistically
analyze interview responses. The ethnographic research attempts to access the
complexity of group processes, as well as enrich and situate the personal
interview data of the first research component.

The significance of this research centers on its examination of how common ideas
within "sustainable development," such as the coincidence of rural women's
interests in developing countries with environmental conservation interests, are
perhaps being used by groups to their own advantage. There is a tendency to
polarize discussion into either/or terms: either women are natural environmental
stewards or they are not. The thesis that women's groups in the southern Yucatan
peninsular region might be using the notion of women as natural environmental
stewards to their material advantage does not necessarily mean that these groups
are not in fact adopting more environmentally sound practices. Both theory and
conservation and development practice will benefit from a more nuanced
understanding of when, why, and under what circumstances particular women
consider themselves to be environmental stewards and then also engage in
corresponding "green" activities. The results will contribute to local
sustainable development efforts around the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve and be of
comparative interest to conservation and development efforts elsewhere in the
world. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.