* 0201108
* Continuum Mechanical and Micromechanical Fundamentals of Mechanochemistry of Energetic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2005
* Valery Levitas, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Continuum Mechanical and Micromechanical Fundamentals
of&lt;br/&gt;Mechanochemistry of Energetic Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shear
stress and shear banding are suggested by many investigators as possible sources
of ignition in energetic materials and explosives. A three-year program is
proposed to develop continuum mechanical and micromechanical fundamentals of
mechanochemistry of energetic materials, new analytical and computational
methods, and to investigate and systematize possible new reasons for shear
stress and strain initiation of explosives. We will concentrate on plastic
bonded explosives (e.g. PBX-9501) which consist of HMX energetic crystals
connected by a polymer binder. The objectives of the research proposed are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To develop a systematic multiscale continuum
thermodynamic, kinetic and micromechanical theory for stress- and strain-induced
chemical reactions (CR) and phase transformations (PT) in energetic materials
allowing for thermodynamic and kinetic&lt;br/&gt;coupling between CR, shear
stress and large plastic strains, temperature and pressure. New analytical and
numerical methods for CR and PT in inelastic materials will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To study analytically and numerically some
typical problems for modeling of PT&lt;br/&gt;and CR at the microscale and
mesoscale under various prescribed stress tensors. These problems include: a)
Nucleation and growth of the d phase inside of the b phase matrix; b) Nucleation
of the gas phase during sublimation and CR inside the HMX crystal or at the
boundary with the binder, as well as in existing and collapsing voids; c)
Multistage PT and CR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To investigate analytically and
numerically reaction-induced plasticity and transformation-induced plasticity
phenomena in the shear band at micro-, meso-, and macroscales, and their effect
on the thermodynamics and kinetics of CR and PT (as
positive&lt;br/&gt;mechanochemical feedback), as well as on the mechanical
behavior of energetic materials (as the new deformation
mechanism).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. To conduct multiscale finite element
modeling and description of experiments on combined shear-pressure ignition and
initial post-ignition processes in explosives. Material parameters and loading
conditions responsible for shear sensitivity of explosives will be
found.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;