* 0201443
* Analysis of Topological Singularities and Their Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2008
* Fang-Hua Lin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2008
* USD 440,000.00

Fang-Hua Lin, NYU Courant Institute.
DMS-0201443&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first part
of this proposal is to study the dynamics and the&lt;br/&gt;stability of
topological singularities in several concrete cases
including&lt;br/&gt;:magnetic vortices in the Landau-Lefschitz
equations(Schrodinger and wave&lt;br/&gt;maps coupled with magnetic
fields),vortices and vortex rings in the trapped&lt;br/&gt;dilute Bose-Einstein
condensates(certain nonlinear Schrodinger systems&lt;br/&gt;coupled with
potentials).The second part of the proposal is concerned
with&lt;br/&gt;topological singularities of Sobolev mappings.We shall examine
the effects&lt;br/&gt;of singularities on the denisity of smooth maps,the
topology of mapping&lt;br/&gt;spaces,the regularity and singularity of various
energy minimizers.Of&lt;br/&gt;particular interest is the global structures of
singular sets and asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;behavior of energy minimizers near such
topological singularities.&lt;br/&gt; Many interesting natural phenomena contain
some sort singular behavior&lt;br/&gt;and they are often manifiested through
energy concentrations.Singularities&lt;br/&gt;of solutions of partial
differential equations which describe these&lt;br/&gt;phenomena are,therefore,an
important part of facets.We propose here to&lt;br/&gt;establish a rigourous
mathematical theory concerning probabilly a most&lt;br/&gt;important class of
such singularities ,topological singularity.Topological&lt;br/&gt;singularities
arise in many physical problems and have been an important&lt;br/&gt;subject of
much study over past many years.Among known examples are&lt;br/&gt;magnetic
bubbles in a fereomagnetic(or anti-ferromagnetic)continuum,vortices
&lt;br/&gt;in Bose-Einstein condensates and superconductivity,topological
defects in&lt;br/&gt;liquid crystals,as well as skyrminors,monopoles and
instantons which are&lt;br/&gt;particle like solutions in generic models of high
energy physics.These&lt;br/&gt;singularities not only carry definite topological
informations but also&lt;br/&gt;quantified amount of energies.Because of this
they are often more&lt;br/&gt;observable and stable energitically and
dynamically.Thus a rigourous&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory for such singularity
would be not only mathematically&lt;br/&gt;challenging and interesting but also
of fundamental importance in sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;