* 0201105
* Dynamics and Evolution of Emerging Diseases with Applications to Amphibians
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Edward Allen, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 915,000.00

The goals of this project are threefold: (1) to contribute to the mathematical
theory of the evolution of host-pathogen systems, (2) to apply the theory to
amphibian populations, and (3) to conduct an intensive biological investigation
of amphibian populations and their associated diseases on the Southern High
Plains. Deterministic and stochastic structured epidemic models with host and
pathogen genetics will be developed, analyzed, and numerically simulated.
Discrete and continuous time structured models are based on difference
equations, differential equations, Markov chains, and stochastic differential
equations. The mathematical models will be used to study how disease affects
persistence, duration, onset of an epidemic, and population size, and how host
and pathogen coevolve in response to various control strategies and to different
selection pressures. The models will be applied to specific amphibian
populations on the Southern High Plains. The proposed research includes a three-
year experimental investigation (two years of intensive fieldwork) to determine
amphibian abundance, disease prevalence, and immunological characteristics of
two common species of amphibians on the Southern High Plains, the tiger
salamander and the plains spadefoot toad. The study sites consist of twelve
playa lakes on the Southern High Plains. Mathematical and statistical analyses
of the data collected from this study address some basic biological questions
about the relationships among amphibian abundance, immune response, disease
prevalence, life cycle stage (larvae, juvenile, and adult), landuse practices
(grassland versus cropland), and climatic conditions. This study provides
important information for determining critical factors that are significant in
the transmission and persistence of diseases in amphibians. &lt;br/&gt; The
emergence of infectious diseases in humans and wildlife is a major threat to
public health and to the conservation of global biodiversity. Increased
population densities, changes in agricultural and livestock practices, dam
building, deforestation, encroachment into wildlife habitat, climate change,
environmental pollution, and introduction of pathogens into new areas are some
of the factors leading to the emergence of infectious diseases. Understanding
the dynamics of the pathogens responsible for the emergence of these diseases
and the complex and changing relationship between their host and their
environment is needed for potential control of these diseases. A variety of
human and environmental influences have caused many host-pathogen systems to
evolve and to adapt to these changing influences, making control an even more
difficult task. Theoretical studies which contribute to our understanding of the
evolution of host-pathogen systems are urgently needed. It is the purpose of
this investigation to develop, analyze, and simulate mathematical models based
on principles from epidemiology, genetics and population dynamics, to apply
these models to host-pathogen systems, and to conduct an experimental
investigation on a particular host-pathogen system. The host population models
developed in the proposed investigation are applied specifically to amphibian
populations. The global decline in amphibian populations is thought to be one of
the most pressing and enigmatic environmental problems today. Recent evidence
indicates that emerging diseases (viral and fungal pathogens) are responsible
for mass die-offs of frogs, toads, and salamanders. Indeed, recent outbreaks of
diseases in amphibians should be given serious attention as they may signal
environmental change on a global scale that may threaten many organisms. A major
part of the proposed research involves a two-year field and three-year
laboratory investigation. The purpose of the experimental investigation is to
assess amphibian abundance, disease prevalence, and immunological
characteristics of two common species of amphibians on the Southern High Plains.
This study lays the groundwork for future studies on causes of population
declines in amphibians. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative
to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.