* 0201338
* Multiple Stage Optimization of Stochastic Dynamic Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2002,10/31/2003
* S. Travis Waller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 10/31/2003
* USD 99,916.00

The decision making process for transport systems is a multistage problem,
ranging from long-term strategic and tactical planning decisions to operational
and real-time/control. Uncertainty in supply and demand experienced in the real-
time, operational and tactical stages as well as the effectiveness of potential
control decisions impact earlier strategic decisions. However, these future
impacts are often neglected when strategic decisions are made for the
optimization of a network. By neglecting such impacts, planners are missing
opportunities to develop networks that are more resistant to fluctuations and
capable of exploiting the full potential of information.

This research will develop methods for accounting for the transport system
stochasticity (and dynamics) with a focus on representing actions such as real-
time routing and control as recourse. This will then be used within the context
of prior stage decisions (such as network design), where new methods will be
investigated to account for the potential recourse. By viewing the system within
the overall strategic, tactical, operational, and real-time framework, stage
interactions will be explored as well as the role of information and uncertainty
within the integrated decision process. The true value of information and
control under such a view can be given both in terms of real-time improvement
and with the benefits from improved recourse on prior decisions.

In addition to the research problems, several fundamental complementary
educational issues are raised in this context. Students and practicing
transportation engineers do not generally have sufficient technical background
to fully appreciate the complex behavior of stochastic and dynamic systems, and
the know-how to exploit the potential of real-time data for actual online
operational purposes. This research will explicitly address this problem by
developing teaching material for a new course on multi-stage transportation
optimization, educational simulators, and tools that will successfully convey
the fundamental principles related to the optimization and control of dynamic
and stochastic transportation systems to students. By further developing the
fundamental research of this area, and integrating it into the education
curriculum, future planners will be able to better account for the unavoidable
uncertainties that exist as well as the recourse options that will be available
in later stages. In turn, this allows for the creation of a more robust and
efficient transportation network.

