* 0202256
* Capturing the Next Step in 3D: From 3D Modeling to 3D Parametrics
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Rick Lapidus, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 346,146.00

Moraine Valley Community College is updating the existing exemplary Mechanical
and DesignDrafting/CAD A.A.S. degree and three corresponding certificates by
incorporating 3D Parametric Modeling skills into the curriculum. Employers have
identified that 3D Parametric Modeling must be incorporated into curriculum to
ensure graduates have mastered the advanced CAD skills used currently in
business and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parametric modeling combines the
power of three-dimensional modeling as an intuitive engineering design tool with
the ability to manipulate and control the corresponding engineering drawings in
an adaptive environment. This simplifies the design process, reduces the
engineer's design cycle time, achieves better design visualization, more closely
associates 2D and 3D drawings, and makes the design process easier to manage.
Rapid prototyping is also being incorporated into curriculum in order to provide
faculty and students the opportunity to produce a prototype, or model, of their
designs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collaborative partnership with three other
community colleges and four high schools is forming to fully develop, pilot
test, evaluate and revise curriculum for three existing and two new courses in
the Mechanical Design and Drafting/CAD A.A.S. degree. Each member of this
partnership, the Content Development Team, is participating in summer curriculum
development workshops and year-round curriculum pilot testing, evaluation, and
revision activities. The PI and three Co-PIs from Moraine Valley are serving on
the Content Development Team and ensuring that the following project goals and
corresponding objectives are implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1:
Revising/updating current Mechanical Design and Drafting A.A.S.
&lt;br/&gt;degree and three Certificates to include 3D Parametric
Modeling.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2: Building on existing partnerships with high schools
and other community colleges to develop, pilot test and evaluate 3D Parametric
Modeling courses.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3: Utilizing E-Learning tools to incorporate
Web-assisted instructional course resources.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 4: Disseminating the
Mechanical Design and Drafting A.A.S. degree and three Certificates to other
educational institutions.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 5: Developing and implementing
recruitment strategies to promote the revised programs to high school students -
focusing on students currently underrepresented in Mechanical Design and
Drafting/CAD courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To respond to student learning
styles, alternative instructional techniques, such as group project work, and
Web-assisted eLearning tools are incorporated into instructional delivery. 3D
CAD instruction occurs using a variety of delivery methods, including
traditional instructor-led classes and Web-assisted learning resources, such as
online assignments, skills assessments, lab exercises, teacher guides, tests,
quizzes, and course evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination of the
updated Mechanical Design and Drafting/CAD degree includes providing summer
teacher training workshops for 20 high school and college faculty in year two
and three of the project. In addition, the college is implementing a variety of
career awareness activities to increase high students' knowledge about CAD
careers. In each of these activities, students currently underrepresented in CAD
careers (minorities and women) are targeted for participation. A total of 51
high school and college faculty and several hundred of their students are
gaining expertise and/or awareness of 3D parametric modeling and CAD
careers.&lt;br/&gt;