* 0202994
* Transition to Teaching Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Glenn Markle, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 03/31/2006
* USD 919,536.00

The Transition to Teaching Partnership (T3 ) is a collaborative effort among the
Cincinnati Public Schools, the Mt Healthy Schools, University of Cincinnati
College of Education, Procter and Gamble, the Cincinnati Business Committee, and
multiple community agencies. Its purpose is to recruit, prepare, and retain
effective mathematics and science teachers committed to teaching in urban
schools. Using Ohio's Alternative Educator Licensure process, recent college
graduates and adults changing careers are receiving the education, support, and
mentoring required for a successful transition from other activities to teaching
math or science in grades 7 through 12. T3 is based on the University of
Cincinnati's "Cincinnati Initiative for Teacher Education," a nationally
recognized, award winning teacher preparation program and Cincinnati Public
School's award winning "Peer Evaluation and Assistance Program." T3 combines the
best practices of both programs in providing 24 recruited pre-service teachers
with content preparation, pedagogical knowledge and skills, and follow-on
support and development as new teachers. Recruitment for participation in the
program is taking place in the local communities in which the schools exist and
through partnerships with downsizing corporations. Grass-roots organizations
have been included as partners to address the needs of community members. T3 is
collaborating with these groups to identify and recruit qualified individuals.
T3 also is working with the human resources departments of companies to make
classroom teaching a viable option for their laid off chemists, mathematicians,
biologists, and others. There is particular emphasis on attracting minority
teacher candidates. Special features of the retention component of the project
include financial planning, personal and family counseling, and contingency
funding for unanticipated life events. Recruited candidates are enrolled in
university courses required to meet the Ohio Alternative Educator License
requirement and other refresher content courses. Candidates are required to
become Cincinnati Youth Collaborative mentors and form one-on-one relationships
with Cincinnati or Mt Healthy public school students. This feature of T3 is
assisting teacher candidates in building rapport based on knowledge and trust
with their students. It also serves as a "reality check" to ensure that
candidates have an accurate understanding of urban youth and the difficulties
they face. Teaching experiences begin in summer school sessions. Teacher
candidates teach in those schools where they are scheduled to become full-time
teachers in the fall (in accordance with Ohio's Alternative Educator License).
Cincinnati and Mt. Healthy have a large cadre of experienced teachers who have
been trained to mentor and support new teacher candidates. These teacher-mentors
are leading teams of 3 to 4 teacher candidates with support from university
faculty. Teacher candidates continue working with a mentor teacher until they
earn a professional teaching license. Coursework completed in T3 also counts
toward a master in education degree, a feature that enables continued university
participation in the professional development of program participants. This
program has the potential to become a model for the State of Ohio and the
nation. The evaluation strategy has a dual purpose, one focused locally on the
project and one focused on the effectiveness of this approach for wider
dissemination.