* 0202179
* Minkowski Geometric Algebra of Complex Sets: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Rida Farouki, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 255,001.00

ABSTRACT 0202179 Rida Farouki U of Calif Berkeley

Minkowski geometric algebra is concerned with the complex sets populated by the
sums and products of all pairs of complex numbers drawn from given complex Cset
operands.Whereas the Minkowski sum under vector addition in R n has been
thoroughly studied,from both the theoretical and computational perspective,the
Minkowski product in R 2 induced by the multiplication rule for complex numbers
is a relatively unexplored oncept. Conceptually, Minkowski geometric algebra is
the natural generalization of real interval arithmetic to complex Cnumber
sets.With the transition from real to complex,however,the trivial geometry of
real intervals and their consequent closure under addition and multiplication is
relinquished. The two Cdimensional haracter of Minkowski geometric algebra
endows it with a rich geometrical ontent,in which simple operands (e.g.,circular
disks) yield subtle results described by analytic curves such as the Cartesian
oval ovals of Cassini and their higher Corder generalizations,while
sophisticated algorithms are required to approximate Minkowski combinations for
general sets.Apart from being a basic tool to monitor the propagation of
uncertainty in complex Cvariable computations,the algebra o .ers a versatile
language for two Cdimensional shape operators and the description of (direct or
inverse) wavefront re .ection/refraction problems in optics.It is also
fundamental to the stability analysis of systems with uncertain parameters,in
the context of the Routh CHurwitz criterion and the Kharitonov robustness
theorem.