* 0202345
* Expansion of the Woodworking Technicians Distance Education Partnership
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Joseph Smith, Mount Wachusett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

As a result of a 1998 critical needs analysis, the faculty of Mount Wachusett
Community College (MWCC), Gardner, Massachusetts, applied for and received a
grant from the National Science Foundation (ATE Award No. 9850317). Under this
project faculty developed an educational program for woodworking technicians,
employing a unique combination of educational videos, classroom and in-plant
instruction utilizing a "Corps of Craftsman." The latest efforts build on this
work to further develop and implement a national model offering distance-
learning courses to industry professionals or students in existing woodworking
training programs. Through this program, students earn a wood technician
certificate which is applied towards an associate degree in wood products
technology. MWCC is completing the development of and is offering the full
associate degree program for woodworking technicians on a distance-learning
basis in conjunction with an ongoing Winrock International apprenticeship
program in Arkansas. Once their full program is underway in Arkansas, it will be
expanded to at least one other state during the project period. The intent is to
eventually use the Arkansas program as a national model. Courses are being
offered through a unique combination of distance-learning and classroom
instruction.

The "Corps of Craftsmen," consisting of both retired and non-retired personnel,
was established as part of the initial NSF project. These craftpersons also
assist in some of the hands-on educational instruction of the program. The
course materials developed for the education of apprentices in Arkansas are also
being used for a project currently underway in Washington, D.C. MWCC faculty are
working in Washington, D.C. to train a diverse group of inner-city youths in
woodworking, with partial support from their previous NSF grant. Ongoing
participation of these youths in the project enhances their opportunities for
learning. Another unique component of their program involves the inclusion of an
industry trade magazine. Non-credit and for-credit course modules (portions of
full courses) are being administered in cooperation with Wood Digest magazine on
a national level. A major strength of their project is the involvement of
several public and private organizations.