* 0202295
* Interactions between Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Rajesh Kulkarni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 06/30/2003
* USD 83,552.00

In this proposal, the investigator and collaborators study problems in algebra,
algebraic geometry and topology. Three of these projects study families of
noncommutative algebras arising naturally in various branches of algebra. The
first project is to study finite dimensional irreducible representations of
Clifford algebras of forms of higher degree. The approach in studying these
algebras is to work on a reformulation of the questions in terms of moduli
spaces of certain reflexive sheaves on hypersurfaces. Another goal is to
investigate arithmetic applications of these results. The second project (joint
with D. Chan) is continuation of previous work on sheaves of maximal orders on
complex, projective, algebraic surfaces. The main goal is to classify various
classes of such sheaves of maximal orders. This work follows recently developed
ideas in noncommutative algebraic geometry. The third project (joint with A.
Ram) is to investigate whether the Springer correspondence can be set up for
rational Cherednik algebras along the lines of single graded Hecke algebras.
Another goal is to investigate whether these algebras can be related to N.
Wallach's approach to the Springer correspondence. The last project (joint with
M. Banagl) is to investigate whether there exist self-dual sheaves compatible
with the intersection chain sheaves on reductive Borel-Serre compactifications
of locally symmetric spaces associated to semisimple algebraic groups defined
over rational numbers.

In the last few decades, the interaction between various branches of mathematics
and theoretical physics has proved to be especially enriching for all the
fields. One important thread in these connections has been algebraic geometry, a
very old subject that dates back at least to ancient Greece. Algebraic geometry
is the area of mathematics that studies solutions to multi-variable polynomial
equations as geometric objects. It has found applications not only in
mathematics, but also in computer science, coding theory, robotics and string
theory in physics to name a few areas impacted by it. The first two projects of
this proposal use tools from this subject to study "algebras" that are of
interest to a wide range of mathematicians and physicists. It is useful to
describe the whole family of such classes of algebras as a geometric object, and
a goal of this project is to obtain such descriptions. The third aspect of this
research is part of a subject called representation theory. The main objects of
study here are "representations", processes which encode information about
symmetry in nature. The last part of this proposal stands at the intersection of
three subjects: number theory (where number systems are studied), representation
theory, and topology. In topology spaces are studied to determine which
properties do not change under elastic deformations such as twisting and
stretching. The spaces to be studied in this research encode number theoretic
information. The goal is to investigate whether there are invariants of these
spaces which themselves satisfy some symmetry.