* 0202428
* Advancing Technology Education for Pulp, Paper, and Chemical Process Technicians and Operators
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Steve Duke, Alabama Southern Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 10/31/2004
* USD 503,290.00

Alabama Southern Community College, with its partners from the Alabama
Technology Network Center for Forestry, Paper and Chemical Technology, the
Auburn University Chemical Engineering Department, and the Pulp and Paper
Research Education Center at Auburn University, regional industry and
participating regional K-12 school systems, are working on the development,
evaluation and refinement of 12 curriculum modules. These industry driven and
national skill based curricula are being utilized in training process operators
and technicians for pulp, paper, chemical industries. This strategy of providing
tools for a technician and operator education initiative is seen as the best
possible solution to successfully develop qualified workers required to maintain
and improve the competitiveness and sustainability of the pulp, paper and
chemical manufacturing industry in the United States. Once fully developed, the
program utilizes all 12-curriculum modules (8 already developed and being used
under previous NSF ATE funding and 4 to be developed under this project) to
extend hands-on technical education experiences for three technical degree
programs at Alabama Southern as well as with regional industry to upgrade
employee skills. These curricula include classroom, multimedia as well as
instructor-led and teaming laboratory experiences that emphasize safety and
environmental issues of the process operations being modeled. The project is
producing publication-ready curriculum modules with aligned industry driven
laboratory ready for regional and national dissemination. it is also developing
two workshops; one for community college faculty preparing students for
employment in pulp, paper and allied industries throughout the southeast region
of the US. The second is for high school faculty and interested high school
students to provide opportunities for experiencing an industry simulated
environment to strengthen math, chemistry, teaming and workplace leadership
skills. In addition, the project focuses on increasing scholarship and
internship opportunities of students particularly for minorities and other
groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in these industries.
Dissemination is through a project web page, presentations at national
conferences and publication of articles in refereed journals.