* 0202630
* AWARE: Engineering Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Advanced Technology in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Makola Abdullah, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2003
* USD 60,204.00

0202630&lt;br/&gt;Dyke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative research project between Professor Shirley Dyke at Washington
University in St Louis, Missouri and Professor Masato Abe of the University of
Tokyo in Japan. The researchers will undertake a program of engineering research
experiences for undergraduates in advanced technology in Japan. It will focus on
structural control, structural health monitoring, innovative materials, etc. for
the mitigation of damage to structures when subjected to severe dynamic loading.
The program will support a total of eight students from institutions around the
country to spend approximately one summer month in Japan conducting an
independent research project that is relevant to their ongoing research in the
U.S. The participants will likely include minorities and women. The remainder of
the summer would be spent at their host institution in the US conducting
research activities. Participants will prepare a paper on their research
outcomes and give a short presentation at a colloquium. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Current research pertaining to these advanced topics in structural
engineering would be significantly enhanced through input from creative young
minds. Given the opportunity to participate in research experiences, students
discover that they are excited by the challenges they encounter, and intrigued
by the innovative ideas and technological advancements brought about by their
research. Research is also an excellent avenue for increasing students'
enthusiasm to pursue advanced degrees. The program will add an international
dimension to the development of undergraduate researchers. The exposure to
research excellence abroad and the early experience with international
collaboration will greatly enhance the future career opportunities of the
participants. The program will also encourage collaborative research projects
and the initiation of new international collaborative efforts in advanced
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;