* 0202021
* Discrete Problems in Harmonic Analysis, Ergodic Theorems and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Akos Magyar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 93,293.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0202021&lt;br/&gt;PI: Akos
Magyar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will deal with several problems in&lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis
some of which are also of interest in&lt;br/&gt;ergodic and number theory. The
emphasis is on a combination&lt;br/&gt;of techniques from analysis and of other
fields such as&lt;br/&gt;analytic number theory and singularity theory. The
objects&lt;br/&gt;of study are related to diophantine equations,
maximal&lt;br/&gt;averages over subvarieties and their discrete
analogues,&lt;br/&gt;polynomial type ergodic theorems as well as
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;integrals and integral operators with degeneracies. A
set&lt;br/&gt;of problems are discrete in nature, where mapping
properties&lt;br/&gt;of operators related to classical exponential sums play
a&lt;br/&gt;crucial role. Tough these appear as discrete analogues
of&lt;br/&gt;well known constructs in analysis, they in turn can
yield&lt;br/&gt;to new insights both in ergodic and number theory.
Another&lt;br/&gt;direction is to study problems related to
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;integrals with degeneracies, where the usual
"curvature"&lt;br/&gt;type conditions are replaced by assumptions on
the&lt;br/&gt;singularities or only assuming
genericity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During roughly the past decade the scope of
harmonic&lt;br/&gt;analysis has been vastly extended by incorporating
methods&lt;br/&gt;from seemingly different fields of mathematics. This
has&lt;br/&gt;led to an essentially deeper understanding of basic
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations under periodic conditions (such
as&lt;br/&gt;the nonlinear Schrodinger equation of quantum mechanics
and&lt;br/&gt;the Wave equation), new phenomena in ergodic theory
meaning&lt;br/&gt;that measurements do not have to be taken regularly
but&lt;br/&gt;only very rarely to understand physical processes.
The&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will concentrate on these types
of&lt;br/&gt;problems Where a combination of methods of different
fields&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics seems to be needed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;