* 0202654
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Understanding the Invasion of Exotic Woody Species and Native Shrubs Into a Protected Area:  A Case Study of El Palmar National Park
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Diana Sinton, Sinton                  Diana          S
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 12/31/2003
* USD 74,068.00

0202654 Sinton

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eight-month research fellowship by Dr. Diana S.
Sinton to work with Dr. Ana Scopel at the University of Buenos Aires in
Argentina.

The objectives of this project are to understand the invasion of exotic woody
species and native shrubs into a protected area, by a case study of El Palmar
National Park in Argentina. First, they will characterize the changes in the
abundance and spatial distribution of exotic woody species and native shrubs
since the Park was created, second, they will characterize the expansion of each
species in relation to disturbances and management, and third, they will create
models for the dispersal of M. azedarach and its predicted growth. They will use
aerial photograph and satellite image analysis and interpretation, and
supplementary fieldwork. GIS-based, spatial analyses and other modeling
techniques will be used to illuminate the processes affecting M. azederach and
other woody and shrub species. Biological invasions into protected areas are a
worldwide problem, compromising conservation efforts and threatening
biodiversity.

Dr. Scopel has an extensive background in population ecology and a thorough
understanding of the Park landscape and specific properties of M. azederach.