* 0202352
* Consortium for Education in Renewable Energy Technologies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Joy McMillan, Madison Area Technical College
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2006
* USD 420,280.00

The overall goal of this project is to establish a Consortium for Education in
Renewable Energy Technologies (CERET) to facilitate implementation of a broad-
based interdisciplinary approach to technical education in renewable energy
technologies. This goal supports the vision of the consortium to embrace and
mainstream renewable energy technologies through: (1) development of a
technically-competent renewable energy industry workforce. (2) fostering of the
production of more energy from Wisconsin grown agriculture products and by-
products. (3) encouragement of the use of distributed sources of energy
generation. (4) promotion of the understanding and knowledge of renewable energy
applications.

CERET focuses on: (1) establishing a technology demonstration site where
business, industry, farmers, agribusinesses, consumers, legislative and
governmental leaders, trades people, students, and educators can learn about
renewable energy technologies and distributed sources of energy generation from
the around the U.S. and the world. (2) working with business and industry
partners to provide hands-on training and new curriculums for skilled workers in
the distributed energy generation, new and emerging energy technologies, and
renewable energy field. (3) encouraging the use of ethanol, bio-diesel, and
other Wisconsin-based renewable fuels from agricultural sources. (4) making the
promise of renewable and distributed energy technologies a reality for
Wisconsin.

CERET includes as partners and collaborators: Madison Area Technical College,
Nicolet Area Technical College, the University of Wisconsin Madison Biological
Sciences Engineering, the Wisconsin Technical College System Board and
Foundation, Milwaukee School of Engineering, Wisconsin state agencies including
the Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, Department of
Commerce, and Department of Administration Divisions of Energy and Alternative
Fuels, Alliant Energy Corporation, Wisconsin Public Service, and energy
consultants, equipment producers and skilled trades associations.

CERET offers technical training and education to incumbent workers as well as
students seeking careers in renewable energy technologies. To insure that
faculty of college students and teachers of high school students are well
prepared in these technologies, the project is conducting workshops and courses
for teachers. The project also facilitates discussion and implementation of a
public voice for renewable energy technologies through a partnership with the
Wisconsin Educational Communications Board. CERET provides training for the
workforce needed to implement technologies for energy generation and
distribution to sustain the economic strength and competitiveness of Wisconsin
and the United States.