* 0202911
* SGER:Geochronology of Ross Sea Carbonates: Collaborative participation with the Italian National Antarctic Research Program CARBONANT  Cruise 2002
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Charles Hart, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2004
* USD 34,376.00

0202911&lt;br/&gt;Hart&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, provided by the Office
of Polar Programs, allows a US investigator to join a marine geological research
cruise (the CARBONANT project) sponsored by the Italian National Antarctic
Research Program and to begin a new collaborative research project with Italian
scientists. The project is to study Quaternary to recent biogenic carbonate
production and sedimentation in the Ross Sea. Sediment facies enriched in
biogenic carbonate are known from several portions of the Ross Sea continental
shelf and slope, however, the content and distribution of these facies are
incompletely known. In addition, the accumulation rates for these facies have
never been documented. Shipboard work will provide an initial assessment of
carbonate preservation and faunal content. Marine biogenic carbonates (e.g.
mollusc shells, foraminifera) are important vectors for paleoclimatic and
geochronologic information. Collections made during this cruise are intended for
use as baseline for Ross Sea biogenic carbonate stable isotope and
geochronologic data. Following the shipboard work, samples will be analyzed in
the Amino Acid Dating Laboratory at INSTAAR at the University of Colorado. This
lab will perform amino acid analysis on carbonate shelly fossils isolated from
sediment samples collected on the CARBONANT cruise. Amino acid analysis is a
useful geochronologic tool that has received only limited use in previous
Antarctic geologic studies. This analytical method can discern fossil ages
between modern and 5 million years before present. Amino acid analysis is best
applied to biogenic carbonate (e.g. mollusc shells). Paired geochronologic
analyses will be performed on single shell specimens including AMS radiocarbon
and amino acid analysis. The use of paired analyses will enable calibration of
amino acid racemization rates in Ross Sea sediments and an initial assessment of
Ross Sea bottom water temperatures. The data collected through this project will
be interpreted jointly with Italian researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;