* 0202681
* The Simulation and Fitting of the Rotational and Vibrational Structure of Electronic Transitions of Polyatomic Molecules for Singlet-singlet and Singlet-triplet Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Richard Judge, University of Wisconsin-Parkside
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2006
* USD 125,719.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Judge will carry out research in the area of high-
resolution electronic spectroscopy. Specifically, the singlet-triplet band
system of selenoformaldehyde (CH2Se)will be investigated. Thiophosgene (Cl2CS)
and nitrosomethane (CH3NO) will also be analyzed. Improved computer codes will
be written for the simulation of spectra, for the absorption and emission that
originates from an initial single vibronic level, for the calculation of Franck-
Condon factors, and other features. The codes will be shared with other
investigators in the field. The work will be done in collaboration with groups
at the University of Kentucky, the University of Akron, and the University
Claude Bernard in Lyon, France. Undergraduate students will participate in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with problems in the area of
high-resolution molecular electronic spectroscopy. The research will be done in
collaboration with groups at the University of Kentucky, the University of
Akron, and the University Claude Bernard in Lyon, France. The experimental work
will be accompanied by the development of computer codes specifically designed
to deal with the complexity of the spectral band systems. This research will be
conducted with the aid of undergraduate students. They will participate in the
work done at their home institution as well as with on-site activities at the
University of Kentucky. The students will gain valuable experience in modern
research techniques and acquire both experimental and theoretical skills. These
will be of advantage in their advanced studies, or work in industry, government
laboratories or academia.&lt;br/&gt;