* 0202648
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Development of New Preparative Techniques for the Separation of Amino Acids and Peptides Extracted from Ancient Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Jennifer Tripp, Tripp                   Jennifer       A
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,480.00

0202648 Tripp

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer
A. Tripp to work with Dr. Robert Hedges at Oxford University's Research
Laboratory for Archaeology (RLAHA) in the United Kingdom. Co-funding for this
project comes from the Math and Physical Science Directorate's Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.

The dating and isotopic analysis of specific compounds from archaeological
materials is a new and promising approach to artifact analysis. Isolating
individual compounds from ancient materials ensures that input from modern or
ancient impurities is eliminated, and that analyses are performed on well-
defined material. Currently no general techniques for performing compound-
specific dating on collagen, chitin or cellulose exist. The aim of this project
is to develop and refine technologies for isolating components of hydrolysates
from these three biological polymers in order to perform reliable and routine
accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) C14 dating and stable isotope analyses. The
anticipated outcomes of this project are (a) specific improvements in the
compound-specific analyses of archaeological materials, and (b) the development
and publication of a methodology that would be of general use in archaeological
science laboratories.

The RLAHA is one of the world's premier locations for studying archaeological
science. The UK has numerous facilities and an active community of researchers
conducting ongoing archaeological science research, and Oxford has a particular
reputation for the purification of archaeological material for isotope
measurement.