* 0202586
* The First American Conference on Neutron Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Anne Mayes, Neutron Scattering Society of America
* Standard Grant
* hugh vanhorn
* 05/31/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This award to the Neutron Scattering Society of America (NSSA) is from four NSF
units, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Chemistry Division, the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Biological Infrastructure.
The award provides partial support for the first biannual American Conference on
Neutron Scattering (ACNS) organized by the NSSA with an inaugural four-day
conference planned for June 23-27, 2002, in Knoxville, Tennessee. Neutron
research in the past 40 years has played a crucial role in advancing fundamental
science, technology and medicine in the U.S. However, for the US to remain
globally competitive in neutron science and continue to reap its technological
rewards, it is important that the community of scientists and engineers using
neutrons in research continue to grow in number and increase its public
presence. The ACNS will serve a dual role as a national user meeting and a
scientific meeting, providing a much-needed focal point for the U.S. neutron
user community and a mechanism for outreach to prospective users of national
neutron facilities. The scientific portion of the meeting agenda will include a
plenary session followed by parallel oral sessions over several days in the
topical areas of Neutron Sources & Instrumentation, Soft Condensed Matter,
Magnetism, Materials Science, Biology, Chemistry & Chemical Physics, Industrial
Applications, and Fundamental Physics. Time has also been designated for poster
sessions, user discussions, and a tour of the SNS. NSF funds will be used to
support travel expenses of young faculty, students and postdocs who attend the
first ACNS.

This award to the Neutron Scattering Society of America (NSSA) is from four NSF
units, the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, the Chemistry Division, the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Biological Infrastructure.
The award provides partial support for the first biannual American Conference on
Neutron Scattering (ACNS) organized by the NSSA with an inaugural four-day
conference planned for June 23-27, 2002, in Knoxville, Tennessee. Neutron
research in the past 40 years has played a crucial role in advancing fundamental
science, technology and medicine in the U.S. However, for the US to remain
globally competitive in neutron science and continue to reap its technological
rewards, it is important that the community of scientists and engineers using
neutrons in research continue to grow in number and increase its public
presence. The ACNS will serve a dual role as a national user meeting and a
scientific meeting, providing a much-needed focal point for the U.S. neutron
user community and a mechanism for outreach to prospective users of national
neutron facilities. The scientific portion of the meeting agenda will include a
plenary session followed by parallel oral sessions over several days in the
topical areas of Neutron Sources & Instrumentation, Soft Condensed Matter,
Magnetism, Materials Science, Biology, Chemistry & Chemical Physics, Industrial
Applications, and Fundamental Physics. Time has also been designated for poster
sessions, user discussions, and a tour of the SNS. NSF funds will be used to
support travel expenses of young faculty, students and postdocs who attend the
first ACNS.