* 0202772
* SGER: The Costs and Benefits of Self-Enhancement: Coping with the Terrorist Attack on the World Trade Center
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* George Bonanno, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 11/30/2002
* USD 45,280.00

The September 11, 2001 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center (WTC) in New
York City was a traumatic event of unparalleled magnitude. In addition to the
thousands who perished in the attack, literally tens of thousands of others were
directly and without warning exposed to grave danger as they fled the buildings.
Still others not in immediate physical danger nonetheless were forced to watch
in horror as people jumped from the towers, or were engulfed by debris. Such
images and experiences will undoubtedly leave thousands vulnerable for Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Yet, based on past research, it can be
anticipated that many of the individuals directly exposed to the WTC attack will
recover their equilibrium and return to normal functioning within a month or two
after the event. The goal of this small grant for exploratory research is to
understand this remarkable resilience. In two previous studies, the principal
investigator and his colleagues found that individuals disposed toward self-
enhancement were better able to cope with extremely adverse conditions. The
current study is designed to explore whether self-enhancing individuals who were
directly exposed to the WTC attack (i.e., in or near the WTC and either in
immediate danger or witnessed horrific sights) might cope better than other
individuals. The relationship between self-enhancement and long-term adjustment
will be examined using multiple measures, including a biological marker of
stress reactions and ratings of participant's adjustment provided by close
friends and family members. In addition, this study will further explore the
social cost of self-enhancement and how it relates to overall adjustment and
well being by including a wider range of measures of social relations than had
been used in previous research. Finally, the study will examine how survivors of
the WTC attack experience express emotions when they talk about their
experiences on September 11. These data will help determine whether self-
enhancers process emotions differently than other individuals and, if so,
whether these differences hold the key to their unusual ability to cope with
extreme adversity.&lt;br/&gt;