* 0202096
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleoclimatology and Geochronology of a Late Quaternary Eolian System, Columbia Plateau, U.S.A.
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Alan Busacca, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,800.00

The paired eolian system of the Columbia Plateau is composed of the extensive
Palouse loess of variable thickness and upwind dune fields that are derived from
reworking of sand- and silt-rich slackwater deposits from multiple episodes of
Wisconsin giant outburst flooding from Glacial Lake Missoula. Few models exist
that explain changes in the thickness and distribution of loess accumulations.
We will investigate three models that describe the interaction of migrating
sands with loess and influences of topography, bioclimate, and source sediment
character that control the thickness and distribution of loess. Field mapping
will include sample collection on a regional scale to determine the temporal and
spatial distribution of saltation- versus suspension-dominated eolian units.
Timing of stability (represented by paleosols) and eolian activity (represented
by eolian sand an loess units) will be determined by luminescence dating that
measures the last time sediments were exposed to sunlight. We will determine 1)
when and where loess deposition began following latest-Wisconsin outburst
floods, 2) if eolian saltation in upwind dunes was active concurrently with
suspension fallout downwind, 3) if periods of saltator release inferred from
sand-rich intervals in the loess were associated with periods of heightened
aridity, and 4) the mass accumulation rates of loess.

Dust emissions on the Columbia Plateau today resulting from dryland farming are
hazardous through the presence of particulate matter less than 10 microns in
size in the air and reduced visibility. This regional study will show how the
Columbia Plateau system has responded to climate change through time, allowing
future dust emissions to be predicted. While paired eolian systems do exist
elsewhere in the world (China, Europe, Alaska, North American Great Plains), the
Columbia Plateau offers the opportunity to study multiple models of loess
generation on a workable geographic scale, to add to the knowledge of the
dynamics of paired eolian systems, and to enhance the record of late-Pleistocene
to Holocene climate change for the Columbia Plateau. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award will also provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.