* 0202061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transforming Corporate Mass Tourism: A Case Study of Sandals Resorts International in Jamaica
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2002,08/31/2003
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 08/31/2003
* USD 9,425.00

During recent decades, tourism has been one of the most rapidly growing segments
of the world economy. The total number of international tourists was estimated
at nearly 700 million people in 2000, with the estimated $476 billion in
tourist-related transactions constituting about a tenth of the global GNP.
Although the tourism industry frequently has been criticized for fostering
environmental harm, a growing number of firms are seeking to adopt and adapt
alternative-tourism policies that are more ecologically and culturally
responsible. This doctoral dissertation research project will conduct a
comprehensive analysis of the implementation of alternative-tourism policies and
practices by conventional mass-tourism corporations through a case study of the
Sandals Resorts International corporation, which is headquartered in Jamaica.
Sandals is the largest and most successful all-inclusive mass-tourism
corporation operating in the Caribbean. In 1998, Sandals transformed its Negril
facility by creating economic, cultural, and environmental programs that mimic
those of alternative-tourism developments. In so doing, Sandals Negril became
the first all-inclusive hotel in the world to be certified to the Green Globe 21
Standard for its environmental policies and management. This study will
investigate Sandals Negril's economic, cultural, and environmental programs and
practices in order to understand the difficulties a traditional mass-tourism
corporation faces in implementing policies of sustainability as well as the
corporate rationale lying behind such transformations. The study will focus on
the decisions behind Sandals Resorts' move to "mass ecotourism," and it will
investigate how the corporation develops, implements, and evaluates programs of
sustainability. Sandals' five other Jamaican resorts, all of which have retained
their mass-tourism character, will serve as a baseline for comparison, as will
one alternative-tourism site located on the island. The bulk of the research
will consist of an organizational ethnography of Sandals, with inquiries ranging
from the highest levels of corporate management in Montego Bay to waste-
management workers in the Negril facility. Interviews also will be conducted
with government tourism officials and with people living in proximity to each of
the resorts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be the most comprehensive
analysis of an international tourism corporation in a less developed country.
Sandals is central to Jamaica's economy and to Caribbean tourism more generally.
An industry leader, Sandals is a potential harbinger of changes underway in
tourism. The transformation of Sandals Negril is widely recognized as one of the
more important changes in the industry, with widespread implications for the
further development of new resorts and for intra-industry competition. If mass-
tourism corporations begin to more widely adopt the characteristics of
alternative-tourism resorts, there will be pervasive effects on the economic,
cultural, and environmental footprints of tourism facilities. Furthermore, these
transformations in the mass-tourism industry will also affect the future of
alternative-tourism development in other contexts throughout the world.
Methodologically, the research will contribute a much-needed corporate case
study to the literature on tourism development in less developed countries. As
an organizational ethnography, the research will also offer a model for similar
investigations into the restructuring of corporations. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;