* 0202176
* Local Cohomology and Related Questions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2009
* Gennady Lyubeznik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 413,281.00

&lt;br/&gt;A large part of Professor Lyubeznik's research on local
cohomology&lt;br/&gt;over the last decade has been devoted to the study of a
number of striking&lt;br/&gt;connections with several quite diverse areas of
mathematics, such as etale&lt;br/&gt;cohomology, topology of algebraic
varieties, D-modules and others including&lt;br/&gt;the theory of tight closure
and cohomology of groups. Professor &lt;br/&gt;Lyubeznik is going to continue to
study these (and some other) &lt;br/&gt;questions by using methods that have
been successful in the past as &lt;br/&gt;well as developing some new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is always fascinating when a connection is
discovered between two &lt;br/&gt;very different fields of mathematics because
it can result in &lt;br/&gt;unexpected and significant discoveries inaccessible
by the methods of &lt;br/&gt;only one of those two fields. This project is in
the areas of mathematics known as Abstract Algebra and Algebraic Geometry, with
connections to Topology. Abstract Algebra is a vast generalization of high
school or college algebra, think of it as the algebra of many simultaneous
polynomial equations in many variables. Algebraic Geometry gives a way of
studying the solutions to such a system of equations as a geometric object.
Topology is the study of those properties of geometric objects that don't change
when the object is stretched or twisted, as if it were made of rubber. Over the
last decade "local cohomology," an algebraic tool used in all three areas,
&lt;br/&gt;has been shown to have some striking connections with a number of
&lt;br/&gt;very different areas, including differential equations and
&lt;br/&gt;others. These connections are mutually beneficial. For example,
&lt;br/&gt;"D-modules," an algebraic version of differential equations, has
helped &lt;br/&gt;establish some important algebraic properties of local
cohomology, while &lt;br/&gt;local cohomology has helped prove some striking
topological results. Even though&lt;br/&gt;considerable progress on this circle
of ideas has been made, much&lt;br/&gt;remains to be done.