* 0202399
* 21st Century Urban Technical Education Project-Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Len Sterry, Milwaukee Area Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 08/31/2006
* USD 900,001.00

In Milwaukee and the State of Wisconsin too few high school graduates transition
into technical careers. A gap exists between the existing supply of graduates
and the high wage technical jobs available. The 21st Century Urban Technical
Education Project, funded in 1999 by the National Science Foundation, has
responded to this problem by creating a new approach to technology education.
Focusing initially on the construction trades during Phase I, the current
initiative focuses on the application of this technology education model/design
to Energy and Power and Transportation. Phase II begins to diffuse this
technology education model at three district high schools in the Milwaukee
Public Schools in an effort to bring about systemic change in the future. The
project continues to prepare technical high school students for technical career
opportunities through an articulated 2+2+2 approach and the development of an
integrated/connected education model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project refines
and assesses the template for standards-based educational reform designed and
developed in Phase I as part of the construction technology cluster. Phase II
addresses the areas of curriculum reform, faculty development, diversity,
marketing and recruitment, partnerships, and the integration of applied
technology in education. The major partners in Phase II include the Milwaukee
Public Schools, the Milwaukee Area Technical College, the University of
Wisconsin-Stout, Wisconsin Energy Corporation, the U.S. Department of
Transportation, the Association of General Contractors of Greater Milwaukee, and
various business, industry, and labor organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase
II curriculum for grades 11-14 in Energy and Power and Transportation is being
aligned to state and national standards. A coordinated secondary and post-
secondary teacher training initiative, which is based on the successful
NSF/WASDI (Wisconsin Academy for Staff Development Initiatives) project, is
being established in collaboration with business and industry for ongoing
faculty development. A committee of partners, using a shared decision-making
model, is guiding and overseeing technical education initiatives and providing
technical training opportunities for staff and students. A career development
model and a marketing plan are also being developed and implemented. In
addition, research and implementation strategies are breaking down barriers for
women and minorities in non-traditional technical careers and supporting and
increasing involvement by underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;