* 0202935
* Problems in Probability Arising from Ecology and Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Richard Durrett, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2007
* USD 312,168.00



0202935 Durrett Durrett proposes to study a variety of problems in probability
theory that arise from questions in ecology and genetics. In the area of
stochastic spatial models, he will study the asymptotic behavior of multitype
voter models where voters have several opinions and are more likely to imitate
neighbors with similar opinions. With Ted Cox he will work to extend their
conclusions for the stepping stone model to samples of size k > 2, and will
study equilibrium properties of a hybrid zone which results when each of two
alleles is favored in one half of the space. With Ed Perkins he will study
measure valued limits of particle systems to produce limit processes with
interactions between different types of particles. Not all of the systems
Durrett studies will be spatial however: he will work with Jason Schweinsberg to
develop approximations of genetic hitchhiking that involve the coalescent with
multiple collisions, will study the phase transition in a quasi-species model
which models properties of viruses with high mutation rates, and will continue
his work with Vlada Limic on Kauffmann's NK model, which is a prototypical
example of a fitness landscape with a large number of local maxima. Durrett's
research is motivated by a variety of applications. Durrett will work with Ted
Cox to extend their work on spatial genetics models to investigate explanations
for the surprisingly large amount of linkage disequilibrium (genetic
correlation) in the human genome. Understanding the possible sources of patterns
in DNA sequences is important for using association mapping to locate genes and
to identify footprints of positive selection. In relation to the latter
question, Durrett will work with Jason Schweinsberg to develop an approximation
to the genetic hitchhiking that occurs with the fixation of favorable mutation,
which will allow for the derivation of analytical results for quantities that
can currently be understood only by simulation. A major theme of Durrett's
research is the influence of a spatial distribution of competitors on
equilibrium properties of a system. With Simon Levin, he will study a collection
of stochastic spatial models for the evolution of social norms. With Ted Cox, he
will investigate hybrid zones where closely related but genetically
differentiated populations coexist in close proximity. With Ed Perkins he will
investigate scaling limits of stochastic spatial models, in order to construct
new interesting examples of interacting measure-valued diffusions and to obtain
approximations for particle systems with large range.