* 0202329
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Tiwanaku Residential Mobility and Archaeological Chemistry: Strontium and Lead Isotope Analyses in the South Central Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2004
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Price, Kelly Knudson will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation at the University of Wisconsin at Madison. She will
use archaeological chemistry to investigate the Precolumbian Tiwanaku culture,
which existed from AD 500-1000 in the South Central Andes. The large and
impressive site of Tiwanaku, located in Bolivia, was a religious, economic and
political center that exerted influence over what is now southern Peru, northern
Chile and western Bolivia. However, the nature of that influence is unclear and
very controversial. More specifically, the relationship between the capital city
of Tiwanaku and smaller sites associated with Tiwanaku has been heavily debated.
While some scholars argue that these sites in southern Peru and northern Chile
are colonies established by the Tiwanaku empire to gain access to valuable
agricultural goods, others insist that these sites were populated by local
people with religious or economic ties, but not political, ties to the capital.

While archaeologists have tried to address this debate through various means,
only archaeological chemistry can definitively identify colonists from the
capital city of Tiwanaku in the proposed Tiwanaku colonies. Through a new
technique that utilizes the strontium and lead isotope ratios in archaeological
human teeth and bone, Knudson will determine where people buried at the proposed
Tiwanaku colonies lived for the first 5 years of their lives. By determining the
patterns of residential mobility at the proposed Tiwanaku colonies and their
biological relationship to the capital city of Tiwanaku, Knudson will test the
various hypotheses concerning the nature of the Tiwanaku polity.

This research is important on a variety of levels. Since this powerful
methodology is still relatively new, this dissertation research will help refine
the use of strontium and lead isotope analyses in archaeology, and will help
convince the archaeological community of its utility. In addition, this research
will elucidate the relationship between the capital city at Tiwanaku and
possible Tiwanaku sites in the hinterlands, and will help Andeanists resolve the
debate on the nature of the Tiwanaku polity. Finally, because most information
on imperial strategies comes from regions and time periods for which written
records exist, this research on Tiwanaku heartland-hinterland interactions and
imperial strategies will expand current knowledge on the role of residential
mobility in prehistoric state development and maintenance. The work will also
assist in training a promising young scientist.