* 0202939
* Heat Kernel Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Bruce Driver, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/2005
* USD 162,292.00

This research is devoted to questions involving heat equations in both finite
and infinite dimensional contexts. The following issues are to be addressed. 1.
The existence of differential type inequalities related to hypoelliptic heat
equations in finite dimensions, including the existence of logarithmic Sobolev
and Poincare (or mass gap) type inequalities. 2. The existence of differential
inequalities related to heat kernel measure and Wiener measures on path and loop
spaces of Riemannian manifolds 3. The relationship between heat kernel measures
and pinned Wiener measures on Loop spaces of compact Riemannian manifolds. 4.
Extensions of Fock space like representations from finite dimensional groups to
infinite dimensional loop groups. 5. The generalization of certain finite
dimensional approximations to Wiener measures to include the "super symmetric
quantum mechanics" setting used by physicists. &lt;br/&gt; Most of the questions
to be studied in this research are motivated by, or are outgrowths of, questions
coming from studying a number of fields, namely the spread of heat in curved
metal plates, quantum mechanics, quantum field theories, and certain aspects of
probability theory. These seemingly disparate fields turn out to share a common
mathematical description, namely "parabolic partial differential equations" or
equivalently the probabilistic theory of "Brownian motion." In most interesting
(physically relevant) cases it is seldom possible to find explicit solutions to
the complicated partial differential equations to be studied by the P.I.
Nevertheless, it is often possible to discover interesting and relevant
properties of the solutions. A typical phenomenon of parabolic partial
differential equations is the fact that their solutions tend towards steady
state values after waiting a sufficiently long time. For example, if a metal
plate is heated in a non-uniform way and then left alone, the heat in the plate
will redistribute itself over time so that the temperature reaches a constant
equilibrium value throughout the plate. A fundamental problem, related to
"Poincare" and "logarithmic Sobolev" inequalities, is the questions of how
quickly do the systems described by the parabolic partial differential equations
to be studied in this research converge to their equilibrium value. This same
rate of convergence question has another interpretation in the context of
quantum field theories describing relativistic (i.e. moving near the speed of
light) elementary particles. For these theories the existence of a Poincare
inequality has the desirable interpretation that the mathematical theory does
not predict an unreasonable plethora of elementary particles. The particle
interpretation of parabolic and related quantum mechanical Shrodinger equations
will be another point of study. The particle interpretation goes under the title
of Fock space representations which were mentioned in the first paragraph.
&lt;br/&gt;