* 0202863
* SMECTEP
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Karl Longley, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2006
* USD 543,883.00

The California State University, Fresno Science and Mathematics Education Center
(SMEC) is implementing a collaborative teacher education partnership project
within the service region of the university. SMEC, in collaboration with
numerous school districts in its service region along with 2 community colleges,
Reedley College and West Hills Community College at Lemoore (including their
satellite campuses), is providing a range of program components designed to
enhance science and mathematics teacher recruitment, induction, support, and
preparation in the Central Valley of California. Activities are facilitated and
coordinated through a new network of SMEC satellite partners known as Learning
Communities centered at the regional community colleges in collaboration with
neighboring school districts. Project activities include: 1) expansion of
efforts to recruit and support future science and mathematics teachers (middle
and high school) throughout the service region of California State University,
Fresno with recruitment efforts focusing on under represented minority groups;
2) development of a network of Science and Mathematics Future Science and
Mathematics Teachers Clubs based at the two new Learning Community Centers; 3)
use of a highly developed and successful model for early field experiences for
all SMECTEP participants in the project; and 4) creation of a user-friendly
Alternative Pathways Program designed to assist potential science and
mathematics teachers entering the profession from other professions that
incorporates special programs and summer institutes designed to assist in the
career transition process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SMECTEP incorporates new
recruitment and support strategies building upon the successful Fresno
Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers (FCEPT) in an effort
to greatly expand outreach to the service region of the university. STEM Site
coordinators based at each of the Learning Community Centers (partner community
colleges) serve as primary liaisons to SMECTEP and as key facilitators in the
project. They serve as the primary recruitment facilitators at their site in
collaboration with key district science and mathematics teachers. They are also
establishing Future Science and Mathematics Teacher Clubs in collaboration with
local SMECTEP school districts and identifying science and/or mathematics
faculty on their campuses who may be interested in attending or leading
professional development workshops. Academic Year and Summer Institutes focused
on the modeling approach to learning are offered for preservice students. A
partnership with the University High School is providing a campus-based
demonstration site for the teaching strategies introduced at the
Institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SMECTEP is improving the preparation of future
science and mathematics teachers through early field experiences and other
support and mentoring programs. The project is increasing the pool of
credentialed middle and high school mathematics and science teachers in the
Central Valley with special consideration for attracting prospective teachers
from under served ethnic communities. &lt;br/&gt;