* 0202160
* Collaborative Research: Investigations of Non-Classic Lake-Effect Boundary Layer Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,04/30/2006
* Mark Hjelmfelt, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 399,927.00

Advances in research and operational weather observation systems and numerical
modeling techniques have led to progressive improvements in understanding of
physical processes involved in the development and evolution of lake-effect snow
storms. In particular recent observations taken during the Lake-Induced
Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) and mesoscale numerical models have been
utilized to better understand isolated "classic" lake-effect systems that
develop primarily from lake surface heat and moisture fluxes in fall and winter
months. The enhanced scientific understanding of interactions between microscale
and mesoscale processes in classic lake-effect systems can now be applied to
more complex, and perhaps more common and intense, non-classic lake-effect
storms.

This collaborative research project will build on past research results and use
new observations and numerical models to develop a physically-consistent
understanding of complex interactions of synoptic systems and mesoscale lake-
effect systems and factors controlling the coherence of, and structure along,
mesoscale lake-effect convective bands. In particular the Principal
Investigators will analyze data obtained from radars, aircraft, satellites and
surface instrumentation and perform detailed mesoscale model simulations to
study unresolved issues for non-classic lake-effect situations. Four specific
research objectives are to: 1) Determine differences in the cloud microphysical
structure and thermodynamics of lake-effect boundary layers that occur with and
without large-scale precipitation aloft; 2) Determine the effects of a warm lake
on the mesoscale dynamics and structure of moving mesoscale precipitation
systems (such as associated with synoptic fronts); 3) Determine the processes by
which the convective boundary layer and mesoscale circulations from an upwind
lake influence lake-effect development over a downwind lake; 4) Determine the
dynamic mechanisms leading to the development of mesoscale structures along
lake-effect snow bands and the influence of vertical wind shear on band
structural coherence.

Successful completion of this research could help improve the forecast of
intense lake-effect snowstorms.