* 0202287
* Biotechnology/Bioinformatics Discovery!
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* F LeRoy Walser, Oklahoma City Community College
* Standard Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 07/31/2006
* USD 230,992.00

This project is expanding the pipeline of qualified high school students,
especially minority students, into the biotechnology program at Oklahoma City
Community College (OKCCC) through infusion of high quality biotechnology
experiences into the high schools. The state of Oklahoma lists biotechnology as
a priority growth area, but currently the labor pool of skilled biotechnicians
cannot meet local demand, and the average high school student knows little about
the world of biotechnology and its career potential. Educational teams from
Oklahoma City Public Schools (OKCPS), led by a science educator/biotechnology
faculty at the community college, are selecting and adapting exemplary materials
from NSF-supported projects such as Shoestring Biotechnology, BioLink, and Cases
in Industry Practice in Biotechnology as well as bioinformatics activities from
the Dolan DNA Learning Center of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. Intellectual
support for the teachers starts with intense summer workshops, where teachers
run the labs, study the concepts, and map material to national and state science
standards as well as bioindustry skill standards. As the biotechnology learning
community takes shape, ongoing advice, encouragement, and sharing of experiences
comes through regular meetings, a list-serve, and visits from the Principal
Investigator (PI) and Coordinator. Practical support to teachers comes from the
equipment loaner center, providing needed equipment as well as supplies for
ready-to-go experiments. In the course of implementing this project, teachers
develop professionally. Some assume a leadership role in dissemination of
results and continuation of the project.

OKCPS is enriched with minority students who are potential first-generation
college students. OKCPS is also in the midst of a NSF-funded Urban Systemic
Program, which aims to bring inquiry-based learning into the science and
mathematics programming. Biotechnology/Bioinformatics Discovery! augments the
district's ongoing efforts to improve the performance of minority students by
using nationally developed biotechnology experiences well suited to these
students' needs. The project also plans to address cultural barriers to science
career and higher education choices by including parents/mentors in the
programming. In the first year, three Oklahoma City Public School (OKCPS) high
school teams (a minimum of three teachers per school) are implementing the
biotechnology modules at various levels as part of existing courses, not limited
to science courses. The second year, the project expands to include a full
biotechnology course, additional OKCPS schools, and more biotechnology modules
within additional courses. The third year, the scheme expands to schools
throughout the region. Student learning is augmented with capstone experiences:
more elaborate/sophisticated experiments at OKCCC, and visits to working
biotechnologists at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (OUHSC)
and the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation (OMRF) to witness exciting
applications of this knowledge. The extensive exposure to high-quality
biotechnology experiences as well as to higher education and research sites is
expected to increase the college attendance rate and entry into science careers
of these high school students.