* 0202534
* Experimental Studies of Nanoscopic Superconductors:  Half-flux Quantum, Metallic State of Cooper Pairs, and the Berry's Phase
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2007
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2007
* USD 306,000.00

Research in superconductors on the nanometer scale has made strong headway in
recent years, evidenced by the observation of scores of new physical phenomena
and the publication of several intriguing theoretical predictions. The latter
include negative Josephson coupling that results in pi-junctions, and therefore,
half-flux quantum and novel vortex states, in conventional s-wave
superconductors, a metallic state of Cooper pairs, and the Berry's phase in
mesoscopic systems. This individual investigator award supports a project that
will seek out these predicted physical phenomena, through innovations in sample
fabrication and measurement techniques. At the same time the project will pursue
its educational goals, including undergraduate and graduate student training as
well as public outreach with an emphasis on attracting more women and minorities
to science. The discovery of new physical phenomena and the development of novel
techniques in sample fabrication will have a broad impact on nanoscale
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to maintain the impressive growth in
the semiconductor industries such as seen in the computer, telecommunication,
and e-commerce sectors, alternatives to the traditional technology need to be
developed. It is recognized that new technologies operating at the nanoscale
will become increasingly important. Within this context, research in
superconductors on the nanometer scale has made strong headways, evidenced by
the observation of scores of new physical phenomena and the publication of
several intriguing theoretical predictions. This individual investigator award
supports a project that will seek out the novel physical phenomena predicted by
theory. At the same time the project will pursue the educational goals of
student training and public outreach with an emphasis on attracting more women
and minorities to science and engineering. The discovery of new physical
phenomena and novel techniques in sample fabrication will have a broader impact
on nanoscale technologies.&lt;br/&gt;