* 0202576
* Development for a Model for Community College Leadership in Providing Opportunities for Disadvantaged High School Students in Science-based Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Ralph Ferguson, Los Angeles Trade Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 318,675.00

The science/technology industries in and around the service area of Los Angeles
Trade Technical College (LATTC) have long created a demand for chemical
technicians that greatly exceeded the number of graduates from our Chemical
Technology program. The Chemical Technology program at our school has a thirty-
two year track record in the preparation and training of its graduates for
immediate employment as highly skilled technicians in applied chemistry/physics,
as well as in providing an adequate foundation for students seeking bachelors'
degrees. Employers, as well as faculty, recognize the program is rendered less
effective than it should be by the many applicants who fail to qualify for the
program as a result of inadequate high school preparation, especially those from
inner city schools and minorities of immigrant backgrounds. Employers also
reject many high school applicants seeking work, as they are grossly ill
equipped academically to handle the workplace environment. We are attempting to
remedy the problem by launching a high school science technology program based
on Science in a Technical World, a NSF-funded project product from the American
Chemical Society, with an alliance of local employers, the college, and the
inner city high schools. Our goal is to develop a model by which two-year
colleges can take a leadership role in outreach programs which encourage
disadvantaged high school students to choose science and science-based
technology careers. Our objectives are to assure that: (1) 180 high school
students demonstrate a 10% increase in basic science and technical knowledge
through participation in this program; (2) 20% of students completing this
training program enter a two-year science-based technology program at a
community college upon completion of their high school education, (3) six high
school science teachers from the same schools complete a vocational applications
of science knowledge and skills training program, and (4) all participating
students complete an introduction to instrumentation and a math lab that
prepares them for the industry work environment or a two-year college chemistry-
based technology program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;