* 0202620
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Molten Salts and Ionic Plastic Crystalline Materials as Electrolytes for High Energy Lithium Batteries
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Wesley Henderson, Henderson               Wesley         A
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2004
* USD 128,900.00

0202620 Henderson

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Wesley A.
Henderson to work with Dr. Stefano Passerini at the Italian Agency for New
Technologies, Energy and the Environment (ENEA) in Rome, Italy.

This project is based on the study and development of alternative electrolytes
(molten salts and ionic plastic crystalline materials) for lithium/air
batteries. The development of such materials could provide critical
breakthroughs in battery technology for a wide array of applications (e.g.,
electrically powered automobiles, power generation equipment, and electronics.).
The lithium/air batteries potentially have an order of magnitude higher specific
energy than zinc/air batteries, which are used currently, but these suffer from
problems such as corrosion of lithium metal with water. These problems have
inhibited their commercial use with conventional, highly hydrophobic
electrolytes such as poly(ethylene oxide)/lithium salts. The hybrophobic molten
salts to be studied in this project represent a potential solution to this
problem.

ENEA's Advanced Electrochemical Energy Division conducts projects on both
lithium rechargeable batteries and polymer electrolyte fuel cells for electric
vehicles.