* 0202802
* New Policies for a New Century
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Dane Linn, National Governors' Association
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 04/30/2005
* USD 214,564.00

In the late 1990s, the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
(NGA) recognized that the driving force behind the 21st century economy is
knowledge, and that developing intellectual capital is the best way to ensure
prosperity. In a series of publications NGA began to describe the ways that
state governments, including their public colleges and universities, need to
change to help their citizens develop this intellectual capital. Necessary
changes include becoming flexible and adaptable, consumer friendly, reinvented
with technology, accountable and performance-driven. Meanwhile, the market for
postsecondary education has continued to grow in size and importance and on-line
learning has begun to proliferate. The quantity and nature of the new economy's
educational demands place extraordinary pressure on this new, more diverse
postsecondary education market. Our nation not only needs more of its adults to
have education and training beyond high school; it also needs more of its adults
to possess scientific, mathematical, and technological competencies. Tightening
state budgets intersect with these trends to heighten traditional gubernatorial
concerns with access, cost, and accountability. Together, these trends lead
Governors to ask for better measures of higher education quality. Specifically,
they seek measures that are more performance than input-driven, focused on the
customer, and adaptive to such technological changes as e-learning. NGA is
engaged in a set of activities whose combined objective is the development of
state policies that reward postsecondary efficiency and effectiveness. (1) A
policy academy for eight states designed to develop new quality assurance
practices for postsecondary education. State teams are participating in two
annual meetings of the academy, where governors, state higher education
executive officers, legislators and other key higher education stakeholders are
working with national experts to identify new models for i) providing customer-
driven, course-level quality assurance, and ii) assessing undergraduate student
learning at the discipline and institutional levels. (2) A national forum for
fifty states designed to help Governors define expectations and refine their
postsecondary education accountability systems. Key themes of the meeting
include: supporting K-12 reform with linked accountability systems; integrating
learning outcomes and other measures of quality into accountability systems; and
linking economic and social indicators to postsecondary education
accountability. In addition to presentations of research findings and lessons
from states, the forum includes workshops for board members, college presidents,
and policymakers. (3) An Issue Brief designed to share existing research and
practice in the emerging and important policy area of undergraduate student
assessment. The desired outcomes of this proposed set of activities are: -
Databases measuring course-level quality that are online and usable. - Comments
and actions of Governors that reflect greater knowledge of the basic
methodological and policy issues related to undergraduate student assessment. -
Commissions, pilot studies, and/or large scale assessment investments that
reflect stakeholder consensus for the need to comparably measure undergraduate
competencies, including science, mathematics and technology literacy. - State
higher education accountability systems that incorporate student learning data
and link more closely to accountability systems for K-12.