* 0202703
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Functional Analysis of Electrical Feedback from Horizontal Cells to Cone Photoreceptors
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,11/30/2004
* Colleen Shields, Shields, Colleen
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 11/30/2004
* USD 122,171.00

0202703 Shields

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Colleen
Shields to work with Dr. Maarten Kamermans at the Netherlands Ophthalmic
Research Institute in Amsterdam, Netherlands.

This project aims at a functional characterization of the network formed by the
cones, horizontal cells, and bipolar cells in the vertebrate retina. The
negative feedback pathway from horizontal cells to cones is an essential element
of this network. Although we are approaching a quantitative description of this
first stage of retinal processing, no psychophysical correlate for this network
activity exists. Fortunately, a new tool for analysis of horizontal cell
function from the cellular to the behavioral levels has recently become
available. Recent studies in the Kamermans laboratory have indentified connexin
26 (Cx26) hemichannels as key actors in the communication between horizontal
cells and cones. Cx26 forms putative hemichannels on horizontal cell dendrites
near the glutamate release site of the cones. Blocking these hemichannels
abolishes all feedback-mediated responses in cones and horizontal cells,
suggesting an ephaptic feedback mechanism in which the release of
neurotransmitter by the cones depends on the polarization of the horizontal
cells. To do this, they will generate transgenic zebrafish with a modified
dominant negative Cx26. Wild type and transgenically modified animals will be
studied electrophysiologically to verify the importance of Cx26 hemichannels in
the feedback from horizontal cells to individual cone photoreceptors. The
creation and study of zebrafish lacking Cx26 function will yield a quantitative
physiological description of this neural network and will provide a
psychophysical correlate of its role in visual perception in both man and fish.

The lab of Dr. Kamermans first described the role of Cx26 in horizontal cell
feedback to cones. The expertise in the group encompasses electrophysiology,
anatomy, psychophysics, and molecular biology. Dr. Kamermans is an expert in
outer retinal circuitry.