* 0202688
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Environmental Controls on an Invertebrate-Microbe Association:  Tropical Corals and Their Symbiotic Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Marshall Hayes, Hayes                   Marshall       L
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 04/30/2005
* USD 107,752.00

0202688&lt;br/&gt;Hayes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Marshall L. Hayes to work with Dr. Christine Ferrier-
Pages at Centre Scientifique de Monaco, Observatoire Oceanologique European in
Monaco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how
environmental conditions control an animal-bacteria symbiosis, using an
experimental model based on the stony coral Stylophora pistillata and the
bacterial community that lives on the coral tissue surface. Two questions will
be answered: first, whether environmental changes in temperature and nutrient
chemistry regulate bacterial community composition and abundance; and second,
whether environmental changes influence the bacterial community by causing the
host animal to alter its biochemistry. The first objective will be to employ
molecular and non-molecular methods to identify bacteria collected from the
surface of S. pistillata with the result being a database of long-term bacterial
cultures and of bacterial DNA information. The second objective will describe
the carbohydrate composition of mucus on the surface of S. pistillata under
different temperature and nutrient regimes. This project will broaden
understanding of animal-bacteria interactions, providing insights into how
symbioses respond to large-scale environmental change in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ferrier-Pages and her research team specialize
in the fields of microbial ecology, coral nutrition and coral-microbe
interactions. The OOE is situated within the Musee Oceanographique de Monaco, a
museum and aquarium that has the ability to cultivate corals for lengthy
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;