* 0202790
* FRG:  Excitation Dynamics and Laser Action in Systems of Pi-Conjugated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 603,977.00

This project is a collaborative effort among researchers at the University of
Utah Physics De-partment with expertise in Organic Materials Science, Transport
and Device Physics, Optics and Optoelectronics, and Theoretical Physics. The
project research goals are the synthesis and growth of novel semiconductor pi-
conjugated organic crystals and self-assembled polymer thin films; fabrication,
applications and theory of organic optoelectronic devices and microlasers with
un-usual resonators; and study of the photoexcitation dynamics, laser action and
charge carrier prop-erties in these systems. The approach is to study pi-
conjugated polymers and long oligomers that form self assembled 2D lamellae
and/or other highly planar chain morphologies in spin cast films, as well as
novel single crystals of oligomers, acenes, and their alloys. These polymer
films and single crystals can be grown with very low defect densities,
consequently substantially in-creasing their carrier mobilities. The
photogeneration and dynamics of excitons and polaron pairs in the polymer films
and single crystals at low excitation intensities, the formation of stimulated
emission, laser action and exciton nonlinear processes at high excitation
intensities will be stud-ied. Additionally, organic light emitting diodes (OLED)
and field effect transistors (FET) will be fabricated using self-assembled
polymer films and single crystals, along with study of the prop-erties of
carriers injected into the OLED active material and FET channel transistor using
a novel spectroscopic technique. A variety of unusual microlaser resonators will
be fabricated, tested and investigated experimentally and theoretically. These
include randomly formed resonators, which give rise to the phenomenon of random
lasers in pi-conjugated films and infiltrated opals; asym-metric resonators that
form both chaotic and stable laser modes with improved directionality over
existing microdisk laser resonators; and 2D photonic crystals that will be
directly patterned onto the organic crystals using electron beam lithography.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in
topical areas of electronic/photonic materi-als science having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong em-phasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. The combined
resources, in-cluding crystal growth, polymer synthesis, experimental and
theoretical physics methods, device fabrication, processing and testing, provide
special opportunities for education and training of post doctoral associates,
graduate and undergraduate students involved in highly interdisciplinary
forefront research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;