* 0202141
* Aquarium Technology and Marine Interpretation
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Jane Hodgkins, Oregon Coast Community College
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 04/30/2006
* USD 779,845.00

This project isl developing and implementing an Associate of Applied Science
(AAS) degree program in Aquarium Technology and Marine Interpretation. The
program is educating individuals to work in the growing number of aquariums,
ornamental fish enterprises, aquaculture facilities, and marine recreation and
interpretative centers in the Pacific Northwest and throughout the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an Advanced Technology Education (ATE) Adaptation and
Implementation Project, Oregon Coast Community College is:&lt;br/&gt;(a)
Reviewing and adapting curricula on Fisheries Technology developed by Northwest
Center for Sustainable Resources (DUE 981315) and aquarist curricula developed
by Marine Advanced Technology Education Center (DUE 9752028);&lt;br/&gt;(b)
Developing additional curriculum specific to aquarium technology and marine
interpretation using the DACUM ( Developing A CurriculUM )
process;&lt;br/&gt;(c) Submiting and receiving approval for the AAS degree from
the Oregon Department of Education, Division of Professional/Technical
Education;&lt;br/&gt;(d) Enrolling 25 students in the program in each of years
two and three of the grant;&lt;br/&gt;(e) Developing articulation agreements
with Oregon State University and other four-year institutions to facilitate
successful transition to related bachelor's degree programs; and&lt;br/&gt;(f)
Sponsoring annual marine education and career institutes for high school
students. These institutes give 100 students per year the opportunity to explore
careers in aquatic life support, aquatic animal husbandry and health, and marine
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is accomplishing these tasks
with the assistance of local and national partners. The partners provide
technical expertise, training facilities, and internship opportunities for
students. Local partners include the Oregon Coast Aquarium, the Bureau of Land
Management, the Port of Newport, private nature-based tourist enterprises, and
the Oregon State University Hatfield Marine Science Center, which includes
Oregon State University's Marine Science program, Extension Sea Grant and
research facilities for the Environmental Protection Agency, the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Association, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
and the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. A National Science Foundation
funded nation-wide survey indicated strong employer demand for a technical
training program of this nature.