* 0202016
* Two-dimensional Electrons in Modulation-Doped AlAs Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2005
* Mansour Shayegan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2005
* USD 420,000.00

This experimental condensed matter physics project focuses on electron
interaction physics in high-quality, quantum-confined semiconductor structures.
The program includes studies of both fabrication, via molecular beam epitaxy
technique, and of electronic transport properties at low temperatures and high
magnetic fields where electron correlation phenomena dominate. The emphasis is
on high-quality two-dimensional (2D) electron systems confined to selectively-
doped AlAs quantum wells. The 2D electrons in AlAs have parameters that are very
different from those of the standard 2D electrons in GaAs: they have a much
larger and anisotropic effective mass, a much larger effective g-factor, and
they occupy multiple conduction band valleys. Since these parameters influence
the electron-electron interaction, AlAs 2D electrons thus provide a crucial and
important test-bed for new many-body physics. The proposed projects are
performed primarily by students, both graduate and undergraduate, and form a
crucial part of their education and training. Quality education, in cutting edge
technology and physics, is therefore integrated into the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves an experimental study of
interaction between electrons in specially designed semiconductor structures. In
these structures, the electrons are confined to specific layers in the material
and are spatially separated from the dopant atoms (impurities). As a result, the
electron system iis very pure and the physics is dominated by electron-electron
interaction rather than electron-dirt (-iimpurity) interaction. Such systems
serve as a testing ground for some of the most exciting physics involving
interaction. The particular system that is explored in this work involves the
confinement of electrons in an AlAs (aluminum arsenide) layer. The electrons in
AlAs have parameters that are very different from the more conventional system
of electrons in a GaAs (galium arsenide) layer so that new phenomena is expected
to occur. This research program includes studies of both fabrication, via
molecular beam epitaxy technique, and of electronic transport properties at low
temperatures and high magnetic fields where electron interaction phenomena
dominate. The major part of the research will be performed by graduate and
undergraduate students. The students will do state-of-the-art research, under
close supervision, on some of the most exciting and challenging problems in
solid state physics. Both the fabrication and the physics of advanced layered
semiconductor structures are at the forefront of today's science and technology.
Therefore, while the subject of the proposed research is fundamental, well-
trained and educated students in this field will be invaluable resources for the
US as well as the rest of the world.&lt;br/&gt;