* 0202366
* Online Degree Program:  Electrical Transmission Systems Technology (ETST)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2005
* William Wahlman, Bismarck State College
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 12/31/2005
* USD 899,911.00

Electrical generation system operators are essential to the reliable and safe
distribution of electric power. Recent federal regulations, certification
requirements, and projected need for a trained workforce have created an urgent
need for this program. Bismarck State College (BSC), expanding upon existing
energy programs and distance education expertise, joins industry and technology
partners, in the development and delivery of an anytime, anywhere accredited
Associate Degree in Electrical Transmission Systems Technology. This project
encompasses several national funding priorities including: response to a
national workforce education need; collaboration and effectiveness of multiple
partners; balance between cost efficiencies and flexibility; development of high
quality, interactive courses, and; accountability of student learning and
program success.

An industry advisory committee works with the project team to develop curriculum
for a competency-based program with measurable performance outcomes. This team
is designing and developing 18 technical courses for flexible, online delivery
to a targeted workforce audience in a 7-state region that is challenged by time
and place constraints. Through internal and external assessment, BSC continually
evaluates this model in terms of student learning, retention, performance,
success and overall program effectiveness. The major outcomes and innovations of
this project are: 1) To design a comprehensive, accredited associate degree
program for electrical transmission system operators. 2) To demonstrate and
record the outcomes of leveraging partnership resources. 3) To deliver the
system operator program to a targeted region and workforce audience. 4) To
demonstrate student success in an interactive learning environment, that ensures
program effectiveness through continuous modification and improvement. 5) To
disseminate student learning and program results, and market for distribution in
other locales.