* 0202440
* Global Description of Patterns Far from Onset
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 123,002.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0202440&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Global
Description of Patterns Far from
Onset&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0202440
Newell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural patterns turn up all
over the place. One sees them on windswept sand dunes, as ripples on long sandy
beaches, on plant skins and animal coats, as fingerprints, on optical beams, in
cloud formations. The striking similarities between the textures of patterns and
their defects which arise in diverse microscopic situations lead one to the
conclusion that patterns are macroscopic objects whose behaviors are well
described almost everywhere by universal equations that reflect overall symmetry
properties shared by the individual systems. For example, the triradius defect
on each human fingertip is also seen on optical beams and in magnetic materials.
The reason is not that there is any fundamental connection between light and the
fetal epidermis but rather that in both contexts the system under stress is two
dimensional with translational and rotational invariance. The equations
describing the overall pattern will be the same. The central goal of this
research is to develop a global description of such stationary patterns far from
onset. Up to now, certain individual parts of the textures were well understood,
but there was no theory, for example, to say what the total convection pattern
would be in an elliptical container whose side walls were
heated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate the common
mathematical structure that underlies the diverse occurrence of patterns in
nature. The work will contribute to the understanding and prediction of
important physical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;