* 0202673
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Algal Biodiversity and Landscape Patterns in Tropical Streams
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Rebecca Bixby, Bixby                   Rebecca        J
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 12/31/2004
* USD 58,080.00

0202673 Bixby

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support an eight-month research fellowship to be done over two
years by Dr. Rebecca J. Bixby working with Drs. Jose Vargas and Pedro Leon and
Dr. Ursula Wydrzycka at Universidad de Costa Rica and Universidad Nacional
respectively, in Costa Rica. Support for this project is provided by the
Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering.

The objectives of this project are to investigate biodiversity and community
structure of attached algae (periphyton) in tropical streams at La Selva
Biological Station, located in lowlands on Costa Rica's northern Caribbean
slope. No detailed taxonomic studies of algae have been conducted at La Selva.
This work will build upon ongoing ecological studies of streams at this site
(and adjacent environs), funded through NSF's LTREB Program. Seasonal,
qualitative surveys will focus on microhabitats, sampling substrates such as
plants, sediment, and rocks. Taxonomic studies from collections will result in
detailed taxa lists including new species. Quantitative samples will be taken
from colonized tiles incubated for a month in streams along a phosphorus
gradient. These collections will be analyzed for community structure and
correlated with solute concentrations. Results from this comparative study are
expected to show shifts in community structure and diversity with varying
phosphorus levels.

Dr. Vargas is an aquatic biologist. Dr. Leon is chair of the Organization of
Tropical Studies' Board of Directors and has worked at La Selva. Dr. Wydrzycka
is a botany faculty member working on Costa Rican algae.