* 0202729
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Origins of Polyploidy in Achillea Millefolium
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,11/30/2005
* Justin Ramsey, Ramsey                  Justin         M
* Fellowship Award
* John Snyder
* 11/30/2005
* USD 84,050.00

0202729&lt;br/&gt;Ramsey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Justin M. Ramsey to work with Dr. Brian C. Husband at
the University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will involve the investigation of Achillea millefolium (asteraceae), a native
wildflower with tetraploid and hexaploid populations. Recent studies document
the local adaptation of hexaploid genotypes to xeric environments. This research
extends those investigations to address the following questions: (1) What are
the dynamics of polyploid establishment, and how do genetic and ecological
factors influence this process?; and (2) What is the phylogenetic history of
polyploidy in North American Achillea? Numerical simulations based on a life-
history model (transitions from gamete to seed, seed to seedling, seedling to
adult, and adult to gamete) will track the fate of hexaploid mutants in
tetraploid populations, and identify the conditions in which hexaploid
populations establish and persist. Previous empirical data will be used to
parameterize the simulation. Phylogenetic analyses of Amplified Fragment Length
Polymorphisms (AFLP) genetic markers and DNA sequence data will be conducted at
both regional and continental geographic scales to quantify local incidences of
hexaploid formation as well as successful establishments of hexaploids over the
species range. This multi-faceted research will elucidate the mechanisms,
ecological significance, and patterns of polyploid
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Husband has a strong background in molecular
markers, population genetics, and quantitative methods in ecology and evolution.
He has developed quantitative approaches in polyploidy research.&lt;br/&gt;