* 0202139
* Harmonic Analysis and Geometric Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Andrea Nahmod, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 102,000.00

Nahmod's research lies in the overlap of harmonic analysis, geometry and partial
differential equations. It aims at studying the behavior of nonlinear waves
arising in geometry, ferromagnetism and gauge field theories; and that of
functions along vector fields whose integral curves lack sufficient curvature.
In the first part the focus is in geometric partial differential equations. Of
special interest are Schroedinger maps, Wave maps and other gauge field theories
such as the Yang Mills equations in Minkowski space-time. All of these equations
model `wave like phenomena'. Their solutions arise as minimizers of the
corresponding energy functionals. To conform with natural physical situations,
it is of interest to study their existence, uniqueness under minimal regularity
assumptions. These are difficult issues because the nonlinearities of these
equations involve not just the solutions but also their derivatives. Nahmod will
address these questions and plans to show that in the scale invariant set up
solutions to the Cauchy initial value problem exist globally provided that the
data is sufficiently small when measured relative to the critical regularity
norm. She also plans stability issues; e.g. whether such a system remains close
to its initial state as time evolves when the data has small energy. From a
physical viewpoint the latter models whether such systems are close to
equilibrium. The techniques exploit geometric aspects of these equations to
extract crucial information -such as special structures in the nonlinearity-
which is then used in the analysis. The method combines deep Fourier analysis
with gauge theoretic geometric tools. The goal of the second part is the study
of the Hilbert transform along vector fields and its associated maximal operator
in two dimensions. Their treatment departs from the classical study of singular
integrals for in the present situation, the singularity lives on some variety
that is changing at each point. Nahmod will investigate how to develop time
frequency techniques to study operators under no curvature assumptions. This is
the case, for example, in studying differentiability properties of functions
along vector fields.

Partial differential equations are the mathematical models to the laws governing
much of the phenomena in our physical world. The wave equation models the
propagation of different kind of waves -such as light waves- in homogeneous
media. Nonlinear models of conservative type arise in quantum mechanics while
other variants appear for example in the study of vibrating systems and
semiconductors. The nonlinear Schroedinger equation arises in various physical
contexts in the description of nonlinear waves- such as propagation of a laser
beam in a medium whose index of refraction is sensitive to the wave amplitude,
water waves at the free surface of an ideal fluid as well as in plasma waves.
Some of the interesting questions are those about local and global existence of
solutions, uniqueness as well as long time behavior of global solutions. The
role of mathematical analysis is to understand the behavior of the solutions to
these equations, provide the tools to extract their quantitative and qualitative
information and lay the foundations upon which methods to accurately approximate
the solutions are developed. Fourier analysis and more generalized adapted
frequency decompositions such as time-frequency analysis' consists in
decomposing complex objects via `modulated waveforms' into basic building blocks
which are localized and easy to understand, and then piecing them back together
in a straightforward manner. It works very similarly to a musical score. The
modulated waveforms have four attributes: amplitude (loudness), scale
(duration), frequency (pitch) and position (instant it is played). The objects
could be speech, radar signals, as well as oscillatory expressions arising in
optics, AC ousting scattering, wave propagation and other phenomena of nonlocal
nature.