* 0202606
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Basis of the Irradiated Sporozoite Vaccine:  Identification of Plasmodium Genes Essential for the Development of Liver Stages
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Alka Agrawal, Agrawal                 Alka
* Fellowship
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 10/31/2005
* USD 137,204.00

0202606 Agrawal

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Alka
Agrawal to work with Dr. Robert Menard at the Pasteur Institute in Paris,
France.

This project will involve the study of the basis of the irradiated sporozoite
vaccine, which remains the most effective malaria vaccine to date. Irradiated
sporozoites are able to infect liver cells, but in the liver they fail to
develop into stages of the parasite that later infect red blood cells. The PI
will develop a technique for identifying genes in P. berghei, a species that
infects rodents, that are essential for parasite differentiation in the host
liver. She will then test the defective mutants for their ability to serve as
attenuated malaria vaccines. The expectation is that a number of genes will be
found that are essential for parasite development in the liver, as well as
parasite mutants that could serve as attenuated vaccines or the starting point
for new vaccines.

The Pasteur Institute is well known for its focus on infectious disease and has
several investigators working on malaria.