* 0202300
* Workshop on Geotechnical Composite Systems; Summer 2002, Roanoke, Virginia
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2003
* Joseph Dove, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2003
* USD 20,962.00

CMS-0202300&lt;br/&gt;PI: Joseph Dove&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia
Polytechnic and State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Workshop on Geotechnical
Composite Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A two-day
workshop will be held in June, 2002 to bring together practitioners,
researchers, and government agency end-users for the purpose of exploring and
advancing the new, integrated field of Geotechnical Composite Systems.
Geotechnical composite systems incorporate man-made elements into soil or rock
to create large-scale composite materials. The workshop will involve 25
participants with differing backgrounds from academic institutions, specialty
construction companies, governmental agencies, and engineering design
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most exciting and compelling issues in modern
geotechnical engineering are found at the boundary between disciplines, and
cannot be addressed by a single group or single individual. The principal goal
of this workshop is to bring together a diverse group of researchers,
practitioners, end users, and other interested persons to accomplish the
following six specific objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Establish common
ground, and a language for communication, between
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Identify gaps in knowledge about
geotechnical composite systems as they are used in&lt;br/&gt;existing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Propose new types of geotechnical
composite systems and new applications for&lt;br/&gt;existing geotechnical
composite systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Explore how methods from other
disciplines, such as composite materials&lt;br/&gt;engineering, may apply to the
field of geotechnical composite systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Identify and
prioritize research needs in geotechnical composite
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6. Broadly disseminate the workshop
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to invited participants, other
individuals interested in the topic will be invited to apply for funds to attend
the workshop. Underrepresented minorities, female and academically young
investigators will be particularly encouraged to apply.&lt;br/&gt;