* 0202582
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Spectral and Geographic Analysis of Soil Carbon in East Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,03/31/2003
* David Brown, Brown                   David          J
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/2003
* USD 22,874.00

0202582 Brown

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a three month research fellowship by Dr. David J. Brown
to work with Drs. Keith D. Shepherd and Markus Walsh, at the International
Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) in Nairobi, Kenya.

Organic matter (measured as carbon content) plays a vital role in soil
functioning and with a growing concern about climate change there has been
increased attention paid to soil as an important source or sink for global
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Addressing these concerns, the PI proposes to 1)
combine terrain and reflectance information to model the vertical and geographic
distribution of soil organic carbon for a selected watershed in Kenya; and 2)
refine statistical methods for characterizing soil carbon using reflectance
data. Land degradation, food security, and fresh water sedimentation assessments
in countries like Kenya (and in the United States) can be closely linked to the
type, amount, and distribution of organic matter in the soil. The scientific
community has a vital interest in research that improves the estimates of
regional and global soil carbon, and the identification of potential sites for
carbon sequestration. The hosts are pioneering the use of reflectance spectral
analysis to characterize soil properties. Using a spectrometer in the field or
lab, they "snap" a soil sample just as a tourist snaps photos of local culture -
except that their "camera" digitally captures light reflection over hundreds of
bands from infrared through the visible light spectrum. Ultimately, this
research will allow scientists to map surface soil using satellite imagery -
providing early warnings of land degradation and precise measurements of global
carbon pools. This project will complement this work with lab and field
dimensions. In the lab the PI will sequentially strip away inorganic, labile and
non-labile carbon; scanning the soil material at each step of the process. With
these scans, he can then isolate the contributions of the various fractions to
the overall spectral signature of the soil, and refine models predicting soil
carbon from spectral data. In the field, he will employ digital terrain models
in conjunction with spectral analysis to predict subsurface soil carbon
distributions. Slope, curvature and other more complex terrain indices can
predict erosion, deposition, infiltration and depth to the water table - all
factors that contribute to organic matter accumulation.