* 0202942
* Louisville Area Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment in Teacher Education Reform
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Joseph Steffen, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2007
* USD 849,968.00

The Louisville Area Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment and Teacher
Education Reform (LA-SMARTER) brings together the University of Louisville (U of
L), Jefferson County Public Schools (JCPS) and 10 school districts of the Ohio
Valley Educational Cooperative (OVEC). Its goal is to ensure that the Louisville
area has an adequate number of qualified and certified middle and high school
teachers of mathematics and science over the next decade. To meet this general
goal, LA-SMARTER is building a model teacher education program in mathematics
and science education with an accessible alternative certification option;
Preparing at least 50 certified middle and high school mathematics and science
teachers in the greater Louisville area in the next three years; and Building a
support system in four schools for prospective and new teachers that extends
beyond preparation and induction experiences. In support of these objectives,
LA-SMARTER is (a) enriching mathematics and science courses in the teacher
education program; (b) establishing an accessible alternative certification
program for non-traditional students; (c) implementing an aggressive recruitment
plan; and (d) creating a support system for new teachers that ensures retention
in teaching beyond five years. The Alliance is using teams of mathematicians,
scientists, mathematics and science educators, and exemplary middle and high
school teachers to develop four mathematics and science courses that help
prospective teachers develop a deep understanding of the content that they will
teach. It has established and is supporting professional development teams
(PDTs) in two middle schools and two high schools. These teams are comprised of
a mathematics or science educator, all teachers in the mathematics or science
departments, and a group of three or more student teachers in mathematics and
science. Mathematicians and scientists will work with PDTs as needed. The
Alliance employs a full-time faculty member in the College of Arts and Sciences
to recruit and advise students and coordinate courses. This faculty member is
recruiting into both traditional and alternative certification programs,
focusing on students majoring in biology, chemistry, geology, mathematics, and
physics and students who have withdrawn from the College of Engineering. Also
LA-SMARTER has established a team of staff members from partner schools and the
University to develop and distribute print materials explaining the
certification programs in mathematics and science, and to actively recruit
persons in mathematics and science teaching. This project is also recruiting and
creating a pool of emergency-certified teachers that subsequently complete a
one- or two-year alternative certification program in middle or high school
mathematics or science.