* 0202284
* Saddlepoint and Bootstrap Methods in Systems Theory and Survival Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Ronald Butler, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 126,000.00

Abstract

PI: R. W. Butler DMS-0202284

Title: Saddlepoint and Bootstrap Methods in System Theory and Survival Analysis

Stochastic systems underlie the models applied in most areas of modern science.
These concepts have evolved over a long period of time but were heavily
influenced more recently by the cybernetics movement spanning the late 40s until
the late 70s. Those involved on the electrical engineering side of this movement
used flow graphs to represent the systems. Interesting time-dependent system
characteristics were naturally characterized in terms of the Laplace transforms
that could be associated with the flow graph. Their efforts lead to a general
theory of finite state semi-Markov systems that generalized the very restrictive
Markov systems that are commonly applied even today. Unfortunately, the
inversion of the transforms in this approach proved to be a challenge that
ultimately limited the impact of the flow graphs. This proposal addresses these
inversions along with other missing tools so that a general systems theory may
be fully developed into a complete mathematical discipline. These inversion
tools, using saddlepoint methods, allow for the determination of the transient
behavior of complex systems. In addition, the bootstrap is introduced for
nonparametric statistical inference about the true system based on system
observation. The range of applications in the engineering and biomedical
sciences include communication and computer networks, queueing theory, multi-
state survival models, and right/left and interval censoring in the context of
the competing risks associated with such models. More specifically, this
proposal addresses the following issues: (1) New techniques are required for
inverting the Laplace transforms that characterize the complex behavior of
systems; the author proposes several new saddlepoint methods for achieving this
by using the method of steepest descents. (2) Transforms describing system
characteristics need to be specified in ways that make the saddlepoint methods
easy to use. Often Mason's rule is used but, because of its form, it is much too
complicated to apply to large systems. The author has proposed several
alternative co-factor rules that greatly simplify computations for the
saddlepoint inversions. (3) Nonparametric statistical inference is to be
developed for such semi-Markov systems using the bootstrap and its relationship
to empirical transforms. The single and double bootstrap lead to a practical
means for computing confidence bands of survival and hazard functions related to
the semi-Markov process. The proposed double bootstrap is implemented through
saddlepoint inversions.

This proposal studies the statistical and probabilistic traits of dynamic
stochastic systems with feedback. The models for such systems are commonly used
to make extrapolations and predictions in most areas of modern science. In
engineering, for example, a communication or computer system changes from state
to state and the dynamics of these state transitions determine the evolution of
the system. This proposal considers the computation and estimation of
reliability or performance evaluation for such an evolving dynamic system. The
proposed methods have important applications in reliability analysis, electrical
engineering, biomedical sciences and manufacturing.