* 0202631
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Organic Microlasers for Photonics
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2003
* Daniel Wright, Wright, Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 10/31/2003
* USD 53,502.00

0202631 Wright

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve month research fellowship by Dr. Daniel Wright
to work with Dr. Joseph Zyss at the L'Ecole Normale Superieure de Cachan in
Cachon, France. This project will be co-supported by the Math and Physical
Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

This project will advance research on organic microlasers in the lab of Dr.
Joseph Zyss at the L'Ecole Normale Superieure de Cachan. The research will be
directed in two areas, one focusing on the laser gain media and the other on the
laser feedback structure. The work on the gain media will concentrate on the
development of organic microlasers that operate in the near infrared portion of
the spectrum at the industrially useful wavelengths of 1.3 and 1.55 um since
there are currently no organic laser sources that work at these wavelengths. The
project will entail the examination of new polymers doped with rare-earth ions
that could provide efficient laser light in this spectra region. The PI's work
on microlaser cavity design will focus on improving the directionality of the
emissions of these devices by fabricating organic microdisk structures with
engineered defects and also exploring other planar cavity shapes such as ovals,
mulipoles, and polygons. He will subsequently investigate the coupling of these
planar cavities to optical fibers, waveguides, and other microdisks. In order to
characterize and improve the feedback structures, he will perform experiments in
which the emitted light of each new cavity will be collected such that the
angular dependence and spectral properties of the light can be examined. The
results of these experiments will be compared to mathematical models of the
systems under study.

Dr. Zyss is one of the leading researchers in organic non-linear optics and
photonics.