* 0202087
* Collaborative: Systems for Quantum Learning:  Perceptrons and Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* David Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 06/30/2007
* USD 438,088.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative&lt;br/&gt;(0202087) David Meyer, UCSD &amp;
(0202055) Mitchell Rothstein, U of
Georgia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems for Quantum Learning:
Perceptrons and Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two radical ideas have infiltrated
computer science and engineering from the natural sciences: that computers might
learn, like biological systems, and that computation might he quantum
mechanical, like physical systems. These ideas have led to artificial neural
networks and machine learning theory, and to quantum computation, respectively.
The practical advantages of these two computational models are orthogonal: the
former are used to attack practical problems like image classification and
control of complex systems for which there are no obvious algorithmic
approaches; the latter (putting aside the fact that large scale quantum
computers have not yet been built) has a known algorithm for only one specific
practical problem-factoring large numbers--but that algorithm runs immensely
faster than the best classical algorithm known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
combines both of these computational models. It will address the possiblility of
quantum learning for practical reasons. The ultimate goal is to develop quantum
learning models which have strengths analogous to classical ones-the ability to
find quantum solutions to problems for which there is no apparent quantum
algorithmic solution. Only the most rudimentary steps have been taken in this
direction-hence the project will approach this goal from the bottom up. The PI's
will investigate a specific architecture (inspired by biology): quantum
perceptrons, and more generally, quantum neural networks. Then will carefully
define a completely quantum perceptron which can be connected into a network,
analyze its capacity, derive learning rules for it, apply these rules to various
tasks, and extend each of these objectives to quantum neutral networks. This
work will emphasize the importance of designing quantum systems with performance
not achievable by corresponding classical systems.&lt;br/&gt;