* 0202032
* Geometry and Computation of  Dynamics for Conservative Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2008
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 01/31/2008
* USD 277,079.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0202032&lt;br/&gt;PI: J.D. Meiss&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Colorado Boulder&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometry and Computation of
Dynamics for Conservative
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes to study the geometry of low-dimensional dynamical
systems, especially symplectic and volume-preserving maps, using both
computational and analytical techniques. While much is known about the two-
dimensional case, there are still many questions about the onset and development
of chaos for three- and higher-dimensional systems. While most oscillators are
anharmonic (have twist), twistless bifurcations occur in one-parameter families
of these systems. In the proposal, the geometry of twistless bifurcations will
be studied leading to an understanding of fold and cusp bifurcations in the
twist. The resulting geometry of the reconnection of resonances and exotic
twistless tori will be studied numerically. These should play a role in limiting
the stability domains for many dynamical systems. From the other side, the
destruction of chaos can be profitably studied using a limit of extreme chaos,
the anti-integrable (AI) limit as a starting point. In this proposal, the PI
will use the AI limit to study coupled systems of maps and chaotic boundaries.
Near this limit, structures such as exotic versions of the Smale horseshoe, and
other heteroclinic tangles should occur. The onset of chaos in conservative
systems is signaled by the destruction of tori. These have been studied by a
rescaling analysis called the renormalization transformation. The structure of
this transformation for four and higher dimensional systems is only beginning to
be understood. The PI proposes that recent approximate versions of this
transformation will give effective numerical strategies for finding the
destruction and analyzing the topology of the resulting
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an understanding of the dynamics of
conservative systems is important to applications including the design of
particle accelerators, obtaining rates for simple chemical reactions,
calculating confinement times for charged particles in plasma fusion devices,
understanding the spectra of highly excited atomic systems, and designing
efficient spacecraft trajectories in an era of lower budgets. Dynamics is such
systems is often chaotic, which implies &lt;br/&gt;that prediction of specific
trajectories is difficult; however, chaos can be profitably utilized to improve
efficiency, for example of spacecraft trajectories, by judiciously applying
small course &lt;br/&gt;corrections. Chaos can also dramatically affect the
lifetimes of particles in confinement devices and the rates of chemical
reactions. The PI proposes to develop geometrical and computational techniques
that can be used to address these questions. In addition extending our
understanding of chaos to higher dimensional cases will help populate the zoo of
chaotic objects in multidimensional systems.&lt;br/&gt;