* 0202780
* Antidot and Ring Arrays for Magnetic Storage Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2005
* Vitali Metlushko, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 04/30/2005
* USD 237,897.00

The major challenge in technological applications of magnetic arrays
for&lt;br/&gt; storage is to control the magnetic switching precisely. To
achieve this one&lt;br/&gt; needs to have reproducible remanent state and,
second, the switching&lt;br/&gt; process itself must be simple and reproducible.
Only in very few cases with&lt;br/&gt; well-defined anisotropies does the
reversal take place via a coherent&lt;br/&gt; rotation of the magnetization.
More common, however, is that the reversal&lt;br/&gt; occurs via the domain
formation at the ends of the element. For arbitrary&lt;br/&gt; shape nano-scale
elongated elements, in general, it has been impossible to&lt;br/&gt; reliably
calculate the field at which domain first forms from basic&lt;br/&gt;
principles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; If the memory element is ring instead of
elongated, the magnetization flux&lt;br/&gt; forms a closure in the circular
mode and the problems associated with the&lt;br/&gt; ends of the linear elements
are eliminated. The ring elements exhibit two&lt;br/&gt; different highly stable
'onion" states in addition to the vortex states.&lt;br/&gt; Two possible onion
states, forward or reverse magnetized, can be realized&lt;br/&gt; at remanence
and can be used for magnetic storage.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; On the other hand,
it has been suggested that the inverse structure,&lt;br/&gt; nonmagnetic
antidots (same as negative dots) in magnetic media, could be a&lt;br/&gt;
potential system f or magnetic recording with areal densities
approaching&lt;br/&gt; 750 Gb/in2. The PI proposes the systematic experimental
study of periodic&lt;br/&gt; antidot arrays to compare with theoretical
predictions presently available.&lt;br/&gt; The investigation of the changes in
the magnetic properties induced by the&lt;br/&gt; antidotes, different remanent
states for antidotes of various shapes,&lt;br/&gt; influence of
magnetocrystalline anisotropy, film thickness and possible&lt;br/&gt;
application for high-density storage will be performed and the
exploration&lt;br/&gt; of the high-density limits will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;