* 0202452
* National Center of Excellence for High Performance Computing Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Thomas Murphy, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,007,093.00

&lt;br/&gt;A consortium of four community colleges, each serving a
geographically defined region, together with seven affiliate supercomputer sites
and business partners, constitute a National Science Foundation Advanced
Technology Education Center of Excellence for High Performance Computing (HPC)
technology. High Performance Computing refers to multi-processor computers
performing complex computational operations with a particular focus on clusters.
Each college in the consortium has at least one partner High Performance
Computing facility, referred to as an HPC site. The National Center is
partnering with business and industry to develop skill set standards and
competencies needed for certifying HPC technicians and for developing an
articulated Associate Degree program in HPC technology. The Regional Education
and Training Centers (RETCs), established at each community college, are
developing curricula in HPC Technology that articulate with four- year college
information science, computer science, and high performance computing technology
programs and that include the establishment of 2 + 2 agreements with regional
high school Tech Prep Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maui Community College is
the lead institution in a consortium with Wake Technical Community College,
Pellissippi State Technical Community College, and Contra Costa College, each
chosen because of the diversity of student populations, partnerships with HPC
sites and regional business and industry, and potential four-year college
affiliations. An NSF planning grant (award 0101643) supported a nation-wide
survey that revealed that within the next 2 to 5 years, a) 71% of surveyed
business and industry will utilize high performance computing, (2) PC-cluster
use will grow by 9% and there will be a distinct shift offsetting the balance
between PC-cluster and supercomputer use in favor of PC-clusters and c) industry
will continue to struggle to recruit, train and/or retain HPC employees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Center administrator is responsible for (a)
creating and administering a web-based certification examination for technical
personnel, (b) overseeing curriculum development and teaching methodologies, (c)
developing strategies for recruitment, retention and placement; (d) creating a
national repository of PC-cluster software, curricula and training materials for
HPC technician educational programs; (e) providing professional development
activities for college faculty, secondary teachers and business professionals;
(f) developing and providing a consortium communications infrastructure; and (g)
supervising dissemination, evaluation and reporting
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RETC directors are responsible for (a)
developing curriculum and learner centered teaching methodologies, (b) educating
faculty, people from business and industry, and secondary teachers in PC-cluster
construction, management and use; (c) providing professional development
activities; (d) developing and coordinating professional internship programs at
HPC sites and business for college faculty and secondary teachers; (e)
coordinating student internship programs; (f) assisting with program graduate
placement and (g) developing four-year college articulation agreements and local
high school 2 + 2 agreements.&lt;br/&gt;