* 0202415
* Project ACCESS
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Tony Brannon, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 289,479.00

A critical and timely issue facing the U.S. Food and Agricultural system in the
21st century is how to provide highly technical and qualified agricultural
individuals to meet demands of the industry within the new millennium. To
address the region's agricultural industry requirements, Murray State University
has partnered with three community colleges located in Henderson, Hopkinsville,
and Madisonville, Kentucky, to form Agriculture Consortium for Comprehensive
Education, Service and Support of Project ACCESS. The project is focusing on
providing a solid mechanism to develop a highly trained and qualified
agricultural workforce for western Kentucky, and neighboring regions. This well-
trained and qualified agricultural cohort is being developed mainly through
higher-level agriscience technology curriculums at the associate and
baccalaureate levels. A major goal of the project is to increase access for
students and agriculture workers into these modified agriscience technology
programs by developing a joint, cutting edge, and articulated agriscience
technology baccalaureate program. Other specific goals are to: (1) to strengthen
and raise the level of educational expertise in the national agriculture system,
(2) to provide increased student and agricultural worker "ACCESS" into associate
and baccalaureate agriscience degree programs, and (3) to strengthen a regional
and state agriculture system to be highly competitive in the global economy.
Project objectives are to: (1) develop a wide-entry, multiple-exit and seamless
agriculture educational system from high school through the baccalaureate level
in the articulation partnership service region by June, 2005 (2) continue to
raise the current academic level of Associate degree programs to allow for a
successful transition of an increasing number of students into the workforce
and/or a baccalaureate degree program by June, 2005 (3) develop an articulated
joint baccalaureate Agriscience technology curriculum by August, 2003, and (4)
increase the current matriculation rate of western Kentucky students into all
educational levels of Agriscience technology by 25% by June,
2005.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;