* 0202494
* Holomorphic Dynamics, Small Divisors and Related Topics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Ricardo Perez-Marco, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0202494 PI: Ricardo Perez-Marco

ABSTRACT

Research will be conducted on several projects on the theory of Dynamical
Systems, and more specifically, in Holomorphic Dynamics and Small Divisor
theory. Using heuristic ideas from Holomorphic Dynamics it is proposed to
investigate an effective selection of polynomials as iterators in Pollard rho
method of factorization. Factorization algorithms are a central topic in
Cryptography. Numerical explorations show that there is room for improvement in
this field. In Holomorphic Dynamics and Small Divisors, it is proposed to extend
the general theory of dynamics on Hedgehogs. The focus of the proposed research
is on weak forms of stability when arithmetic conditions, typical of Small
Divisors, fail. It is proposed to investigate Siegel disks and their boundary,
and to attack the hard problem of classifying invariant annular continua. It is
anticipated that the techniques of tube-log Riemann surfaces should play an
important role. Another project consists in extending geometric techniques to
higher dimensional Small Divisors problems. In particular, a new geometric
construction of invariant tori is envisioned. In the theory of Renormalization
in Holomorphic Dynamics it is proposed to develop the new theory of
renormalization. This involves a better understanding of Degenerate Quasi-
Conformal theory (i.e. for non bounded Beltrami coefficients). A last topic in
Complex Analysis on which research is proposed is the theory of Borel Monogenic
functions. We project to develop a theory that is flexible enough to apply to
problems in Small Divisors.



Dynamical Systems is a branch of Mathematics with ancient roots linked to
Celestial Mechanics. It was founded as a distinct branch of Mathematics more
than a century ago by H. Poincare. It is a rich field with multiple interactions
with other parts of Mathematics and Science. The main goal is the study of the
long time behavior of evolution processes. Some of the most important problems
come from fields as Biology, Physical Sciences and Chemistry. One of the central
questions is the Problem of Stability. For example, is the Solar System stable
according to Newton laws ? K.A.M. theory (also called Small Divisor theory) is
one of the major branches in Dynamical Systems. It was founded in the second
half of the XXth century and had an important impact in Dynamical Systems and
related fields. It is the very first theory that provides stability results in
non-linear conservative problems. It continues its expansion to fields as
diverse as Partial Differential Equations, the theory of foliations, Holomorphic
Dynamics, etc. In the proposed projects some of the most difficult open
questions in KAM theory will be explored. What happens when stability fails? Can
we still recover some traces of stability that may be useful in the
applications?