* 0202417
* Amarillo College Teacher Preparation in Mathematics/Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Arthur Schneider, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive teacher preparation
program at Amarillo College, with emphasis in mathematics and science, and
formal articulation with schools of education at Texas universities. The
objectives of the project are to: 1) develop the mathematics courses, refine the
science curriculum, and update the general education curriculum for elementary
education; 2) enhance the Amarillo College Teacher Education project through new
Introductory Education courses, and by emphasizing hand on, collaborative
learning pedagogy and the use of technology in the classroom; 3) develop and
implement partnerships and articulation agreements with Texas Universities
Schools of Education, beginning with West Texas A&amp;M and Texas Tech
Universities; and 4) increase the number of teachers well-prepared to teach the
students of the Texas Panhandle at all pre-college levels, K-12. The objectives
are being implemented through the newly formed Teacher Education Department in
the Division of Sciences and Engineering. New mathematics and science courses
incorporate real-world experiences and labs, and the use of technology in
teaching and in science. Technology as a teaching tool is taught through the use
of technology including Smart classrooms, interactive TV classrooms, computer
lab assignments, and Internet ancillaries. Recruitment efforts are designed to
attract women, minorities and those who are considering a career change.
Industry partners enrich the teacher preparation program by involving scientists
and technicians with instructional course development and onsite labs, hosting
field trips, and offering internships. Collaborations with school districts
provide mentor teachers for preservice students, field observations of K-8
classrooms, and tutoring opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;