* 0202327
* Fix-a-Gene
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2006
* Philip Jardim, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 834,714.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two components: (1) developing a
curriculum and instructional materials that provide community college students
with actual research experience as a core part of their instruction and (2)
designing a recruitment strategy to attract a variety of students to programs
and retain them. The research focuses on developing a treatment for a genetic
disorder called xeroderma pigmentosum (XP). XP is a serious disorder that causes
patients to suffer severe skin damage (including serious burns and DNA damage)
when exposed to minimal sunlight. The disorder is caused by mutations in genes
responsible for repairing DNA damaged by UV light. When DNA cannot be repaired,
mutations accumulate and cancer develops. In fact, approximately half of all XP
patients are diagnosed with skin cancer by age 10. City College of San Francisco
(CCSF), Bio-Link, and the University of California San Francisco (UCSF), are
collaborating on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation to undertake
this project rests on three factors. First, students learn best when they see
the real-world, human connections of the content they are learning. By teaching
courses in this manner, students gain an immediate practical understanding of
two important concepts: (1) the importance of biotechnology in the search for
treatments for diseases and (2) the essence of life as a research assistant. The
second reason for undertaking this project is to increase the diversity and
number of students pursuing careers in science generally and biotechnology
specifically. Third, the motivation rests on the fact that this project exposes
students to world-class researchers from UCSF, and the research in which they
are involved is leading to advancing knowledge about genetic disorders generally
and XP specifically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tangible deliverables of this
project include: (1) a model for curriculum design that blends education and
technical research experiences; (2) a set of instructional materials in cell
culture and research that promote real-world applications, hands-on experiences,
and problem-solving skills; (3) a model recruitment strategy based on research
and tested through actual experience; and (4) research findings with respect to
XP (and other related diseases) to which students have
contributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link is disseminating the Fix-a-Gene
products by making them available through the online instructional materials
clearinghouse; featuring the project and materials at the annual Bio-Link Summer
Fellows program that brings together community college and high school
biotechnology educators from across the nation; and showcasing the project in
the national Bio-Link newsletter. An advisory panel composed of individuals with
expertise in XP research, cell culture, and community college biotechnology
education is guiding the project. In addition, an external evaluator provides
formative assistance in developing the curriculum and instructional materials
and recruitment strategy in addition to conducting a summative analysis.