* 0202058
* SGER: Fracture Processes on Small Extraterrestrial Bodies in the Solar System
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Leonid Germanovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2004
* USD 53,017.00

Leonid Germanovich Georgia Institute of Technology SGER: Fracture Processes on
Small Extraterrestrial Bodies in the Solar System"

Traditionally, asteroids and comets are considered to be an important source of
information on the early Solar System. The defense against asteroids and comets
has become a popular media and research topic. They pose a risk to life on
Earth, but also represent a potential source of metals and other raw materials
in the near-Earth space. The vast majority of data concerning asteroids and
comets has been obtained via remote observations based on the assumed surface
properties, which are functions of former and ongoing geomechanical processes.
Yet, there has been no or hardly any quantification and mathematical treatment
of the possible role of these processes in the evolution of asteroids and
comets.

The goal of this proposal is to incorporate principles of terrestrial
geomechanics in the framework of mechanical processes that occur on asteroids
and comets. Geomechanical processes on terrestrial planets (i.e., Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Moon, and Mars) are significantly affected by such factors as
gravitation, tectonics, volcanism, and erosion, which are considered absent, or
of no consequence, on small extraterrestrial bodies. In essence, asteroids
represent the simplest geomechanical systems (no air, no water, extremely low
gravity, "primitive" rocks) and studying this extreme case would not only assist
astronomical developments but could also provide valuable feedback for
conventional (terrestrial) geomechanics.

The proposed research consists of three parts: (1) devising a new mathematical
model accounting for various temporal and spatial scales associated with
fracture processes on asteroids; (2) investigating mechanics of the formation of
the soil (regolith) on asteroids; and (3) developing a new model of cometary
outbursts associated with fractional sublimation of nucleus material. It is
suggested that thermal stresses induced by the "seasonal" periodic heating due
to the motion of the asteroid around the Sun in elliptical orbits coupled with
short "daily" rotations around the axis of inertia are primarily responsible for
the disintegration of asteroid material. Furthermore, the regolith/soil
formation is an ongoing process caused by thermal space weathering, which is an
effective means of erosion even in the airless, waterless, and low-gravity
environment. Finally, sublimation of cometary material caused by crystallization
of amorphous ice produces large hydraulic fractures. Propagation of these
fractures transports pressurized vapor-dust emulsions to the surface of the
comet nucleus resulting in catastrophic vapor-dust outbursts.