* 0202704
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Information Content and Signal Function of Song and Bright Plumage in a Wild Bird
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Timothy Parker, Parker, Timothy H
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/2007
* USD 157,756.00

0202704&lt;br/&gt;Parker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Timothy H. Parker to work with Dr. Benjamin C.
Sheldon at the University of Oxford in the United
Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bird song is one of the most ubiquitous sounds in
nature. In many species, song may act to attract mates, but this possibility has
not been well studied. Studying animal behaviors, such as bird song, is
important both to our basic knowledge of nature and to our ability to address
applied problems of conservation and species management. This project breaks new
ground by 1) using experimental manipulations to determine the causes of
variation in songs among individuals within a species and 2) integrating the
results of the song study with the collaborators' ongoing study of visual
(feather) signals and mate attraction in the same population. Thus, this will be
the most comprehensive study to date of the relative condition dependence and
signaling roles of multiple signals (song and bright feathers) within a single
species. The PI and his collaborators will manipulate brood size (add or remove
chicks from nests) in a common European bird. This manipulates the provisioning
demands on the parents and the food delivered per chick and is thus a proven
method for increasing or decreasing condition in both parents and offspring. In
the year subsequent to brood manipulations, the PI will record the songs of the
fathers of manipulated broods, and the songs of returning males who were reared
in manipulated broods. This will be a uniquely thorough assessment of the degree
to which different song components contain different information about their
bearer's condition. If signal expression (i.e., song) is condition dependent,
theory predicts that it can be useful in intra-specific communication. The PI
will assess the importance of different aspects of song in determining male
access to females and male success in holding a territory. Once again, song and
plumage data will be integrated to generate a comprehensive picture of the
function of sexual signals in the study species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to Dr. Sheldon, the PI will collaborate with Dr. Simon Griffith. Both
of researchers have been involved in some of the most important avian sexual
selection research in recent years. The host department is one of the leading
institutions in the world for the study of avian field ecology, with a tradition
of innovative research extending back over a half a century.&lt;br/&gt;