* 0202169
* Maryland Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Arthur Johnson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lenell Allen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,146,323.00

&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Maryland Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate (MAGEP) is a coalition of three
campuses of the University of Maryland dedicated to increasing the number of
minorities who earn Ph.D.s in SEM fields. MAGEP has the further goal of
preparing our students to be successful in their careers, with a focus on the
professoritate. This alliance, led by the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County (UMBC), is made up of the three state supported research universities in
Maryland: UMBC, the University of Maryland, College Park (UMCP), and the
University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB). MAGEP embraces the notion that we must
educate the whole person. Our comprehensive approach will foster excellence in
education and research while providing emotional support, peer advising, group
study, role models and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAGEP builds on a number
of initiatives at the undergraduate and graduate levels that have been quite
successful on the individual campuses and within partnerships between some of
the alliance institutions. The University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP), also led by UMBC in partnership
with UMCP, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) and the public
community colleges, has more than doubled the number of bachelor's degrees
awarded to minority science, mathematics, engineering and technology students
from 201 to 502 during 1994-2000. Large numbers of these students continue on to
graduate schools across the nation. The LSAMP provides partial support for the
nationally recognized Meyerhoff Scholars program at UMBC. Both UMBC and UMCP
have a large contingent of McNair Scholars who receive strong preparation for
graduate school. UMCP has received recognition for its success in graduating
minorities with Ph.D.s in SEM fields, including 3 African American women in
mathematics in one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1996, a minority graduate
training program was initiated at UMBC, supported by a NIH National Institute of
General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) grant. The Graduate Meyerhoff program is
focused on biomedical science, and currently has four participating departments.
Enrollment in the program has grown from 2 when the program started to 22 today.
The Graduate Meyerhoff program has proven to be highly successful and has
attracted excellent applicants. Our results demonstrate clearly that a
comprehensive approach is successful at the graduate level. The programs and
activities of MAGEP will be modeled after the Graduate Meyerhoff program and
will incorporate best practices in diversifying graduate education from MAGEP
and other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, MAGEP will
focus on the following specific and measurable objectives: 1) cultivating new
graduate students: including not only increasing the numbers of applicants but
also recruiting students with higher qualifications (GPA, undergraduate research
experience); 2) retention through degree: increasing the rate of successful
completion of the Ph.D. degree; 3) excellence in academic performance: providing
support mechanisms to ensure outstanding classroom performance; 4) excellence in
research performance: providing appropriate infrastructure and research
opportunities to enhance research productivity (including publications and
presentations); and 5) pursuit of careers in the professoriate: increasing the
number of students who enter and thrive in academic careers by providing
preparation in the issues and responsibilities that shape professional life in
the academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAGEP will institute a comprehensive set of
programs and activities that have proven to be effective in pilot efforts at
MAGEP institutions and at others around the country. They are clustered into
three areas: cultivating new students, building a supportive community, and
professional development. Many of the programs span more than one of these
areas. Each institution will participate in all of these programs and activities
to some extent. However the emphasis on individual campuses will be tailored to
the needs of the students and graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;