* 0202815
* Asymptotic Solutions to Problems Arising in Computer Science and Information Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Charles Knessl, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

Knessl&lt;br/&gt;0202815&lt;br/&gt; The investigator, together with colleagues
and students,&lt;br/&gt;studies a variety of problems in computer science,
information&lt;br/&gt;theory, and applied probability. These have the common
feature&lt;br/&gt;that they can be reduced to solving recursion or
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations. Sometimes these equations can be solved
exactly using&lt;br/&gt;transform methods. Then one can obtain asymptotic
information by&lt;br/&gt;expanding the results using methods such as the Laplace
or saddle&lt;br/&gt;point methods, the Euler-Maclaurin and Poisson
summation&lt;br/&gt;formulas, Watson transformations, etc. Many applied problems
of&lt;br/&gt;interest (especially nonlinear ones) cannot be solved
exactly.&lt;br/&gt;For these the investigator and colleagues develop
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic techniques that analyze directly the
governing&lt;br/&gt;equations. These are variants of applied mathematics
methods,&lt;br/&gt;such as WKB expansions and matched asymptotic expansions.
The&lt;br/&gt;latter are especially useful for asymptotic problems that
involve&lt;br/&gt;several different scales. The focus is on problems
in&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, data compression, analysis of algorithms,
digital&lt;br/&gt;and binary trees, queuing, and coding.&lt;br/&gt; Computers
play a progressively greater role in all of our&lt;br/&gt;lives. Important
problems in computer science include sorting and&lt;br/&gt;searching, efficient
data storage, and data compression. To&lt;br/&gt;decide on what is a good method
to search out a given item in&lt;br/&gt;some database, or a good method for
storing music or video with&lt;br/&gt;minimal use of memory, it is important to
analyze the method or&lt;br/&gt;algorithm. For example, one might ask for the
average search&lt;br/&gt;time, or for the likelihood that the search time will
be very&lt;br/&gt;long, exceeding some prescribed tolerance. Such questions
involve&lt;br/&gt;the "analysis of algorithms." They can frequently be reduced
to&lt;br/&gt;solving certain classes of equations. The investigator
and&lt;br/&gt;colleagues develop mathematical tools for obtaining solutions
of&lt;br/&gt;these equations, either exact ones or accurate
approximations.&lt;br/&gt;Approximations are often sufficient, because for
example the&lt;br/&gt;searching problem is most important if the total number of
items&lt;br/&gt;stored is very large. This "largeness" shows up as a parameter
in&lt;br/&gt;the governing equation that facilitates its solution.
Related&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problems arise in other important areas such
as&lt;br/&gt;molecular biology and communications, and the
investigators'&lt;br/&gt;methods and results should thus find applicability to a
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of problems.&lt;br/&gt;