* 0202766
* Fabrication of Masters for Extreme Precision NanoImprinting of Optical Gratings
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Robert Cohn, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 03/31/2004
* USD 80,000.00

Thin film deposition processes are capable of nanometer and
even&lt;br/&gt;atomically precise fabrication of layered structures. While
the&lt;br/&gt;capabilities of deposition are well developed to the point of
routine&lt;br/&gt;use by the optics and semiconductor devices manufacturers,
application&lt;br/&gt;of deposition methods to extreme precision patterning and
lithographic&lt;br/&gt;fabrication has received, at best, limited consideration.
&lt;br/&gt;This degree of precision is especially needed in the fabrication
of&lt;br/&gt;sub-wavelength diffractive optics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is aimed at a preliminary evaluation of the potential of&lt;br/&gt;multilayer
stacks to be fabricated and processed into three dimensional&lt;br/&gt;master
stampers for molding or casting high aspect ratio, nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;features
in polymers. The vertical dimension of the pattern is produced&lt;br/&gt;by
cleaving the material, polishing the cleaved surface as required,
and&lt;br/&gt;chemically etching back selected layers of one material type to
produce&lt;br/&gt;a bi-level topography. Not only can stamps for one-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;bragg-type gratings be produced by deposition, but curved
stamps (used&lt;br/&gt;to mold sub-wavelength lenses) can be produced by
deposition onto curved&lt;br/&gt;surfaces (e.g. optical fibers or anisotrpically
etched silicon.) Layers&lt;br/&gt;of from 5 to 200 nanometers will be deposited
using and extending our&lt;br/&gt;recent electroplating methods that are noted
for increased mechanical&lt;br/&gt;strength, reduced grain size and the
potential for producing films on&lt;br/&gt;the order of one nanometer
roughness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the most significant outcomes of this
study would be the&lt;br/&gt;successful demonstration of electrodeposition to
fabricate precisely&lt;br/&gt;controlled layers as an alternative to the more
traditional, but much&lt;br/&gt;more expensive, physical deposition methods of
sputtering and&lt;br/&gt;evaporation.