* 0202120
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research: The Biochemical Function of Basonuclin in RNA Polymerase Transcription
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2003
* Hung Tseng, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2003
* USD 12,400.00

0202120&lt;br/&gt;Tseng&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Hung Tseng and a student
from University of Pennsylvania in a collaboration with Ingrid Grummt of the
Section for Molecular Cell Biology at the German Cancer Research Center in
Heidelberg, Germany. The project will focus on the biochemical function of
basonuclin, a zinc-finger protein and a cell-type specific transcription
regulator for the rRNA genes. The US-German collaboration will use biochemical
purification, immunological detection, and in vitro and in vivo transcription
assays to investigate the role of basonuclin in polymerase transcription. All
cell require rRNA transcription, but its enhancement is particularly necessary
when the rate of protein synthesis increases in proliferation and protein
accumulation. One of the novel aspects of the action of basonuclin is the it is
cell-type specific, which makes it different from all previously described
polymerase I transcription factors. The US side brings current knowledge about
basonuclin and reagents to the collaboration. The laboratory of Dr. Grummt is
one of the leading groups in the world in RNA polymerase I research. That lab
will provide expertise and state-of-the-art equipment in biochemical
purification and analysis of the polymerase transcription complex. This
collaboration will help institutionalize the collaborative relationship between
the German and US research groups.&lt;br/&gt;