* 0202259
* Moduli Spaces that are Upper Half Plane Quotients and the Inverse Galois Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,02/28/2005
* Michael Fried, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 02/28/2005
* USD 110,688.00

MODULAR TOWERS AND THE IGP OVER THE RATIONALS: Often researchers
use&lt;br/&gt;algebraic relations in two variables x and y over a field to
describe&lt;br/&gt;significant data. Some examples are sets of values x having
an (x,y)&lt;br/&gt;with entries in the field that satisfy the relation. One of
these is the&lt;br/&gt;Davenport's problem of determining equivalence classes of
polynomials&lt;br/&gt;according to their value sets over finite fields.
Describing complex&lt;br/&gt;multiplication fields, generated by those x with
(x,y) a special&lt;br/&gt;elliptic curve torsion point, is a variant. A relation
with a data&lt;br/&gt;variable x produces a permutation group G: The Galois
group. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator treats these as cases of the Inverse
Galois&lt;br/&gt;Problem (IGP). One goal is to decide, from certain
lists&lt;br/&gt;of relations, if some have the rational numbers as definition
field.&lt;br/&gt;Serious group theory helped solve Davenport's 1965 problem and
Schur's&lt;br/&gt;exceptional polynomial problem (1919; see below). Further,
modular&lt;br/&gt;curves reveal complex multiplication to be a version of
Schur's&lt;br/&gt;problem. Having command of all finite simple groups has
many&lt;br/&gt;applications. One is to list those groups attached to
exceptional&lt;br/&gt;polynomials. Knowing many characters of Chevalley groups
showed Thompson&lt;br/&gt;and Voelklein where to find series of solutions to the
IGP. Yet, it will&lt;br/&gt;require more than massive group theory to solve the
whole IGP. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator uses Modular Towers, a modular curve
generalization, to&lt;br/&gt;finesse unknowable group classifications. He and
his students let a&lt;br/&gt;known group G, and a prime p dividing the order of
G, seed the base level&lt;br/&gt;of a Modular Tower. Higher tower levels code
relations with mysterious&lt;br/&gt;groups covering G related to p. Coherent
maps between the tower levels&lt;br/&gt;replace details on these intricate
covering groups. Work of Y. Ihara and&lt;br/&gt;J.P. Serre inspire showing that
Modular Towers has many properties of&lt;br/&gt;their special, modular curve,
case. For example, high tower levels for a&lt;br/&gt;G with no Z/p quotient
should have no rational points. For certain groups G, &lt;br/&gt;and the prime
p=2, this extends Serre's program on spin structures. The
&lt;br/&gt;investigator applies new spin-like structures to all cases when p is
2 and &lt;br/&gt;to all primes p. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRACTICAL CRYPTOGRAPHY
AND IGP OVER FINITE FIELDS: Modern cryptosystems&lt;br/&gt;aim to secure
electronic transfers of data. Exceptional functions act
as&lt;br/&gt;permutations on infinitely many finite fields. A special case of
the&lt;br/&gt;Inverse Galois Problem over finite fields asks how to
construct&lt;br/&gt;exceptional functions. These scrambling functions look
simple. Users can&lt;br/&gt;easily apply them (up to 1993, all came from the
19th century). Still,&lt;br/&gt;finding them has been difficult. Fried (UCI),
Guralnick (USC) and Saxl&lt;br/&gt;(Cambridge) nearly classify them. This solves
old problems (Dickson 1896&lt;br/&gt;and Carlitz 1965). They also produce
unexpected new examples. Their best&lt;br/&gt;discovery is that exceptional
polyomial Galois groups (excluding now&lt;br/&gt;well-understood cases) have the
affine geometric property. This is&lt;br/&gt;useful for it gives the degrees of
exceptional polynomials. Yet, it is&lt;br/&gt;also a difficult challenge: There
can be no final description of all&lt;br/&gt;affine groups. The investigator
with A. Mezard approaches affine groups&lt;br/&gt;by generalizing to all
algebraic relations over finite fields&lt;br/&gt;Grothendieck's famous results
for tame relations. Applications for&lt;br/&gt;exceptional functions alone
include ways to manipulate data for&lt;br/&gt;encryption and to assure
integrity. This will mean faster, more&lt;br/&gt;efficient and accurate file
back-ups; more stable software; and more&lt;br/&gt;secure data
transfers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;