* 0203359
* Theory of Electronic, Magnetic and Transport Properties of Nanoscale Magnetic Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Sitaram Jaswal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

This theoretical project explores the fundamental physics of electronic,
magnetic and&lt;br/&gt;Transport properties of nanoscale magnetic junctions. The
major emphasis is on spin-&lt;br/&gt;Polarized electronic transport in the
nanojunctions, in which a small amount of various&lt;br/&gt;Metallic,
semiconducting or insulating materials is placed as a contact between
two&lt;br/&gt;Ferromagnetic nanowires. First-principles density functional
calculations will be&lt;br/&gt;Performed to predict electronic, magnetic and
transport chacteristics of these&lt;br/&gt;Nanojunctions. Micromagnetic modeling
will be used to understand the magnetic&lt;br/&gt;Structure of nanocontacts and
tight-binding models will be developed to tread disordered&lt;br/&gt;Systems and
to explore the influence of localized states on magnetotransport in
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;Tunnel junctions. These theoretical studies will guide
experimental investigations of the &lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale junction fabricated by
state-of-the-art nanofabrication techniques and will&lt;br/&gt;Complement the
established experimental program at Nebraska. The research
will&lt;br/&gt;Facilitate the development of novel magnetoelectronic devices,
which merge spin degrees&lt;br/&gt;Of freedom into electronic
nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical project explores the
fundamental physics of electronic, magnetic and &lt;br/&gt;Transport properties
of nanoscale magnetic junctions. The major emphasis is on
spin-&lt;br/&gt;Polarized electronic transport in the nanojunctions. These
theoretical studies will guide&lt;br/&gt;Experimental investigations of the
nanoscale junction fabricated by state-of-the-art&lt;br/&gt;Nanofabrication
techniques and will complement the established experimental program
at&lt;br/&gt;Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;