* 0203397
* RUI:   Imaging Transport - From the Motion of Charge to the Detection of Light
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Nancy Haegel, Fairfield University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2006
* USD 186,530.00

This RUI project uses simultaneous, variable temperature cathodoluminescence
(CL) and electron beam induced current (EBIC) to image transport properties,
with micron scale resolution, in the near-contact region for a variety of high
resistivity materials and devices. A new approach allows imaging of the motion
of charge, in response to fixed-point generation. This approach is similar to CL
in that an electron beam is used to generate charge, but different in two
significant ways: the beam is not scanned during a given measurement and the
collection of light allows for spatial resolution of the source of its emission.
The motion of charge is tracked by detecting the light emitted along its path.
Imaging will be used to view transport behavior, providing a new window on the
transport of charge in the high field, highly non-uniform region adjacent to
contacts, especially in high resistivity materials where space charge and
internal fields play dominant roles over extended distances. Specific research
goals include the study of charge transport patterns near contacts in SiC
devices, improved understanding of contact performance and reproducibility in
photorefractive heterostructures and direct imaging of electric field profiles
in high energy radiation detectors. In addition, the technique has potential for
directly observing fundamental changes in transport behavior in the near-contact
region. A thermoelectrically cooled CCD will be used to image the light emitted
in response to the point generation of charge in a semiconductor material. In
standard CL, the spatial information of the emitted light is lost as the total
emission signal is displayed as a function of position of the generation point.
That information is maintained in this approach by using an internal optical
microscope to collect and re-image the luminescence pattern. A magnification of
~ 1000-2000 x can be obtained, suggesting spatial resolution of the luminescence
on the order of five microns or better, depending on generation conditions. %%%
The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials
science having technological relevance. Undergraduate students will play a
primary role in the project, with opportunities for research integrated directly
into their academic program, and continued full time in the summer. The research
program will also enable access to a state-of-the-art microanalysis facility for
a wide variety of students, in addition to those engaged directly in the
proposed project. An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. ***