* 0203608
* Quantum Phase Transitions in Nanostructured Superconductors in 2D
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2005
* James Valles, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2005
* USD 276,999.00

This individual investigator award will support an experimental project that
focuses on quasi-two-dimensional (2D), nanostructured films near their
superconductor to nonsuperconductor quantum phase transitions (QPTs).
Nanostructured proximity effect arrays, consisting of nanoscale superconducting
grains embedded in a metal film and nanoscale wire arrays of superconducting
films will be tuned through their superconductor to non-superconductor
transitions and probed with electron magnetotransport and tunneling measurements
at dilution refrigerator temperatures. The physics behind the QPTs in the nano-
arrays, while similar to the well-known superconductor to insulator transitions
is expected to sharply contrast with them. Because of the nanoscale dimensions,
the phase and amplitude degrees of freedom in the superconducting order
parameter, rather than just the phase, will vary strongly through these
transitions. These experiments have the potential to reveal new classes of QPTs,
and to provide physical insight into the origin of pseudogaps, and
unconventional metallic phases in 2D correlated electron systems, such as the
underdoped high temperature superconductors. While being immersed in important
current problems in condensed matter physics, the students involved in this
research will develop expertise in nanotechnology, scanning probe microscopies
and low temperature techniques that will make them potentially attractive to
industry and prepare them to be future leaders in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to produce and obtain images of
electronic materials with features as small as a few billionths of a meter (a
few nanometers) leads to new opportunities in technology and fundamental
science. In technology, as more speed and power is demanded from our computers
the dimensions of the electronics necessarily rapidly shrink toward the
nanodimensions. On a fundamental side, new properties can emerge in seemingly
familiar materials such as the metal copper when its dimensions are reduced to
the nanometer scale. How small can a piece of copper be and still maintain the
properties which are commonly associated with a metal? This individual
investigator award supports a project that focuses on how the properties of
superconducting materials (i.e. materials which lose all of their electrical
resistance when cooled close to the absolute zero of temperature) change when
some of their dimensions are pared down to the few nanometer scale. Measurements
on two types of structures, nanostructured proximity effect arrays and nanoscale
superconducting wire arrays, will test recent theories that suggest that the
superconductors go through a dramatic change, becoming more like a metallic
state of matter, when their dimensions become small enough. This metal state is
predicted to have exotic properties that are similar to those of the
technologically relevant high temperature superconductor materials. Thus, these
nanostructured superconductors will serve as a model system that can lend new
insight into other more complex materials. In addition, they will be used to
address the simple and fundamental question of how finely structured can a
superconductor be and still maintain its superconducting properties? While being
immersed in important current problems in condensed matter physics, the students
involved in this research will develop expertise in nanotechnology, scanning
probe microscopies and low temperature techniques that will make them
potentially attractive to industry and prepare them to be future leaders in
science.&lt;br/&gt;