* 0203680
* Surfaces in 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Jennifer Schultens, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 10/31/2003
* USD 102,626.00

DMS-0203680&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer C. Schultens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research concerns the study of 3-manifolds. The notion&lt;br/&gt;of a 3-manifold
constitutes the 3-dimensional analogue of the&lt;br/&gt;2-dimensional notion of
a surface. The 2-dimensional notion of&lt;br/&gt;surface is to be understood in
a rather broad (and rather technical)&lt;br/&gt;way. It includes the
2-dimensional sphere (that tends to be pictured&lt;br/&gt;as all points in
3-space at distance exactly 1 from the origin), the&lt;br/&gt;torus (often,
jokingly, described as ``the icing on a doughnut''), the&lt;br/&gt;Klein bottle,
and many others. The study of 3-manifolds is&lt;br/&gt;considerably more complex
than that of surfaces. Surfaces are&lt;br/&gt;completely classified, 3-manifolds
are not. In fact, it is at present&lt;br/&gt;unknown whether 3-manifolds can be
classified (in an algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;sense). It is known that 4-manifolds
cannot be classified. The&lt;br/&gt;research here endeavors to employ different
types of surfaces lying in&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds and their relation to each
other in a structural study of&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research grows out of a study of the relation of
Heegaard&lt;br/&gt;splittings to Haken decompositions. It turns out that the
lessons&lt;br/&gt;learnt in that investigation have applications to a wider
range of&lt;br/&gt;problems in 3-manifold topology ranging from additivity
properties of&lt;br/&gt;the generalized bridge numbers of knots and additivity
properties of&lt;br/&gt;the width of knots to questions about the genus of a
Heegaard&lt;br/&gt;splitting that is a common stabilization of two given
Heegaard&lt;br/&gt;splittings. The methods for this investigation include a
counting&lt;br/&gt;technique developed by M. Scharlemann and the P.I along with
the&lt;br/&gt;notion of an orbifold Heegaard splitting. The methods further
include&lt;br/&gt;the notion of untelescoping of Heegaard splittings, Cerf
theory, thin&lt;br/&gt;position arguments, and the analysis of foliations
induced by Morse&lt;br/&gt;functions corresponding to Heegaard splittings or
untelescopings of&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard splittings. The proposed research also
includes a strategy&lt;br/&gt;to obtain a more structural theory of surfaces in
knot complements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;