* 0203560
* Novel Optical Investigations of Spin-Dependent Effects in Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Bruce McCombe, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2006
* USD 456,998.00

This is an Information Technology Research Proposal (ITR). Until recently, an
intrinsic property of electrons, their spin, has been overlooked in potential
applications in electronics. Understanding and manipulating spin in appropriate
semiconductor structures offers promise for entirely new types of future
"spintronic" devices and for producing elements of quantum computers.
"Spintronic" devices are non-volatile, consume less power, and can be faster
than conventional electronic devices that are based on the charge of the
electron. This project will focus on investigating the complex states of
electrons and holes and their interactions with the local environment in
semiconductor quantum structures that have potential for application in spin-
based devices which ultimately might find their way into future quantum spin
based computers. An array of optical techniques will be used to probe spin-
related effects in semiconductor nanostructures. The project will couple
extensive experimental investigations with theoretical calculations and
predictions. Three graduate students, one undergraduate student and one or more
high school physics teachers will be involved in these projects. Results are
expected to reveal new physics and bring improved understanding to issues that
will be important for implementing future generations of devices for information
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an Information Technology Research
proposal (ITR). Until recently the carrier spin has been overlooked in
electronic devices. Understanding and exploiting carrier spin in semiconductors
offers promise for spintronic devices, which are non-volatile, consume less
power, and can be faster than devices based on manipulation of carrier charge.
This project couples experimental and theoretical research directed at
understanding and manipulating spins in semiconductor structures. The detailed
nature of electronic states of neutral and spin-singlet/-triplet charged
excitons in GaAs/AlGaAs lateral fluctuation quantum dots will be investigated
with the goal of understanding their role in possible implementation of quantum
bits. The spin states of carriers in spin-injection devices will be probed with
the goal of understanding the effects of lattice vibrations, band structure,
phonons, interfaces and diffusion distances on the degree of spin polarization.
Polarized photoluminescence (PL) and PL excitation spectroscopies combined with
optically detected resonance (ODR) spectroscopy of free electrons and holes, and
internal transitions of excitons will be employed in these studies. Three
graduate and one undergraduate students, one or more high school physics
teachers will be involved in these projects. Results are expected to reveal new
physics and bring improved understanding to issues that are important for future
information technology applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;