* 0203278
* The Mousterian fauna from Grotte XVI, Dordogne, France
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2002,10/31/2003
* Donald Grayson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2003
* USD 19,695.00

The Grotte XVI archaeological site, located in the Dordogne region of
southwestern France, contains a sequence of human occupations that began prior
to 70,000 years ago and that continued until the end of the Ice Age, about
10,000 years ago. The cave was first occupied by Neandertals, but the later
occupants were modern in all ways, with the transition between the two presumed
to have occurred around 30,000 years ago. Not only does the archaeological
sequence at Grotte XVI span at least 60,000 years, but the preservation of the
bones and teeth of large mammals is excellent, and the archaeological
assemblages assumed to represent the latest Neandertals-the
"Chatelperronian"-and the earliest modern peoples-the "Aurignacian"-are well-
represented. The site is rich in the remains of such large ungulates as
reindeer, red deer, ibex, and horse, all of which provide information on the
diets of the residents of the site, and on the mammal history of this part of
southwestern France. Previous work on these faunal assemblages, supported by the
National Science Foundation, has shown that the diet of the Chtelperronian
residents of the site (presumably Neandertals) did not differ in significant
ways from that of the people (presumably modern in biology and behavior) who
used the site immediately after them. This demonstration joins work from other
parts of Europe in suggesting that if modern peoples truly replaced Neandertals,
the differential use of animal resources may not have played a major role in
allowing this to occur. In fact, the only important difference between the
ChAtelperronian and Aurignacian large mammal assemblages involves cave bears.
These huge carnivores were common in the ChAtelperronian level (as well as in
earlier ones), but disappear soon thereafter, and it appears that increasingly
intense use of caves in post-Neandertal times may have hastened the extinction
of these remarkable animals. In addition, analysis of the history of the large
mammals that occur at Grotte XVI between about 36,000 and 12,000 years ago has
shown that the abundances of reindeer (known in North America as caribou) rose
and fell in concert with summer temperatures: reindeer were far less abundant
when summers were warmer. Ultimately, at the end of the Ice Age, summer
temperatures became so warm that reindeer became extinct here. This long-term
view of reindeer history suggests that current caribou populations in northern
North America may be particularly vulnerable to global climate warming. Although
the detailed picture that we have of human diet and large mammal history
currently goes back to about 36,000 years ago, the Grotte XVI sequence includes
a rich Mousterian assemblage, clearly reflecting Neandertal use of the site,
that dates to about 65,000 years ago (less detailed records from the site are
older yet). Support from the National Science Foundation will allow this earlier
material to be studied as well. This analysis will let us know whether earlier
Neandertal diets differed from those represented in later deposits, and will
also tell us whether the relationship between summer temperatures and reindeer
abundances existed this deeply into the Ice Age.