* 0203486
* TQFT, Links and Real Algebraic Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Patrick Gilmer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 138,617.00

DMS-0203486&lt;br/&gt;Patrick Gilmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates applications of integrality results for&lt;br/&gt;morphisms under
Topological Quantum Field Theories (TQFTs) for&lt;br/&gt;low-dimensional
topology. Strong Shift Equivalence (SSE) is an&lt;br/&gt;equivalence relation
which arose in symbolic dynamics. Gilmer is&lt;br/&gt;investigating a connection
between TQFT and SSE which he has recently&lt;br/&gt;discovered. Using a TQFT
one defines various SSE class invariants of&lt;br/&gt;knots and other spaces
which are equipped with an infinite cyclic cover.&lt;br/&gt;This can now be
derived as a consequence of a SSE class invariant.&lt;br/&gt;Gilmer is
attempting to use TQFT to find obstructions to classical knots&lt;br/&gt;being
slice knots. In general, Gilmer is using TQFT as a tool in&lt;br/&gt;low-
dimensional topology. In joint work with Stepan Orevkov, Gilmer
is&lt;br/&gt;calculating further signatures and nullities of certain links which
he&lt;br/&gt;associated to collections of curves in the real projective plane.
In&lt;br/&gt;previous work, Gilmer found restrictions on these invariants if
the&lt;br/&gt;collection of curves is isotopic to a real algebraic curve of
given&lt;br/&gt;degree. These calculations may lead to new general restrictions
on the&lt;br/&gt;topology of real algebraic curves. Gilmer is also exploring
relations&lt;br/&gt;between real algebraic curves and shadow descriptions of
links, in the&lt;br/&gt;sense of
Turaev.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is the study of intrinsic
shape. It is sometimes called "rubber&lt;br/&gt;sheet geometry" because the
objects under investigation can be twisted and&lt;br/&gt;stretched (but not
torn) without losing their identity. It is a subject&lt;br/&gt;which impinges on
many areas of mathematics and science. Topological&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Field
Theory is one of the most current and exciting areas of&lt;br/&gt;topology with
intimate connections to high energy physics as well as other&lt;br/&gt;areas of
mathematics, for instance number theory and symbolic
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems. Gilmer is applying this subject to answer questions
about knots,&lt;br/&gt;links and 3-dimensional manifolds. A 3-dimensional
manifold is a&lt;br/&gt;topological object which looks locally like the familiar
space we live in.&lt;br/&gt;One may also consider manifolds of other dimensions.
It is ironic that&lt;br/&gt;manifolds of dimension three and four are least well
understood. One would&lt;br/&gt;guess that our intuition should be strongest in
these dimensions. A knot&lt;br/&gt;is a closed loop in a 3-manifold. A link is a
collection of closed loops&lt;br/&gt;in a 3-manifold. In 1900, Hilbert gave a
famous list of problems for&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians to study. His sixteenth
problem concerns the topology of&lt;br/&gt;real algebraic curves in the real
projective plane, It is still unsolved&lt;br/&gt;but it has lead to many
beautiful developments and partial solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Hilbert asked how the
components (called ovals) of the set of zeros of a&lt;br/&gt;nonsingular real
homogenous polynomial of given degree can be arranged in&lt;br/&gt;the plane, if
the number of these ovals is maximal for the given degree.&lt;br/&gt;This
project further studies certain type of links to make progress
on&lt;br/&gt;Hilbert's problem and related questions.