* 0203735
* Rigidity Phenomena in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Ralf Spatzier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2006
* USD 222,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0203735.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed lies at the
interface of dynamical systems and differential &lt;br/&gt;geometry. Its
principal goal is the investigation of the dynamical and geometric
&lt;br/&gt;structures of "higher rank" systems. Such systems naturally appear
both in dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems and geometry. In particular, the principal
investigator will study &lt;br/&gt;rigidity properties of actions of higher rank
abelian and semisimple Lie groups &lt;br/&gt;and their lattices with the
ultimate goal of classifying such systems under &lt;br/&gt;suitable geometric or
dynamical hypotheses. In particular, he will study higher&lt;br/&gt;rank
hyperbolic abelian actions, and actions by semisimple groups and their
&lt;br/&gt;lattices preserving affine and geometric structures. He will also
investigate &lt;br/&gt;invariant measures of algebraic higher rank abelian
actions. The investigator &lt;br/&gt;will also investigate Riemannian manifolds
(especially higher rank ones)&lt;br/&gt;and their geodesic flows. Geometric,
dynamical and group theoretic &lt;br/&gt;tools will be used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems and
ergodic theory are relatively new fields that investigate &lt;br/&gt;the
evolution of a physical or mathematical system over time (e.g. turbulence in
&lt;br/&gt;a fluid flow). New ideas and concepts from dynamics (e.g. chaos,
fractals) have &lt;br/&gt;changed our perception of the world fundamentally.
Dynamics and ergodic theory &lt;br/&gt;provide the mathematical tools and
analysis for these investigations. Dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems have had a major
impact on the sciences and engineering. Symbolic &lt;br/&gt;dynamics for
instance has been instrumental in developing efficient and safe &lt;br/&gt;codes
for computer science. Tools and ideas from smooth dynamics are used as
&lt;br/&gt;far afield as cell biology and meteorology. Geometry is one of the
oldest fields &lt;br/&gt;in mathematics, and generally studies curves, surfaces
and their higher &lt;br/&gt;dimensional analogues, their shapes, shortest paths,
and maps between such &lt;br/&gt;spaces. Differential geometry had its roots in
cartography, and is now studied &lt;br/&gt;for its close ties with physics and
other sciences and applied areas (computer &lt;br/&gt;vision e.g.)as well as
internal aesthetic reasons. Geometry and dynamics are &lt;br/&gt;closely related
as some important dynamical systems originate from geometry, and
&lt;br/&gt;geometry also provides tools to study dynamical systems. One main
goal of this &lt;br/&gt;project studies when two dynamical systems commute, i.e.
when one system is &lt;br/&gt;unaffected by the changes brought on by the other.
Important examples of such &lt;br/&gt;systems arise from geometry. &lt;br/&gt;