* 0203449
* CRCD: The Ad Hoc Classroom: Integrating Emerging Wireless Communications and Networking Technologies into Mainstream Computer Science and Electrical Engineering Curricula
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Alan Demers, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Anita J. LaSalle
* 08/31/2006
* USD 410,000.00

This project integrates recent search developments in ad hoc netorks into
mainstream computer science and electrical engineering curricula. It explores
students to challenges posed by this emerging class of systems, improving
studets' exposure to future infrastructures by developming real world ad hoc
networking test-beds and deployment platforms, and permits educators at other
U.S. institutions to do the same by sharing the system infrastructure and
educational materils developed for this project. Specifically, the project
transforms several undergraduate and graduate level courses in computer systems
to address the challenges posed by wirless, mobile and embedded networks of
computers that form transient alliances in ad hoc networks. This project
transforms classes in networking, databases, operations systems, adaptive
systems to integrate pervaive, ubiquitous, ad hoc networking and sensor
networks. A three-tiered approach benefits both current classsroom instructions
as well as ongoing research on ad hoc network, and involves: 1) The development
of software and courseware infrastructure necessary to build, use and evaluate
system services for ad hoc networkss in a classroom setting. 2) Deployment of
the critical mass of equipment to field a large, physical test-bed. This network
consists of mobile computers, ranging form sensors and pocket-sized information
appliance through hand-helds to laptops. Equipped with a wireless networking
card, and multi-purpose sensors such as camera, these machine provide a real
physical test-bed on which system services are evaluated for ad hoc networks. 3)
Collection of information from the deployed test-bed on application
communication pattersn, mobility models, and observed link characteristics. This
information can be used to carry out better-informed simulations of ad hoc
networks. This grant impacts computer challenges the nation is facing, it
results in innovative research on operating systems, database and
telecommunications, and it generates course materials and define infrastructure
that will allow the project to be repeated elsewhere in the country