* 0203581
* N-Vortex Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Paul Newton, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 173,729.00

Discrete models of the Euler equations governing fluid mechanics will be
analyzed with the goal of understanding high Reynolds number turbulent flows.
The comprehensive approach will involve a combination of mathematical analysis
of Hamiltonian dynamical systems, physical modeling based on discrete particle
representations of the Euler equations, and high performance computing. The
mathematical problem is of N-body type, thus numerical algorithm development for
these systems and dynamical systems visualization techniques will be an
essential component of the work carried out under this award. The four main
projects described in the proposal are each designed to develop new analytical
techniques in dynamical systems theory, test current techniques on models that
are physically well grounded, develop new numerical algorithms and visualization
methods for particle interaction problems, and push the models closer towards
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the development of
discrete models for fluid flow, using a combination of mathematical tools and
high performance computing. One major emphasis will be on studying these models
on the surface of a sphere, both rotating and non-rotating, a problem which has
direct applications to the flow in a planetary atmosphere on such large scales
that the curvature of the planet plays a role in the dynamics. This problem is
potentially of great importance to the understanding of environmental processes
in the atmospheres and oceans of Earth and to the large vortices, including the
Red Spot, observed in the atmosphere of Jupiter.