* 0203813
* Collaborative Research: Platform-Based CAD for Power and Performance Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 96,060.00

As integrated circuit chips are becoming more complex to design, pre-fabricated
platform chips, intended to meet the needs of a wide variety of embedded
computing products, are becoming increasingly &lt;br/&gt;common. The trend
towards platforms creates the need for parameterizing computing architectures
such that platforms can have their performance and power consumption adapted to
the different needs of different products, and that can be tuned to the
particular compute patterns of a particular product. This project will
investigate several aspects of such parameterization. It will demonstrate the
feasibility of extensive parameterization of an architecture's memory
components, key contributors to power and performance. It will define the basic
tasks that make up platform-oriented CAD, partition computer-aided design (CAD)
tasks between desktop and platform resources to yield fast yet accurate
and&lt;br/&gt;cost-effective CAD solutions, and develop new CAD exploration
algorithms for desktop/platform co-exploration. The research will benefit
platform designers, who need an understanding of parameters and tuning issues to
effectively build heavily parameterized platforms and their associated CAD
tools, and platform users, who can utilize such platforms and CAD tools to
develop more efficient platform-based designs than currently possible.
&lt;br/&gt;