* 0203859
* 2002 Electronic Processes in Organic Materials Conference; Newport, RI; July 21-26, 2002
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Gerald Small, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2003
* USD 6,500.00

A Gordon Research Conference on Electronic Processes in Organic Materials (EPOM)
will be held July 21-26, 2002 at Salve Regina University, Newport, RI. The main
goals of the conference are to provide a forum for the presentation of new and
exciting experimental and theoretical results on EPOM and to bring together
investigators from diverse disciplines so that they can share their experimental
and theoretical approaches in solving problems related to electronic and
photophysical processes in complex organic materials of many different types.
The scientific program is multi-faceted and will also serve to educate young and
established scientists in areas they are not so familiar with. Topics include
fundamental science and device applications, e.g., organic superconductors,
field-effect transistors, lasers, conducting wires, light emitting diodes,
semiconductors, electronic structure and dynamics in low-dimensional systems,
light harvesting and electron transfer in artificial and photosynthetic systems,
organic-inorganic heterostructures, single polymer and biomolecular spectroscopy
and, nano-architectronics. The conference will consist of nine formal sessions
with a total of 28 oral presentations, and two afternoon poster sessions.
Invited speakers and discussion leaders were selected on the basis of their
relevant expertise and recent achievements while emphasizing a program with
gender balance, minority representation, and participation of young
investigators. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future
directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
universities, research institutions, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An
evaluation of the progress and status of Electronic Processes in Organic
Materials and related device issues along with current assessments of the most
important developments will be of significant value to the understanding and
enhanced utilization of electronic/photonic materials in computing, data
processing, and communications. This conference is co-supported by the Chemistry
and Materials Research Divisions within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;