* 0203041
* Semiclassical Methods for the Evolution of Nonequilibrium Systems Undergoing Quantum Transitions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Michael Herman, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 351,600.00

In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
the Chemistry Division, Herman will develop numerically efficient and accurate
semiclassical methods to evaluate quantum transition probabilities and
correlation functions in nonequilibrium condensed-phase, gas-phase, and
molecular-beam systems. These density-evolution methods require consideration of
the full quantum nature of the evolution only for times on the order of the loss
of quantum phase coherence. These methods are systematically correctable and
provide an estimate of the calculational error at each level of approximation.
The procedures will be tested on simple model problems for which exact quantum
results can be obtained and then on problems for which experimental data is
available. The results of calculations using these methods will also be compared
with those obtained using other computational methods.

At a time when experimental methods are able to characterize increasingly fast
processes, it is imperative to develop theoretical formalisms that are capable
of describing such processes. The work proposed here addresses that need. It
further promises to provide a framework for analyzing and interpreting ultra-
fast nonequilibrium processes in excited-state systems. The planned extension of
the methods to systems that are far from equilibrium will allow simulation of
new classes of chemical reactions.