* 0203094
* U.S.-JAPAN COOPERATIVE SCIENCE: BIOGEOGRAPHIC HISTORY OF NORTHERN HEMISPHERE COASTAL FISHES (PHOLIS AND CHIROLOPHIS):
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Clifford Cunningham, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 05/31/2003
* USD 14,910.00

0203094&lt;br/&gt;Cunningham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-year
collaborative research project between Professor Clifford Cunningham at Duke
University in North Carolina and Professor Hisashi Imamura at the Hokkaido
University Museum in Japan. The researchers will undertake a study of the
biogeographic history of northern hemisphere coastal fishes (pholis and
chirolophis). &lt;br/&gt;They will use multi-locus DNA sequence data (mtDNA
d-loop, nuclear a-enolase, and nuclear a-tropomyosin) in conjunction with
morphological data to investigate how past climate changes and ecological shifts
(changes in vertical depth) have affected patterns of speciation and
morphological evolution in temperate rocky coastal fishes of the superfamily
Stichaeidae (Yatsu 1985). Their research will be undertaken in Japan, Wales,
Norway and Iceland. The findings of this study will illuminate our understanding
of the timing, conditions and consequences of speciation in temperate coastal
fishes. Although we know little about the causes of speciation in temperate
coastal fishes that are restricted to a single ocean, DNA sequence data has the
ability to distinguish between different allopatric speciation explanations as
well as explanations that invoke changes in vertical depth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
U.S. researchers have expertise in many of the fish species being studied and
the Japanese researcher is Japan's foremost intertidal fish specialist. Results
of the research could suggest that the present species diversity found in
temperate marine coastal fish assemblages is largely the result of the Earth's
periodic and extreme climate changes of the last 10 Mya. This would mean that
changes in oceanographic conditions brought on by climate changes could have
separated conspecific populations of marine taxa, even in the face of gene flow
via planktonic larvae. The research could also suggest that speciation in
coastal fishes was associated with invasions of new habitat depths, such as a
subtidal species invading the intertidal with subsequent reproductive isolation
between the two intraspecific ecotypes. The research will offer a good
opportunity to join efforts between the two countries. Through the exchange of
ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
promote international understanding and cooperation. A graduate student will
also be participating in the research. The researchers plan to distribute the
results of their findings through the Web, publications and presentations at
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;