* 0203244
* Superfluid Studies in Quantum Systems at Low Temperatures
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2006
* John Reppy, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2006
* USD 375,000.00

This low temperature physics project involves the phase behavior of quantum
fluids, 3He and 4He, which are confined in highly porous low-density 'solids',
vycor and aerogel, or adsorbed on high-surface-area solids such as graphite. The
first subject will be a study of the Bose Einstein Transition (BEC) in low-
density helium systems. In this work, porous Vycor glass is used to provide a "
trapping" potential that confines a low-density gas of helium atoms in three-
dimensional space. Under normal circumstances, a gas of helium atoms would
condense into a liquid phase long before the temperature could be lowered enough
for BEC to take place, however for mobile helium atoms adsorbed on the surface
of the porous glass the gas phase is stable to the lowest temperatures and the
BEC temperature can be reached in practice. The ability to continuously vary the
particle density in this system, from the dilute Bose-gas regime to almost the
full liquid density, provides a unique opportunity for the study of the
evolution of the properties of a Bose-condensed system over a wide range of
interaction parameter. The second topic is a study the superfluid transition in
the 3He-aerogel system. This system is currently receiving much attention from
the low temperature community because its unusual properties. This project will
contribute a high-resolution heat capacity and superfluid density measurement.
The third experiment seeks to provide a clearer understanding of the reentrant
superfluid phase that is found for a certain range of partial coverage of the
second layer for 4He adsorbed on hexagonal basal plane graphite. A tentative
interpretation is that the superfluid signal arises through percolation of 2-D
droplets in the second layer. The very unusual, almost logarithmic, temperature
dependence of the superfluid signal is not understood at this time and so
remains as fascinating open question. This research program and the previous
program provide an excellent training ground for both undergraduate and graduate
students inclined toward industrial or academic careers. This training develops
experimental management and decision-making skills that are transferable to
diverse areas, including genomics or management consulting where former students
are currently pursuing successful careers.

Phase transitions, the change of one matter form into another, are ubiquitous
phenomena in nature. One of the goals of physics has been to achieve a more
complete understanding of the phase transition process. It is natural to turn
low temperature examples for study for these present several of the least
complex systems in which to study the phase transition process. Research
supported in this grant will study three contrasting examples of essentially the
same phase transition, one that is important from a number of fundamental
viewpoints. It is the transition from the superfluid to non-superfluid state.
The first example is a system of low-density gas of helium atoms, which
undergoes a superfluid or Bose Einstein Condensation (BEC) transition at very
low temperatures. If interest is the evolution of this transition as the
strength of the interaction between the particles by is increased as the density
of the atoms is increased in controlled fashion. The second example is
superfluid 3He entrained in low-density aerogel glass. This is a model system
for the exploration of the influence of quenched impurities, the complex aerogel
network, on the nature of the superfluid transition in liquid 3He. The final
example explores the 4He superfluid transition in the world of two dimensions
where things are quite different from the 3-D examples mentioned before. The
4He-graphite system has been known for many years to display a large number of
different 2-D phase transitions. Most of these involve changes in
crystallographic structure of the adsorbed helium, however the superfluid
transition is also observed at various coverages in the graphite. One of the
least understood of these transitions, and the one that will be investigated, is
the so-called reentrant (a property appears and then disappears as a function of
experimental variable) superfluid transition observed for partial coverage of
the second layer of adsorbed 4He. The superfluid phase appears with increasing
second layer coverage and then vanishes as the layer is completed. This
interesting behavior is complemented by a yet to be understood temperature
dependence for the superfluid signal. Students, both undergrads and graduate,
are provided the opportunity to participate in leading-edge research, in
projects of modest size. The scientific management and decision-making skills
acquired in this type of research have launched successful careers for several
graduates who are now working in areas outside of low temperature physics such
as genome studies and management consulting. Still others have pursued notably
successful physics careers in academe and government.