* 0203589
* Exact Results in Model Statistical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2007
* Peter Kleban, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 190,000.00

This research focuses on the exact study of the statistical mechanics of model
systems. Research concentrates on critical percolation in two-dimensions, and
important and extensively studied statistical system, and the phase transition
of the farey fraction spin chain, a new and interesting one-dimensional model
with connections to multifractals and Monte Carol simulations, mathematically
exact solutions of model statistical mechanical systems, and techniques from
number theory. The goal is to gain new insights into, and understanding of,
these systems. An important feature of the project is the use of techniques from
pure mathematics and close collaboration with mathematicians. %%% This research
focuses on the exact study of the statistical mechanics of model systems.
Research concentrates on critical percolation in two-dimensions, and important
and extensively studied statistical system, and the phase transition of the
farey fraction spin chain, a new and interesting one-dimensional model with
connections to multifractals and Monte Carol simulations, mathematically exact
solutions of model statistical mechanical systems, and techniques from number
theory. The goal is to gain new insights into, and understanding of, these
systems. An important feature of the project is the use of techniques from pure
mathematics and close collaboration with mathematicians.

