* 0203481
* CRCD:  Integration of High Performance Computing in Nanotechnology:  A Combined Research in the Curricular Development
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Lloyd Lee, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2006
* USD 399,998.00

0203481&lt;br/&gt;Lloyd L. Lee&lt;br/&gt;University of Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;"CRCD:
Integration of High Performance Computing in Nanotechnology: A Combined Research
in the Curricular Development"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-
institutional (University of Oklahoma and Worcester Polytechnic Institute) and
multi-disciplinary project, involving departments of chemical engineering,
computer science, and educational technology. The project addresses the
integration of the fields of nano-technology and computational science; areas of
science and engineering that have experienced fast-paced developments in the
past few years. The project synthesizes these two disciplines by establishing a
curriculum that will combine the latest developments in high performance
computing with computational nano-technology. A three-year curriculum consists
of five elements: (1) nano-materials &lt;br/&gt;manufacture and
characterization; (2) high performance computing and molecular simulation; (3)
wet laboratory experiments for manufacture and testing of nano-structured
materials; (4) design of nano-devices with the help of the National
Nanofabrication Users&lt;br/&gt;Network (NNUN); and (5) lectures from invited
guest speakers in nano-technology. The computational science materials are
packaged as portable modules that can be applied to other scientific
disciplines, such as computational fluid dynamics and bio-informatics. In the
context of computational science, the project has several goals: (1) It
inculcates a sufficient level of interest in performance and an appreciation for
the associated issues, so that students will develop the habit of incorporating
performance issues into every aspect of software design, and especially in
initial design phases; (2) Students will learn about the fundamental issues of
performance, especially parallel performance, thereby creating the ability to
improve and evaluate software optimization. (3) Students will be educated in the
methodologies required to transform a problem from physical description to
mathematical representation, then to algorithmic specification, and finally to
software implementation; (4) Students will acquire the means and understanding
necessary for proper testing, validation and evaluation of their software. In
this context, performance involves two aspects: algorithm and implementation.
(5) It undertakes the professional development of students, cultivating their
abilities in interdisciplinary project management. In particular, the students
will learn to leverage the synergies between engineering, mathematics and
computer science, in order both to fully exploit available resources and to
evaluate the resources required for future endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;