* 0203762
* Sequential Importance Sampling with Resampling and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Yuguo Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

Proposal ID: 0203762&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yuguo Chen&lt;br/&gt;Title: Sequential
importance sampling with resampling and its
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Monte Carlo
method of sequential importance sampling (SIS) provides a versatile and powerful
tool for solving complex statistical inference problems. A number of basic
issues concerning the method remain to be resolved for it to be more widely
applicable: How should the proposal distribution be chosen to strike a proper
balance between computational complexity and statistical efficiency? What is the
role of resampling and what is a good choice for the resampling schedule? An
objective of this proposal is to address these questions through the detailed
study of SIS in three important applications. The first area is time series and
stochastic dynamic systems. Research will develop resampling schedules and
proposal distributions for SIS to solve some long-standing filtering and
smoothing problems in continuous-state hidden Markov models.&lt;br/&gt;Change-
point problems, which can be seen as a special case of hidden Markov models,
will serve as a test ground for the new methodology. The second area is
statistical inference in molecular population genetics. Research in this area
will enhance currently available SIS methodology by developing a new resampling
approach, and by combining such resampling strategy with suitably chosen
proposal distributions. The final area of research is conditional inference on
contingency and zero-one tables. New theories arising from these applications
will be of interest across a broad range of areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Monte Carlo method of sequential importance sampling has been fruitfully applied
to a wide range of scientific problems including simulating molecules, filtering
and smoothing time series arising in engineering and economics, and making
Bayesian statistical inferences. However, a number of basic issues need to be
resolved to make the method more widely applicable and effective. For example,
how should a proper balance be struck between computational complexity and
statistical efficiency in implementing the method and what is the role of
various enhancements to the method. This research will address these issues
through the development of more efficient sequential importance sampling
techniques for three important areas of application. The first area is filtering
and smoothing problems in continuous-state hidden Markov models, which have
important applications in communications signal processing. The second area is
statistical inference on genealogical trees. Recent advances in biotechnology
have provided an abundance of data on the genetic variation of DNA within a
population. This data, which often poses computationally challenging statistical
inference problems, can shed light on the evolutionary process of a population
and yield important information for locating genes that are responsible for
genetic diseases. The third area of application is conditional inference on
contingency and zero-one tables, which is motivated by the interest in
psychology in testing the Rasch model and in ecology in testing theories about
the relationship between evolution and the competition among species. This
research will improve the sequential importance sampling methods used in these
three applications and strive to develop a systematic theory that provides
insight into general strategies for applying sequential importance
samplin&lt;br/&gt;