* 0203655
* Engineered Ceramic-Organic Interfaces: Properties and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2002,03/31/2009
* Paul Kayima, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2009
* USD 480,574.00

Engineered organic-ceramic interfaces offer a wealth of opportunities for
materials synthesis. Furthermore, studying the formation and properties of
organic-inorganic materials affords improved understanding of the interactions
between these dissimilar components on nanoscopic and microscopic scales.
Ceramic thin films formed from aqueous solutions on organic self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs), the focus of this GOALI research program, constitute a
geometrically simplified and chemically versatile model configuration with
important technological applications. The research will study three aspects of
these systems: 1) solution optimization; 2) substrate engineering; and 3)
process design, directed toward economical, environmentally benign synthesis of
nanocrystalline ceramic thin films. The specific systems to be studied include
aluminosilicate coatings on ceramic particles for pigments; indium-tin oxide
films as transparent semiconductors; and vanadium-titanium oxides for catalytic
applications. The major theoretical and experimental tools to be utilized
include the Gorer-Hodes theory of critical solution ratios, ceramic-organic
interfacial force measurements using the atomic force microscope, and in-situ
conversions of organic surface functionalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials
that combine ceramics with organic substances range from indispensable and
familiar objects like paint, tires, bones, and flexible magnets to innovative
organic-inorganic nanocomposite materials for optics, electronics, sensors,
catalysts, coatings, and biomedical applications. This research program will use
ultrathin engineered organic layers two nanometers thick as "primers" to develop
low-cost, energy-efficient, environmentally friendly routes for forming ceramic
thin films and coatings. The versatility of the approach is reflected in the
specific objectives, which include improved paint pigments (through a
university-industry collaboration between Case Western Reserve University and
Sherwin Williams Corporation), thin-film catalysts, and transparent
semiconducting coatings. This work also seeks a clearer understanding of the
fundamental interactions between engineered organic surfaces and ceramics, to
facilitate more widespread applications for organic-inorganic composite
engineering materials. Significant features of the educational plan include
annual involvement of undergraduate students in year-long research projects,
active collaborations (including extended reciprocal visits) with leading
research groups in Germany and Israel, and continuous side-by-side collaboration
between academic and industrial scientists at both the senior and junior level.
Academia-to-industry technology-transfer discussions are underway, involving an
active patent with significant commercial potential for the industrial partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;