* 0203293
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Real-Time Scheduling of Task Graphs on Grid Computing
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Reda Ammar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 28,157.00

0203293&lt;br/&gt;Ammar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. Reda A. Ammar, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut and Dr.
Ayman El Dessouki, President of the Electronics Research Institute, Cairo,
Egypt. They plan to study real-time scheduling of task graphs on grid computing.
The investigators will focus on developing a set of new techniques and
heuristics to schedule real-time applications on a grid. They will assume that
each application consists of a set of connected tasks. The objective of this
work is to meet the requirements of task deadlines, to improve the processing
power utilization, and to increase the throughput. Their scheduling approaches
utilize the available processing power on each processor to accommodate as many
tasks of different applications as possible while satisfying the required
deadline of each task. The algorithms reduce the communication cost among tasks
and the possibility of processing power fragmentation. They will demonstrate
that the proposed scheduling technique produces an adequate acceptance rate
compared to other approaches. Finally, evaluation of the research results will
be through initial simulation studies, followed by experimental testing on an
available grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: &lt;br/&gt;Scheduling a large number
of high performance computing applications on a grid computing environment is a
serious obstacle to achieving a good performance, and this becomes more critical
in real time systems. A grid scheduler without enough knowledge of the state of
the Grid and the scheduled tasks of a given application cannot adequately manage
the Grid resources, may fragment the available processing power and introduce a
high volume of communication among the application's tasks, and may cause
rejection of some submitted applications if some of its tasks miss their
deadlines. This project seeks to provide mechanisms to satisfy the performance
requirements while maximizing the processing power utilization, and thus advance
the field of grid computing. Applications that are computationally extensive,
such as weather prediction, numerical simulations in physics, biology and
chemistry, geodynamics, telecommunications, real-time image recognition,
e-business, e-engineering will benefit from the proposed scheduling algorithms.
The two PIs had prior collaboration and their institutes are well equipped for
the proposed project. The project will involve U.S. and Egyptian graduate
students. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;