* 0203992
* UMEB: Undergraduate Training in Ecological and Evolutionary Approaches to Complex Environmental Problems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Robin Autenrieth, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 442,000.00

0203992&lt;br/&gt;Honeycutt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas A&amp;M University
System, including the main campus at College Station and four primarily
undergraduate serving institutions, will establish an extended and mentor-
supported research experience for undergraduates primarily from underrepresented
groups. The program is designed to provide training in the objective assessment
of scientific theories based on critical thinking, experimentation,
collaboration, and synthesis of information. Students in the program will be
supported throughout the year and for multiple years. Student participants will
be recruited from disciplines in environmental biology, and training will
emphasize interdisciplinary research based on modern techniques in environmental
biology and engineering. Research projects will pertain to complex environmental
problems that require knowledge of ecological principles, population biology,
genetics, environmental risk assessment, environmental engineering, and
toxicology. The program is designed to provide each student co-mentors who will
provide guidance for the student throughout the program. This award includes a
supplement from the Americas Program of NSF's Office of International Science
and Engineering. This supplement will support travel to Latin America, where
students and their mentors will engage in research collaborations between U.S.
and Latin American research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solutions to complex
environmental problems require integrated multi-disciplinary approaches. While
society struggles to devise a means for sustainable economic development, the
degradation of ecosystems threatens renewable natural resources. Such
degradation also impacts biological diversity, human health, and prospects for
future economic gains. Inherent ecosystem complexity often complicates our
understanding of how the various components interact for effective functioning
of a healthy ecosystem. This complication also makes it difficult to identify
potential risks and enact programs that minimize risk. Future scientists must be
trained to collaborate across diverse disciplines in both the life sciences and
engineering. This project is designed to train the next generation of young
scientists, so that they can contribute to resolving some of the environmental
issues that our nation and the world will face in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;