* 0203963
* Theory of Single-Molecule Study of Biomolecule Interactions and Chromosome Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2007
* John Marko, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 340,000.00

This is a theoretical grant funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials
Research and Molecular and Cellular Biology. The past few years have seen the
development of new techniques based on micromanipulation technology to study the
mechanical properties of single and small numbers of biomolecules. Current
state-of-the-art involves the monitoring of biochemical reactions on
micromanipulated molecules, leading to a statistical mechanical picture of the
operation of biomolecular machinery. These types of experiments typically
involve distance measurements in the nanometer range, and force measurements in
the piconewton range. The objective of this project is to develop theoretical
descriptions of these kind of single-molecule force-distance experiments that
study the organization of DNA by proteins, and to apply those ideas to
understand experiments of this type on chomosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
types of problems to be studied include: equilibrium and nonequilibrium aspects
of folding of large DNA molecules by proteins which bind to, and then distort,
the double helix; effects of DNA folding on the topological state of large DNA
molecules, as a model for how disentanglement of duplicated DNAs is coupled to
their folding during cell division; kinetics of opening and closing of dsDNA or
RNA helix-loop structures in response to applied forces, including those applied
by other biomolecules; kinetics of 'communication' processes between DNA sites,
where that communication occurs through juxtaposition of DNA sequences, or
alternatively through a 'messenger' (typically protein) molecule which
sequentially visits two sites; mechanical response of networks of dsDNA-based
nucleoprotein filaments as found in folded chromosomes, and the modification of
that response by sequence-directed cutting.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is a
theoretical grant funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research and
Molecular and Cellular Biology. The past few years have seen the development of
new techniques based on micromanipulation technology to study the mechanical
properties of single and small numbers of biomolecules. Current state-of-the-art
involves the monitoring of biochemical reactions on micromanipulated molecules,
leading to a statistical mechanical picture of the operation of biomolecular
machinery. These types of experiments typically involve distance measurements in
the nanometer range, and force measurements in the piconewton range. The
objective of this project is to develop theoretical descriptions of these kind
of single-molecule force-distance experiments that study the organization of DNA
by proteins, and to apply those ideas to understand experiments of this type on
chomosomes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;