* 0203142
* Chemical and Spectroscopic Studies of Nitrenium Ions and Related Species
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Daniel Falvey, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2007
* USD 370,000.00

With this award Professor Falvey will continue his work on the chemical and
spectroscopic studies of nitrenium ions and related electron deficient nitrogen
species. A variety of experimental techniques will be used to elucidate the
chemical and physical properties of nitrenium ions. The chemistry of aryl
nitrenium ions will be studied in detail in the course of this work. Aryl
nitrenium ions are generated in biological systems through enzyme catalyzed
metabolism of aromatic amines. These nitrenium ions are electrophilic and hence
very reactive so the production of these species in living organisms is believed
to be mutagenic and/or carcinogenic. Aryl nitrenium ions are also implicated as
intermediates in the synthesis of polyanilines, a conducting polymer. Aniline
oxidation will be used to generate nitrenium ions and their reactions with a
variety of electron rich arenes will be studied. Professor Falvey and his group
will also work to prepare and study ground state triplet nitrenium ions since
theory predicts they will have different chemical reactivities than the ground
state singlet nitrenium ions outlined in the first part of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Daniel E. Falvey of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Maryland, College Park. Dr. Falvey
will work on the generation and study of a family of reactive molecules known as
nitrenium ions. These molecules contain an electron deficient and hence
chemically reactive nitrogen atom as part of their molecular structure.
Nitrenium ions are generated in biological systems through enzyme catalyzed
metabolism of aromatic amines. The production of these species in living
organisms is believed to be mutagenic and/or carcinogenic. Nitrenium ions are
also implicated as intermediates in the synthesis of polyanilines, a conducting
polymer. A thorough understanding of how these species are generated and how
they react should contribute to a better understanding of the fundamental
chemistry involved in both of the processes outlined above. Students trained
during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the speciality
chemicals industry and the pharmaceutical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;