* 0203524
* RUI:  Probing Hidden Order and Magnetic Disorder in Correlated Electron Systems Using Spin Probes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Oscar Bernal, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 180,017.00

This individual investigator award will support an experimental project at a
predominately undergraduate institution. The project concentrates on the study
of intrinsic inhomogeneous structures in correlated electron materials, with a
goal of elucidating the nature of phase transitions and the role played by
disordered dynamics in the behavior of these systems as the temperature is
decreased. Static and dynamic properties of local magnetic-field and electric-
field-gradient distributions in systems undergoing phase transitions will be
characterized by means of magnetic- and quadrupolar-resonance techniques. In
addition, muon spin rotation techniques will be used to characterize and assess
the role of disordered dynamics in the ground state of systems displaying
characteristics consistent with a quantum critical point. Undergraduate and
graduate (masters level) students working on this project will receive training
in the techniques of magnetic resonance, radio-frequency electronics,
cryogenics, and interfacing computers with experiments. The research will be
carried out in collaboration with The University of California, Riverside, The
University of Florida, and the Kamerlingh Onnes Lab in the
Netherlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award will
support an experimental project at a predominately undergraduate institution.
The project concentrates on increasing our understanding of correlated electron
materials. These are systems in which the electrons interact strongly with each
other, resulting in a behavior completely different from that displayed by the
more common non-interacting electron systems such as normal metals. Correlated
electron materials are currently the subject of great deal of interest for
science and technology due to the wide variety of behaviors they display in
response to changes in temperature and magnetic field. These materials may
exhibit superconductivity, magnetism, antiferromagnetism, small-moment and
quadrupolar ordering, non-Fermi liquid behavior, colossal magnetoresistance or
hidden order. Nuclear-magnetic and quadrupolar-resonance and muon spin rotation
techniques will be used to study the static and dynamic properties of
correlated-electrons in rare-earth and actinide compounds such as heavy-fermion
systems. The emphasis is on elucidating the nature of phase transitions and the
role played by disordered dynamics in the behavior of these systems as the
temperature is decreased. Undergraduate and graduate (masters level) students
working on this project will receive training in the techniques of magnetic
resonance, radio-frequency electronics, cryogenics, and interfacing computers
with experiments. The research will be carried out in collaboration with The
University of California, Riverside, The University of Florida, and the
Kamerlingh Onnes Lab in the Netherlands.&lt;br/&gt;