* 0203984
* NGS:  Component-based Frameworks for High-Performance Distributed Scientific Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2006
* USD 689,252.00

EIA-0203984 Jack J. Dongarra University of Tennessee Component-based Frameworks
for High-Performance Distributed Scientific Applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computer applications are continuing to evolve
to solve more complex physical problems. The result is an increase in composite
applications that are built from smaller element applications, each of which
model a simpler physical problem. As composite applications are generally large,
they tend to be built by teams. In addition, these composite applications tend
to be distributed over a number of computers using a combination of data-
parallel and task-parallel designs. They typically share data via files and
databases. More sophisticated designs will include message passing, remote event
signals, and other distributed computing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
realize this vision, we must overcome significant scientific and technical
obstacles. The proposed project includes research on a programming model for
large, composite, scientific applications that are targeted to run in computer
Grid environments. This research will focus on developing efficient techniques
to program and execute these applications including support for managing
behavioral aspects of integrating element applications into a composite
application. This research will be use to develop a component-based framework
where a clear, concise, and accurate description of such applications can be
created and used to execute the application in a high-performance, distributed
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;