* 0203676
* Mixed Model Selection: Theory and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jiming Jiang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 68,364.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0203676 &amp;
0203724&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Jiang/Rao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
involves development of model selection procedures for linear and generalized
linear mixed models. The focus of this research will be on studying asymptotic
properties and finite sample performance of the procedures, which will include
comparisons to commonly used ad hoc methods. The research will also develop
applications of the selection methodology to selecting factors in longitudinal
data, genetic screening of genes related to quantitative traits of interest, and
to model selection in small area estimation problems from surveys. In addition,
the methods developed will be made accessible through the development of freely
available software. The research will also improve work recently completed by
the investigators where the conditions for consistent factor selection in linear
mixed models were established. These improvements will include developing a more
efficient method for linear mixed model selection, and studying some adaptive
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linear and generalized linear mixed models are
important classes of models which allow relaxation of standard assumptions like
independence or homogeneity of variances of observations, and take into account
more complicated data structures in quite general ways. Typical applications
include repeated measurements made on a patient over time or screening of
candidate genes that might be related to a quantitative trait of interest.
Selecting which factors should or should not be in the model can be of
importance for model inference and predictions, yet little if anything has been
developed to formally study this problem. This research attempts to fill this
important gap in the field of developing new procedures for correct factor
selection from a theoretical perspective, and evaluating real-world performance
via extensive simulations. Another important component of this research is to
apply it in a variety of real-world settings including longitudinal data,
genetic screening, and small area estimation in survey sampling. &lt;br/&gt;