* 0203755
* Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior, and Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Philip Pincus, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 330,000.00

This combined experiment and theory project is in the area of soft condensed
matter physics. The research will explore phases, structures, and interactions,
in supramolecular assemblies of filamentous cytoskeletal proteins and their
associated biomolecules. The importance of the experiments lies in their
potential to uncover the origin of fundamentally new attractive forces between
charged biological polymers, which can lead to new states or arrangements of
matter. The project should shed light on the physics of charged polymers, which
constitute a group of technologically important industrial materials. The
program trains graduate students in state-of-the-art techniques required to
address complex multidisciplinary problems at the interface between physics,
engineering, chemistry, and biology. The research includes structure
characterization at National Synchrotron X-ray Laboratories and in-house imaging
with laser-scanning confocal microscopy. This will provide student training in
research settings where traditional discipline boundaries between physics,
engineering, chemistry, and biology, have been removed, and teamwork and problem
solving are emphasized. This will prepare the students to tackle and solve
complex technological problems in their careers in academe, industry, or
government.&lt;br/&gt;This combined experiment and theory project is in the area
of soft condensed matter physics. The research focuses on producing and
characterizing novel materials that are obtained when biological polymers (e.g.
proteins) are brought together to form new structures with dimensions between
one-billionth of a meter and one-thousandths of a meter. New "composite"
materials in this size range can have technological applications in areas such
as molecular-based chemical sensors, molecular sieves for separations and
purification technologies, and chemical and drug delivery vehicles. The project
is highly interdisciplinary and exposes graduate students to a broad spectrum of
techniques. These include state-of-the-art structure characterization with
synchrotron x-ray diffraction at National Synchrotron X-ray Laboratories, and
in-house imaging with cutting edge optical and electron microscopes. The
educational significance and impact of this interdisciplinary project, at the
interface between physics, engineering, chemistry, and biology, is in the
training of students with a broad outlook toward problem solving. They will be
valuable not only in academic settings, but also in the industrial and
government job force where interdisciplinary research is required and rewarded.
&lt;br/&gt;