* 0203087
* SGER:  The Impacts of the  September 11, 2001, Attacks and Response on Russian Geopolitical Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2002,06/30/2004
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2004
* USD 55,991.00

Since the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia has struggled to define a new role
for itself in world political affairs. Through the transformation of Russian
political culture into a democratic system, the opinions of Russian citizens
have come to play an increasingly important role in that process. Relatively
little scholarly attention has been given to comparing the actions of the
Russian government with the attitudes of its citizens, however, largely because
of the absence of data on citizen perspectives and views. The September 11,
2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. and the ensuing responses, particularly the
U.S.-led attacks on the Taliban government and terrorists in Afghanistan,
created dramatic shifts in Russian governmental policy, however, both through
direct participation by Russian in the multi-national anti-terrorist coalition
and through its approval of the stationing of U.S. troops in nations formerly
part of the Soviet Union. The degree to which these new policies and actions of
the Putin administration coincide with the attitudes of the Russian people is
uncertain, however. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will assess the
relationship between formal Russian policies and the opinions of Russian
citizens through the conduct 1,600 face-to-face interviews in the homes of
Russian citizens. The 30-minute surveys, which will be conducted by the largest
public surveying organization in Russia, will be draw from a nationally
distributed cluster sample of residents. The surveys will probe the reactions of
Russian citizens to the terrorist attacks on the U.S. and on responses to those
attacks. A major emphasis in this study is on the degree to which Russian
citizens concur with actions and policies of the Putin administration and to the
citizens' preferred future role of Russia in the anti-terrorist coalition and in
world affairs in general. Information also will be elicited on socioeconomic
characteristics, ideology, and political preferences of responders in order to
better assess survey responses. Survey results will have a margin of error of
+/- 3.8 percent. The results of this survey and its analysis will be
disseminated through scholarly publications and through presentations at major
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide valuable information
about the degree to which the actions of Russia's government are based on
popular opinions shared by a majority of the Russian people. Survey data and
analyses will inform scholarly discussions of the evolving nature of Russian
political culture and Russia's real and desired place in world affairs, and it
will also provide new insights of value to U.S. officials engaged in foreign
policy making.&lt;br/&gt;