* 0203072
* Research in Several Complex Variables and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Laszlo Lempert, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number DMS-0203072&lt;br/&gt;PI: Laszlo
Lempert&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two
components. One concerns complex analysis&lt;br/&gt;on infinite dimensional
manifolds, and the proposed problems &lt;br/&gt;are mostly cohomological in
nature. They center around the&lt;br/&gt;computation of Dolbeault and sheaf
cohomology groups. Two types&lt;br/&gt;of manifolds will be investigated: loop
spaces of finite&lt;br/&gt;dimensional compact complex manifolds and Stein
manifolds. One&lt;br/&gt;(longer term) goal will be to prove a Hirzebruch--
Riemann--Roch&lt;br/&gt;type index theorem on loop spaces, another to discover
an&lt;br/&gt;appropriate class of sheaves for which cohomology can be
proved&lt;br/&gt;to vanish on infinite dimensional Stein manifolds
(generalization&lt;br/&gt;of the notion of coherent sheaves). I will also work
on solving&lt;br/&gt;the inhomogeneous Cauchy--Riemann equations in
pseudoconvex&lt;br/&gt;domains in Hilbert spaces. The finite dimensional
component is&lt;br/&gt;about extending the concept of holomorphic motion from
the &lt;br/&gt;complex plane to motions of higher dimensional complex
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;and their subsets. This will hopefully provide a useful tool
for&lt;br/&gt;higher dimensional complex
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics in general elucidates the formal
structures&lt;br/&gt;that underlie the exploration of our world. An example
of&lt;br/&gt;such a structure is a function, which formalizes the
notion&lt;br/&gt;of "dependence" among variable quantities. For
instance&lt;br/&gt;temperature at some location on Earth depends on
the&lt;br/&gt;latitude and the longitude of the location, but also
on&lt;br/&gt;the altitude, and the time of the measurement: we have a
function&lt;br/&gt;of four variables. In another context, the temperature of
say&lt;br/&gt;a mole of a gas depends on the velocity of each molecule of
the&lt;br/&gt;gas, thus on trillions and trillions of variables.
Functions&lt;br/&gt;of such a huge number of variables are best understood
by&lt;br/&gt;idealizing to infinitely many variables. These are the
main&lt;br/&gt;objects of the proposed research: functions of
infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many variables. The variables are complex rather than
real&lt;br/&gt;numbers. Introducing complex variables typically
streamlines&lt;br/&gt;problems, and having solved the complexified problem one
can&lt;br/&gt;often go back and obtain, by restriction, a solution to
the&lt;br/&gt;original real problem. The problems to be considered are
partly&lt;br/&gt;motivated by various mathematical disciplines, and also
by&lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;