* 0203136
* Forming of Ceramics During Firing without the Application of External Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2008
* Stephen Lombardo, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2008
* USD 296,000.00

Forming ceramics into complex shapes has traditionally been accomplished by slip
casting, injection molding, hot pressing, and machining. The subject of this
proposal is a forming technique to shape thin ceramic bodies by introducing
strains into the component during the firing operation, without the application
of external pressure. The method can be considered a synthesis of mold-based and
hot-forming methods in that while molds are not needed, complexity in a
component is realized by operating at high temperature. The feasibility of this
technique has been demonstrated by applying a chromia coating onto thin alumina
substrates to deform the originally flat sample into an arc shape and into a
ceramic wave spring. Preliminary calculations suggest that the internal stress
that drives the deformation arises as a consequence of cation diffusion from the
coating into the substrate. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the research
efforts proposed here will provide for a scientific understanding of this
ceramic shape forming process, which in turn will lead to more wide-spread
examination and possibly use of the methodology as a forming method. The
potential advantages of such a forming method are that the costs of molds and
machining can be eliminated and that a more rapid manufacturing process may be
realized. These two advantages may help to advance the penetration of advanced
ceramic materials into more widespread applications.&lt;br/&gt;