* 0203362
* Reliability Analysis and Robust Synthesis of HIgh-Performance Clock Networks.
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Cheng-Kok Koh, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

The research component of the proposal is to explore a new methodology for clock
networks that explicitly accounts for the interplay between the various design
factors. The educational component will provide graduate student researchers
with an interdisciplinary training in VLSI, optimization, and numerical
computing. Furthermore, the research results will be integrated in graduate
courses at Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;The design of clock networks is a
fundamental problem in synchronous circuit synthesis, and requires trading off
between design effort, physical resource costs and performance. Most existing
clock design methodologies do not explicitly perform this trade-off. Instead, a
design is first proposed, and then evaluated in terms of physical resource costs
and performance, and the design repeated if necessary. As a large number of such
iterations may be required, the design effort is minimized with some simplifying
assumptions. One of these artificially imposed constraints is that of ``zero-
skew'', where it is required that all elements are clocked (i.e., switch) at the
same time-instant. This requirement constrains the physical layout of clock
distribution networks, as the variation in the arrival of the clock signal at
the various switching elements must be held small. Perhaps more important, as
all circuit elements switch together, the demand from the power supply is not
uniform over time but peaks sharply once every clock cycle. This uneven demand
on the power supply leads to what is commonly referred to as power-supply noise:
As the demands on the power supply peak sharply, its ability to deliver power
degrades, leading to possibly degraded performance of the
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;With these observations serving as the backdrop, we propose
to develop a design methodology for clock networks that employs nonzero clock
skews, and directly addresses the interplay between various factors that
determine the trade-off between the design effort, physical resource costs and
performance. We present preliminary results that show that our approach holds
much promise. Specifically, we propose to perform together scheduling and
synthesis of clock networks such that both power supply noise and physical
resource costs are reduced. Essential to our objectives is the efficient
analysis of power supply noise. We propose a framework and techniques for power-
supply noise analysis that draw upon our past successes with model reduction
techniques for interconnect modeling both in the time and frequency
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;