* 0203154
* Enhancing the Performance of Hp-adaptive Methods for Parabolic and Elliptic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Moore, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 110,985.00

&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will develop tools that will enhance the adaptive
solution of parabolic and elliptic systems in three space dimensions. A new a
posteriori error estimation strategy, interpolation-error based error
estimation, developed in one dimension will be extended to three dimensions.
This strategy provides asymptotically exact estimates of the error not only for
the current grid, but for a grid whose elements are one degree higher than the
current one. The estimates involve obtaining approximations of appropriate
solution derivatives from the finite element solution and are thus, easy to
compute. They will enhance the reliability of hp-refinement codes. The
investigator will also improve efficiency through the development of new
assembly and solution algorithms for large linear systems. A new incomplete
assembly algorithm that appears promising in a nonadaptive setting will be
extended to an hp-adaptive code. Incomplete assembly is analogous to incomplete
factorization in that only a fixed number of nonzero entries are stored per row
and a drop tolerance is used to discard small values. A variable order-variable
step implicit/explicit solver will be built. A method for selecting a good
initial guess for an approximate inverse preconditioner for time-dependent
problems based on past history will be investigated. These strategies will be
embedded in an hp-refinement code developed previously by the investigator and
tested on a set of reaction-diffusion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many
important physical and biological processes can be modeled by elliptic and
parabolic partial differential equations, especially those of the reaction-
diffusion type. Some examples include pattern formation in chemical and
biological systems, combustion and voltage propagation in the heart. Solving
such problems often involves significant computational resources, both time and
storage, especially when the problems must be solved in three space dimensions.
Adaptive methods have proven effective by automatically targeting these
resources to areas where the solution must be enhanced while reducing the effort
in areas where the solution is changing little. They also increase the
reliability of the solution by basing resource allocation on appropriate
estimation of the error. The aim of this proposal is to significantly improve
adaptive methods in two ways. First a new error estimation strategy will be
developed that is cheaper and provides more information on which to base
resource allocation, thereby increasing reliability. The second involves the
creation of several new methods to solve large systems of equations thus
improving both time and storage efficiency. This in turn, means that scientists
and engineers will be able to explore more realistic models rather than
deliberate over the finer details of numerical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;