* 0203942
* Problems in Ill-posed Statistical Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Frits Ruymgaart, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0203942&lt;br/&gt;PI: Frits H. Ruymgaart&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Problems in ill-posed statistical
inference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a renewed
interest from the part of statisticians in solving noisy integral equations.
This kind of problem is ill-posed because the integral operator involved
typically has an unbounded inverse and such models boil down to a generalization
of traditional curve estimation. The purpose of this proposal is to pursue the
general theory that is being developed into three directions. The first question
is whether asymptotically efficient estimators of sufficiently smooth
functionals of the input signal can be constructed despite the presence of the
possibly unknown error density as an infinite dimensional nuisance parameter.
The second question to be dealt with is the asymptotic distribution of the
integrated squared error centered at its mean. Such precise asymptotic behavior
of a global measure of accuracy has important applications to model checks.
Finally a new method expedient for convolution equations with mathematical
irregularities will be developed. The method is based on expansion in a wavelet
basis coupled with inversion of the convolution operator in the time
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimenters are often faced with the problem of
recovering the input of a system when only the output is observable. Typically
the observations will be blurred by measurement error and statistical procedures
become pertinent. Examples include computer tomography employed in medical
imaging, and Wicksell's problem in stereology where a transform of the particle
size distribution is observed. Inverse heat conduction requires the recovery of
the initial heat distribution (input) when the present one (output) is given.
There are many more examples and related questions. For instance, can one
estimate the total weight of a cable suspended at its endpoints, when only data
regarding its shape are available? The construction of efficient estimators of
such functionals of the input is one purpose of this research. A second question
considered is precise information about the frequency distribution of the
discrepancy between the estimated input and its expectation. Results can be
useful in checking the validity of certain prior assumptions and could, for
instance, be applied in recovering the luminosity distribution of the Milky Way.
Finally a new method of input reconstruction in irregular cases will be
developed using wavelets with potential application to image
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;