* 0203538
* RUI:  Halogen-Etched and Chemically-Sputtered Germanium Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Dennis Rioux, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 115,130.00

This RUI project is a multifaceted study of single crystal germanium surfaces
modified by reactive halo-gen etchants and energetic ion bombardment. Using
scanning probe microscopy (SPM), reflection high-energy electron diffraction
(RHEED), and photoemission spectroscopy (PES) a sequence of experiments on
etched germanium substrates are planned. Initial stages will investigate the
morphology of Ge(100)-(2x1) and Ge(111)-c(2x8) surfaces etched by diatomic
halogen molecules (Cl2 , Br2 , I2 ). Through statis-tical analyses (correlation
functions, size distributions, etc.) of SPM images from the etched surfaces,
comparisons with theoretical models of surface roughening will be made to assess
competing smoothing and roughening mechanisms. These data will also be compared
to data collected from etched silicon sur-faces with the same orientations. The
chemical similarity of germanium and silicon is predicted to yield the same
halogenated surface species upon exposure to the halogen etchant-this will be
verified by PES measurements to be carried out with collaborators at the
University of Wisconsin Synchrotron Radiation Center. Structural differences,
particularly on the (111)-oriented surfaces are expected to yield different
surface structures, thereby yielding insight into structural mechanisms of
surface evolution. Chemical sputtering (the simultaneous exposure of a surface
to energetic ions and neutral halogen molecules) will be carried out on
Ge(100)-(2x1) surfaces. SPM results from these experiments in conjunction with
those from simple etch systems and those from simple sputter systems will
identify similarities and differences in surface structure. Features unique to
the chemical sputtering method are expected due to the synergis-tic enhancements
in etching that can occur in the presence of both energetic ions and reactive
chemical etchants. Dynamic RHEED measurements taken in situ during etching will
enable monitoring of surface crystallinity. Etching parameters can be tuned so
that RHEED oscillations are obtained, indicative of layer-by- layer removal. PES
measurements will be used to assess concentrations of highly halogenated species
after chemical sputtering. Unique surface morphologies result from material
removal. Etch pits, surface defects, regrowth dimer chains, and regrowth islands
are examples of the kinds of nanostructures that can be controlled via etchant
flux, etchant fluence, and substrate temperature. Large domains of these surface
features can be created and used as templates for thin-film growth. The goal of
the research is to explore the influence of these nanostructures on the
nucleation and growth of thin films. Statistical analysis of SPM data will allow
monitoring evolution of surface morphology. Questions being addressed include
whether or not these surface structures enhance nucleation density, how island
coalescence is af-fected, and how interface abruptness is affected. Before the
thin-film growth experiments take place, re-sidual halogen atoms must be removed
from the surfaces, preferably without disturbing the structure of the etched
surface. Extraction of halogen atoms by atomic hydrogen has been shown to be
effective using spectroscopic techniques; however, the effect of this procedure
has not been explored from a morpho-logical perspective. SPM and PES data will
be collected in order to verify the effectiveness of this tech-nique with
respect to surface modification.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having
techno-logical relevance. Undergraduate students will play a primary role in the
project, with opportunities for research integrated directly into their academic
program, and continued full time in the summer. The re-search program will
enable forefront research and access to state-of-the-art surface science
equipment to undergraduate students. An important feature of the project is the
strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;