* 0203862
* SPIN-UP/TYC:  Strategic Programs for Innovations in Undergraduate Physics at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Warren Hein, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2005
* USD 270,540.00

This project is investigating and analyzing the role of undergraduate physics
instruction at two-year colleges (TYCs) in encouraging students, particularly
women and minorities, to pursue undergraduate degrees in physics as well as in
other areas of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The
project is seeking to discover how some two-year colleges succeed in encouraging
students to take introductory physics and then transfer to four-year
institutions and become physics majors. Based on information gathered through a
survey of TYC physics activities and site visits to ten TYCs, the project is
publishing a series of case studies that physicists in other two-year colleges
can use to enhance their teaching of introductory physics and to encourage the
production of STEM majors, particularly physics majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPIN-UP/TYC project is investigating the basic
mechanism of change in the two-year college physics program. The site visits and
survey that this project is sponsoring seeks to identify the key personnel at
the TYC responsible for implementing changes in the physics/science programs.
The project is also investigating ways to better bridge two-year college and
four-year college physics faculty. Better communication between these segments
of the physics community not only encourage recruitment of physics majors and
pre-service physics teachers in the TYCs and facilitate transfer to the four-
year programs, it strengthens undergraduate physics as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the SPIN-UP/TYC project, information
concerning teacher preparation (particularly physics and physical science
teaching preparation) at two-year colleges is being gathered. The teacher
preparation information concerns both the processes and scope that selected two-
year colleges use in their preparation of future
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPIN-UP/TYC project is a collaboration
between the American Association of Physics Teachers, Lee College, and Southwest
Texas Junior College in association with the American Institute of Physics and
the American Physical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;