* 0203373
* Nitride Quantum Wells and Photonic Structures - Growth, Optical Studies, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Jingyu Lin, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2006
* USD 491,884.00

This project pursues several interconnected research areas: 1) Optimizing III-
nitride material quality; n- and p-type doping, particularly for AlGaN ternary
alloys and InAlGaN quaternary al-loys with relatively high Al contents (x &gt;
0.5); and reduction of dislocations and line defects. When submicron-strip
lateral epitaxial overgrowth is employed, relaxation of excess strain at the
mesa edges may dominate, resulting in fewer dislocations above the window
region. The poten-tial of lattice-matched quaternary quantum wells (QWs) of
GaN/InAlGaN as active media for UV emitters with improved performance will also
be explored. 2) Fabricating and processing III-nitride wavelength-scale photonic
structures and devices. E-beam lithography patterning and plasma dry etching to
create wavelength-scale photonic structures and devices will be studied. Unique
properties of III-nitrides make them very attractive for the generation,
guiding, and switching of light, and new architectures for integrating III-
nitride photonic components (e.g., resonators, waveguides, emitters, detectors,
etc) onto single chips will be explored to lay the foundation for achieving
integrated photonic circuits based on III-nitrides for a wide range of ap-
plications. 3) Deep UV time-resolved nano-optical studies. A specially designed
deep UV pico-second time-resolved nano-optical spectroscopy system will be used
for probing optical proper-ties [photoluminescence (PL), electro-luminescence
(EL), etc.] of semiconductor materials and photonic devices with time-resolution
of a few ps, spatial resolution of 50 nm, and wavelength range spanning from IR
to deep UV (to 195 nm). This system integrates a deep UV femtosecond laser
spectroscopy system with a deep UV near-field-scanning-optical-microscopy
(NSOM)/AFM system. It will be utilized to probe carrier dynamics, optical
transitions, as well as defect properties in nitride materials and QWs,
especially in AlGaN alloys, GaN/AlGaN and GaN/InAlGaN QWs with high Al content
(x&gt;0.5). The aim is to gain new understanding and methods of controlling
optical and optoelectronic properties. The emission and light propagation
properties in wavelength-scale emitters and waveguides will also be investigated
to provide input for improved integrated photonic device design. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area
of electronic/photonic materi-als science having high technological relevance.
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
integration of research and education. Through direct involve-ment in research,
students will have unique learning and discovery opportunities in the areas of
advanced semiconductor materials, nano-fabrication techniques, semiconductor
physics, semi-conductor materials fabrication and device processing using state-
of-the-art epitaxial growth, lithographic patterning, plasma etching, and
advanced materials characterization. The project also encompasses development of
strategic alliances with industry, which further enhances edu-cation and
training opportunities for postdoctorals, graduate, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;