* 0203555
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research on the late Cenozoic Paleoceanographic and Paleoclimatic Evolution of Northern and Central Chile
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Nicholas Pinter, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2006
* USD 49,967.00

0203555&lt;br/&gt;Ishman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas award will support
collaborative research between Drs. Scott E. Ishman and Nicholas Pinter of
Southern Illinois University-Carbondale and Dr. Jacobus Le Roux, University of
Chile, Dr. Guillermo Chong, Catholic University of Antofagasta, and Dr. Ruben
Martinez-Pardo, National Museum of Natural History for their work on the
Cenozoic Paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic evolution of Northern and Central
Chile. The project will be done in the Mejillones Peninsula (MP) region in the
north near Antofagasta and the Navidad region in central Chile to the southwest
of Santiago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The northern region of Chile provides a unique
geographic setting to investigate the oceanographic and climatic sensitivity of
the eastern South Pacific to significant changes in Antarctic ice volume change
as interpreted from sea-level records. The Mejillones Basin is ideal for this
research. It represents a shallow marine setting developed on an active margin
with nearby volcanism and other significant tectonic features. Results from this
proposed project will provide a better understanding of the interconnection
between Antarctic ice volume change, oceanographic and atmospheric circulation,
and the impacts these have on recurring oceanographic and meteorological events
such as El Nino, which have global and economic significance.&lt;br/&gt;