* 0203488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Natural Regeneration and Management of Trees in Agroecosystems in a Seasonally Flooded Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Miguel Pinedo-Vasquez, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2005
* USD 7,645.00

The conceptual interpretation of forest community establishment and maintenance
in tropical forests is heavily influenced by the theoretical concepts of
succession and gap dynamics. While these concepts are appropriate to upland
forests we suggest that they are inappropriate to describe plant community
dynamics for Amazon floodplain forests. On the floodplain seasonal inundation is
the strongest mechanism influencing the ecological processes that maintain the
landscape heterogeneity and complexity so characteristic of this environment.
Floodwaters act most strongly on the edges of landscape elements-rivers, lakes,
levees-where transitions in vegetation occur. This doctoral dissertation
research project will provide an alternative conceptual interpretation of forest
community dynamics on the Amazon floodplain which is based on the ecological
functions of edges. Riverine farmers who take advantage of the rich alluvial
floodplain soils also create edges in their small-scale agriculture production
systems. Their production and resource management technologies also influence
the development of forest communities. The focus of this research is on a single
tree species native to varzea forests--Calycophyllum spruceanum, a tremendous
tree in the coffee family--but broadly treats the composition and dynamics of
floodplain forest environments. Research conducted at the landscape level
combined with studies on the autecology of C. spruceanum will show how the
distribution and population dynamics of this tree species are influenced by the
fluvial dynamics acting on edges and by land use practices of varzea residents.
Research will be conducted in several Peruvian and Brazilian Amazon floodplain
forests and riverine villages. The project employs methodologies at both the
landscape and field scales including participant-observation techniques,
interviews with local farmers, land use surveys, vegetation inventories of
agricultural fields and forests, and experimentation. The stand inventory data
will be analyzed using Principal Components Analysis (PCA). A multivariable
analysis will be employed to test the relationship of flood duration, light
levels, and edge type to the establishment and growth of seedlings in fields,
fallows, and forests. The outcome of this study will include an ecological and
management analysis of the woody component of production systems developed by
varzea residents and a monograph on the ecology of an important tree species
native to the varzea.

Amazon flooded forests provide critical habitat for fish and other animals and
plants specially adapted to long periods of seasonally flooding. The maintenance
of tree cover is critical for the conservation in this fragile environment which
absorbs the floodwaters of the mighty Amazon River and its major tributaries
over a period of four to six months annually. Despite its ecological and
conservation importance, the Amazon flooded forest environment and the
production systems of its inhabitants are not fully understood. To address the
information gap this doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the
natural and social processes that control the regeneration, establishment, and
growth of tree species in the natural forests and landholdings of farmers. Non-
indigenous riverine farmers, who occupy and steward these forests, are also
often overlooked in development and conservation agendas. A second goal of this
research project is to identify and promote their traditional knowledge and
local technologies that maintain tree cover in this critical environment. The
results of this project will be applicable to development and conservation
programs specific to floodplain environments throughout Amazonia. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.