* 0203323
* CRCD: An Human-Computer Interfaces (HCI) Partnership Serving Underrepresented Groups
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Benjamin Bederson, University of Baltimore
* Continuing grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2006
* USD 419,985.00

0203323 Nancy Kaplan University of Baltimore Baltimore, MD "An HCI Partnership
Serving Underrepresented Groups"

This is a multinstitutional project that leverages prior and ongoing research in
the area of Human Computer Interfaces (HCI) into new curricula. In particular,
the project's focus is: (a) to create a Human-Computer Interaction curriculum at
the University of Baltimore's School of Information Arts and Technologies (SIAT)
that will actively involve early-stage graduate students in ongoing research;
(b) to construct and deliver this curriculum so that it is maximally effective
in attracting and graduating students from groups underrepresented in the
sciences, especially women, African-Americans, and students from non-traditional
age groups; (c) to structure this curriculum around the results, and ongoing
inquiry, of research at the University of Maryland's Human-Computer Interaction
Lab (HCIL) in the design of children's technologies; (d) to embed this
curriculum and research in a partnership spanning SIAT, HCIL, and local private
and public sector institutions, and (e) widely disseminate this partnership
model, and the results of its evaluation, with the goal of creating further
partnerships between research and comprehensive institutions that will result in
the involvement of students from underrepresented groups in ongoing research.
Students who participate in this project's curriculum will also engage in field
research that prepare them to join the workforce as professionals who have
experience with research-grounded methods of developing HCI technologies,
particularly those that are components of the HCIL's work on children's
educational information technologies (including contextual inquiry, task
analysis, participatory design, low-fidelity prototyping, querying interfaces,
and spatial interfaces).

