* 0203976
* Geometry and Combinatorics of Hyperbolic 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Yair Minsky, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 09/30/2004
* USD 273,213.00

DMS-0203976&lt;br/&gt;Yair Minsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Minsky
will study connections between the geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure of hyperbolic
3-manifolds, and the combinatorial structure&lt;br/&gt;of surfaces. The main
focus of the project is a program to solve&lt;br/&gt;Thurston's Ending
Lamination Conjecture, which states that a&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifold is
uniquely determined by its topological type&lt;br/&gt;and a list of invariants
describing the asymptotic geometry of its&lt;br/&gt;ends. This conjecture is
central in the field and would settle a&lt;br/&gt;number of outstanding
questions about the structure of the deformation&lt;br/&gt;space of all
hyperbolic structures on a given manifold. The principal&lt;br/&gt;tool in this
approach is the Complex of Curves, a combinatorial object&lt;br/&gt;which
describes the set of all essential homotopy classes of simple&lt;br/&gt;loops on
a given surface. Such a complex, viewed as a metric space,&lt;br/&gt;is
hyperbolic in the sense of Cannon and Gromov, and the invariants&lt;br/&gt;which
describe the geometry of a 3-manifold turn out to be "points
at&lt;br/&gt;infinity" for the complex. A study of geodesics within the complex
of&lt;br/&gt;curves then allows us to construct a model for the geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold which depends only on its end invariants. Part of
the&lt;br/&gt;program is joint work with Brock and Canary. The complex of curves
is&lt;br/&gt;also instrumental in studying the Teichmuller space of
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;structures on a surface, and its symmetry group, known as
the Mapping&lt;br/&gt;Class Group. Hyperbolicity of the complex implies a type
of relative&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolicity property for the Teichmuller space and the
Mapping Class&lt;br/&gt;Group, and in collaboration with Brock and Masur, Minsky
hopes to&lt;br/&gt;apply this to study the geometric properties of Teichmuller
space, and&lt;br/&gt;to answer a number of group-theoretic and algorithmic
questions about&lt;br/&gt;the mapping class
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological spaces appear in
mathematics at varying levels of&lt;br/&gt;abstraction. The earth, for example,
can be thought of as a sphere,&lt;br/&gt;spinning around its axis. The set of
all positions of this sphere,&lt;br/&gt;perhaps as parameterized by the time of
day in New York, can itself be&lt;br/&gt;visualized as a circle. The positions
of the earth in its orbit&lt;br/&gt;around the sun also make up a circle, and
all this information&lt;br/&gt;together can be described by a 2-dimensional
surface, called a torus,&lt;br/&gt;so that each point in the torus corresponds
to exactly one position of&lt;br/&gt;the earth-sun system, and our motion in
space gives rise to a&lt;br/&gt;trajectory winding around the torus. Once a
surface is being studied,&lt;br/&gt;we often give it various structures: it can
have a metric, which is a&lt;br/&gt;way of measuring distance in it; it can also
be filled up in different&lt;br/&gt;ways by loops. The set of all possible
metrics can itself be studied&lt;br/&gt;as a "space", where motion in this space
corresponds to changing&lt;br/&gt;shapes of the surface. The set of all loops in
the surface gives&lt;br/&gt;rise to another space, of a more combinatorial
character. A&lt;br/&gt;fascinating phenomenon, not uncommon in mathematics, is
the appearance&lt;br/&gt;of analogies between these different levels of
abstraction. For&lt;br/&gt;example, a property of a single metric on a surface
called "hyperbolicity"&lt;br/&gt;appears again, in another guise, as a property
of the space of all&lt;br/&gt;metrics on the surface and the space of all loops.
The interaction&lt;br/&gt;between these different levels yields interesting
phenomena and tools&lt;br/&gt;which can be applied to solve a number of problems
in&lt;br/&gt;