* 0203994
* Molecular Manipulation on Crystal Orientation, Phase Transformation and Stability in Nano-Confined Environments using Block Co-polymers and Blends as Templates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Stephen Z. Cheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2005
* USD 335,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to obtain polymers confined in nano-environments
with different geometric shapes and sizes using block copolymers and blends as
templates to achieve a fundamental understanding of how polymers behave during
phase transformations in these nano-confined spaces. The main research includes
several important objectives. First, a series of new amorphous-crystalline block
copolymers and blends will be designed and synthesized (by collaborating with
the synthetic professors at Univ. of Akron). The basic idea in constructing
these nano-confined environments involves manipulating the relationships among
the order-disorder transition temperature of the phase morphology, the glass
transition temperature of the amorphous blocks, and the crystallization
temperatures of the crystallizable blocks using different chemical structures,
molecular weights, and shapes. These confined geometric shapes may range from
relatively simple lamellar, cylindrical, and spherical geometries to complex
hexagonal perforated layers, double gyroids, and inverse phases. Second,
systematic studies of the phase orientation and structural changes of the
crystallizable blocks in thin film and bulk samples will be carried out at
different crystallization temperatures within various confined geometric shapes
and sizes. By comparing the results from these confined samples with those of
their corresponding unconfined polymers, the size and geometry effects on the
phase orientations and structures can be elucidated. The third objective of this
research will concentrate on the concept of phase stability inversion based on
the phase size. For this purpose, the designed amorphous-crystalline block
copolymers will need to have crystallizable blocks which exhibit polymorphism.
With this approach, a quantitative understanding of the relationship between the
size of the phase and the phase stability will be
attained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach presented in this proposal will not
only be valuable by enhancing the scientific understanding of the size effect on
polymer phase structures and transformations, it will also provide a gateway in
designing novel nano-materials that possess desired mechanical, electrical, and
optical properties in different nano-technologies.&lt;br/&gt;