* 0203532
* Electronic, Magnetic, and Thermodynamic Properties of Molecular Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,06/30/2006
* James Brooks, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 365,000.00

This individual investigator award provides support for an investigation of the
electronic and magnetic ground states of molecular solids. These are a unique
class of materials, where organic molecules are stacked in chain or plane-like
structures. The research is motivated by recent developments involving molecular
solids where superconducting and/or magnetic properties appear under special
conditions of composition, temperature, magnetic fields, and electric fields.
The project involves investigations of three sequential hierarchies of molecular
solids where electrical charge is introduced in different ways: 1) an unusual
organic material where charge is introduced by a magnetic ion; 2) a single
component molecular solid, engineered to produce a metallic state solely by the
molecular arrangement (without need for a counter ion); and 3) chemically
engineered, or "functionalized" forms of the acenes (i.e. tetracene and
pentacene). In the latter, electrical charge will be introduced at the surface
of thin films or crystals optically and/or with an electric field. Both the
fundamental physics, and potential new device applications for these molecular
systems, will be pursued. The graduate students involved in this research will
obtain training that will provide them with the skills needed for a future
career in academia or in industrial or government laboratories. In addition, a
strong commitment to educational outreach K-16 and teacher programs is
integrated into the research agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments
indicate that molecular solids are likely to form the basis for future
technologies utilizing bio-molecular materials. Molecular solids are a unique
class of materials where organic molecules are stacked in chain or plane-like
structures. Here superconducting, and/or magnetic properties appear under
special conditions of composition, temperature, magnetic fields, and electric
fields. This individual investigator project will probe the electronic and
magnetic properties of molecular solids. The project will study three kinds of
molecular structures: first, where both electrical charge and magnetism is
introduced into the molecular layers; second, where a molecular solid is
engineered to conduct electrically, solely by the molecular arrangement; and
third, where "functionalized" forms of molecular building blocks are chemically
engineered. Here optical and electric field methods will be employed to switch
the conducting and magnetic properties on and off. New device applications, and
fundamental science, will be pursued in these molecular systems. The graduate
students involved in this research will obtain training that will provide them
with the skills needed for a future career in academia or in industrial or
government laboratories. In addition, a strong commitment to educational
outreach K-16 and teacher programs is integrated into the research agenda.
&lt;br/&gt;