* 0203943
* RUI:  First-passage Percolation and Other Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,09/30/2005
* C. Douglas Howard, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 09/30/2005
* USD 82,269.00

Two models of disordered systems, first-passage percolation (FPP) and stochastic
Ising dynamics with random initial state, are the main focus of this proposal.
Rigorous unconditional results about the geometric features of lattice-based FPP
models are hard to come by, largely due to technical difficulties associated
with the anisotropy of the underlying lattice. Models of Euclidean FPP take
place on graphs constructed from a homogeneous Poisson process and enjoy
complete statistical invariance under all rigid motions. In this sense,
Euclidean FPP is a natural setting in which to study geometric properties of
FPP. One objective of this proposal is to refine, for Euclidean FPP, existing
estimates of key fluctuation exponents associated with these models with the
ultimate goal of proving interesting qualitative results. Another goal is to
exploit a certain re-scaling relation that holds for Euclidean FPP to obtain
results about the stochastic monotonicity of passage time viewed as a function
of distance. Other closely related open questions under investigation concern
issues such as how massively a local perturbation of the Poisson particle
configuration affects minimizing paths and how far "parallel" geodesics
typically travel before coalescence. In Stochastic Ising models, rules of
dynamics interact with a random initial state to produce a system that evolves
with time. The state at any particular time is a configuration of +/-1 spins
associated with the sites of some regular lattice; the configuration at time 0
makes the spins i.i.d. random variables. For the homogeneous ferromagnetic
models of this proposal, the dynamics tend to produce increasing agreement of
spins for neighboring sites as time elapses. Key matters of investigation
concern how quickly and in what sense the system evolves to a limiting state as
well as various percolation properties of the configuration as a function of
time. &lt;br/&gt; Disordered systems are a large class of probabilistic models
generally motivated by problems arising in condensed matter physics and
materials science. First-passage percolation and other closely related models
have served as a mathematical model for phenomena as seemingly diverse as
properties of randomly porous media (such as aquifers), the growth of cancerous
tumors, and the propagation of cracks through brittle material. Ising models
capture the basic features of magnetized materials. The proposed work aims at a
rigorous understanding of some of the many fundamental mathematical properties
of these models.&lt;br/&gt;