* 0203092
* Algebraic Geometry, Commutative Algebra, and Algorithmic Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2009
* David Eisenbud, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2009
* USD 437,233.00

David Eisenbud will work on three groups of problems from
commutative&lt;br/&gt;algebra and algebraic geometry: The use of exterior
algebra methods&lt;br/&gt;in projective geometry and their extension to toric
geometry; the study&lt;br/&gt;of infinite free resolutions; and the study of
codimensions of determinantal&lt;br/&gt;(and related) ideals. This last includes
the circle of problems around the &lt;br/&gt;existence of vector bundles of low
rank on projective spaces. His activity&lt;br/&gt;will also include the
development of fundamental algorithms in computational&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
geometry and their implementation in the Macaulay2 package &lt;br/&gt;written by
Grayson and Stilllman. By far the largest portion of the
project&lt;br/&gt;budget is devoted to the support of graduate students. This
and the computational&lt;br/&gt;tools produced by the project will broaden its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry deals with geometric forms
defined by&lt;br/&gt;simple equations (polynomials). The subject is central in
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;because these forms include the fundamental examples in
most disciplines&lt;br/&gt;of mathhematics; and it is important in the
applications of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;because these forms provide the models
most often used in representing&lt;br/&gt;nature in equations or in the
computer. Over the last 150 years the group of&lt;br/&gt;techniques called
commutative algebra has been developed to study and unify this&lt;br/&gt;and
problems arising in number theory. Much more recently it was realized
that&lt;br/&gt;an extension of commutative algebra into the noncommutative
domain of&lt;br/&gt;exterior algebras gives a fruitful new approach to some old
problems in this&lt;br/&gt;field. Independently, computers and algorithms became
powerful enough to &lt;br/&gt;help research in algebraic geometry. Eisenbud's
proposed work has to do&lt;br/&gt;with some of the most classical problems in
algebraic geometry as well&lt;br/&gt;as with new uses of exterior algebra and
computation in this domain, and&lt;br/&gt;he will also continue his work
developing computational tools for others&lt;br/&gt;to use. The largest part of
his grant will be devoted to the support&lt;br/&gt;of graduate students, whom he
will train in these techniques and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;