* 0203716
* Approximate Reasoning in Stochastic Concurrency:  Applications to Secure Substitution and Stochastic Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Radhakrishnan Jagadeesan, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2003
* USD 75,000.00

Stochastic programs involve time, probability and concurrency. The classical
research into reasoning about probabilistic models of concurrency provides
methods to establish when two processes can be considered the same and be inter-
substituted for each other. Such equivalences are too exact since they are
usually not robust under even slight perturbation of probabilities. This is
particularly unfortunate since practice dictates that probability numbers are to
be viewed as numbers with some error estimate. The focus of this proposal is
approximations and approximate reasoning for stochastic concurrent systems. The
PI proposes to use metric based frameworks to formalize approximation schemes
and develop compositional reasoning methods to study robust notions of
''approximately inter-substitutable'' programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
intended application is the exploration of ''secure substitution'' in mobile
code applications, where programs (such as tax software) are downloaded as
needed, executed on a trusted host (the home computer), require access to
sensitive local data (such as financial information) and yet should not be
permitted to leak information. Probabilistic modeling is used in such
applications to quantify the amount of information flow between systems. A
permissible secure substitution of one component for another in a program
context has to preserve such information flow properties in addition to the
usual observations. The goal of this project is to define a robust notion of
secure substitution, and develop compositional proof rules and algorithms to
determine if a component can be securely substituted for
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second intended application is the design and
implementation of StochCC, an executable specification language for stochastic
hybrid systems. This research will build on the PI's prior work into HybridCC, a
declarative language for specifying and simulating hybrid systems. Users of
HybridCC(in biological systems modeling) have already found it useful to add
limited forms of discrete probabilistic specification to HybridCC. StochCC will
perform a full and general integration of probabilities into HybridCC. In order
to come to computational grips with such systems, one needs a notion of discrete
approximation. Such discrete approximants play a role in both simulation
(executing the system within some error bound) and approximate reasoning
(calculating the observations of the system within some error bound).