* 0204330
* Pottery Production and Ballcourt Ceremonialism: Remarkably Sophisticated Economics Among the Hohokam
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* David Abbott, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 149,895.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David R. Abbott and his colleagues
will conduct 21 months of archaeological research focused on the unusually
complex economy and the regional ceremonial network of the ancient Hohokam
people. The Hohokam were desert farmers and craftsmen who inhabited hundreds of
villages with populations of 200 residents or more through out southern and
central Arizona from ca. A.D. 300 until A.D. 1450. During previous NSF-funded
research, it was shown that nearly all ceramic containers used during the
Sedentary period (ca. A.D. 900-1100) were made by few hands and were widely
distributed to households across a large territory. An efficient and dependable
mechanism for supply was clearly extant at that time, but by the succeeding
Classic period (ca. A.D. 1100-1375) ceramic production had reverted to local
manufacturing for local consumption. Those results evoke questions about how far
back into Hohokam prehistory large-scale pottery production was practiced and
how so many pots were so widely distributed. One hypothesis explains the
Sedentary period ceramic distributions with possible periodic marketplaces
associated ritual ball games played in more than 225 ballcourts spread
throughout the region. These ball games drew crowds from surrounding and
probably distant villages and may have served as venues where specialist-made
pots and other domestic necessities were regularly bartered beyond the limits of
kinship networks. This idea implies far more sophisticated economic arrangements
than any previously supposed for the Hohokam. To further investigate this idea,
the vessel forms and production sources of ceramic assemblages from the Colonial
(ca. A.D. 775-900), late Pioneer (ca. A.D. 700-775), and early Pioneer (pre-A.D.
700) periods will be analyzed to determine how ceramic production and
distribution were organized during each time period and determine for how long
the sophisticated division of labor for ceramic production was extant among the
Hohokam. Did it precede, parallel, or succeed the development of the ballcourt
network, which began during the late Pioneer period and greatly expanded during
the Colonial and Sedentary periods? The new research will also use recent
chronological refinements to determine if the shift to localized ceramic
production was coeval with the collapse of the ballcourt ceremonialism near the
end of the Sedentary period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important
because it contributes to building cultural evolutionary theory and highlights
the remarkable accomplishments of ancient Native American peoples in the
Southwest. Sophisticated economics without centrally controlled and hierarchical
political institutions make the Hohokam a fascinating exception to evolutionary
suppositions that link organizational complexity with hierarchical structures.
As such, reconstructing how their large and intricate networks developed and
worked may be pivotal for improving synthetic theories of culture
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;