* 0204430
* ITWF: Climate for Opportunity and Inclusion: Improving the Recruitment, Retention and Advancement of Women and Minorities in Information Technology (IT)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Donald Davis, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2006
* USD 497,257.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0204430&lt;br/&gt;Major, Debra A., Davis, Donald D.,
Mann, Joan, Sanchez-Hucles, Janis V.&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Climate for Opportunity and Inclusion:
Improving the Recruitment, Retention and Advancement of Women and Minorities in
IT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF award provides support to investigate how
characteristics of the information technology (IT) workplace can foster
increased retention and advancement of women and minorities. In the first year,
several work organizations with IT departments of varying sizes and demographic
compositions will be recruited to participate in the study. Survey and interview
data will be collected from human resource directors, IT supervisors and IT
employees in order to assess the climate for opportunity and inclusion of each
department. The goal is to identify barriers and enablers to the career success
of women and minorities in IT departments. In the second year, a survey feedback
intervention will be conducted in each participating organization to encourage
IT departments to capitalize on their strengths and improve their weaknesses
with regard to opportunity and inclusion for all employees. In the third year,
survey and interview data will again be collected to assess the effectiveness of
the interventions implemented during the second year. The objective is not only
to assist the participating organizations in establishing an inclusive workplace
environment, but also to develop "best practices" that can be shared, through
publications and presentations, with others in the IT field and researchers
interested in workplace diversity issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;