* 0204826
* The Study of Ropelength and Knot Energies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Joseph H. Fu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 203,992.00

DMS-0204826&lt;br/&gt;Jason Cantarella and Joseph Fu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will study the geometry of knots which are
critical&lt;br/&gt;configurations for "ropelength", which is defined to be the
quotient&lt;br/&gt;of their length over the radius of their largest embedded
tubular&lt;br/&gt;neighborhood. Since the ropelength functional is not smooth,
there is&lt;br/&gt;no classical Euler-Lagrange equation describing the
minimizers. The&lt;br/&gt;primary aim of the projec666t is to provide an analogy
to the&lt;br/&gt;Euler-Lagrange equation: a "balance criterion", which shows
that a&lt;br/&gt;curve is ropelength critical if and only if the first variation
of the&lt;br/&gt;length of the core curve can be balanced by a system of self-
contact&lt;br/&gt;forces acting on the surrounding tube. The methods used to
prove the&lt;br/&gt;balance criterion (a generalization of certain aspects of
tensegrity&lt;br/&gt;theory to a class of "continuous tensegrities", using a
version of the&lt;br/&gt;Farkas alternative theorem for linear operators on
Banach spaces)&lt;br/&gt;promise rich applications in other areas of
mathematics, such as the&lt;br/&gt;study of convex curves, and of "knot
energies".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A natural model for a rope with a circular
cross-section is a space&lt;br/&gt;curve surrounded by a non-self-intersecting
tube of fixed radius. If&lt;br/&gt;such a rope is tied in a knot, and the knot
is pulled tight, the&lt;br/&gt;resulting curve is a critical configuration for
the "ropelength" of&lt;br/&gt;the curve, which is defined to be the quotient of
the length of the&lt;br/&gt;curve over the radius of the tube. The project
studies the geometry of&lt;br/&gt;ropelength-critical curves using ideas from
the theory of frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;This theory studies simple engineering
models of structures, and gives&lt;br/&gt;a precise description of how external
loads on a structure are&lt;br/&gt;resolved into tensions and compressions of
different structural&lt;br/&gt;elements. The project views the tension in a
tight knot as exerting a&lt;br/&gt;force directed towards the inside of each
curve of the rope, and aims&lt;br/&gt;to show that such a curve is tight if this
force can be resolved into&lt;br/&gt;a system of self-contact forces acting on
the surface of the tube.&lt;br/&gt;This "balance criterion" has surprising
consequences. Imagine a rope&lt;br/&gt;stretched horizontally, like a
clothesline. If another rope is passed&lt;br/&gt;over the line, and pulled down
until the pair is tight, the ropes form&lt;br/&gt;four straight segments joined
to a central region where the strands&lt;br/&gt;curve around one another. One
would expect the ropes to maintain&lt;br/&gt;contact throughout this curved
clasp, with the two points on the&lt;br/&gt;inside of each bend touching one
another. However, according to the&lt;br/&gt;balance criterion, this cannot
happen: there is always a small gap&lt;br/&gt;between the two strands at the
center of the turn. This model has&lt;br/&gt;already been used in molecular
biology to describe the behavior of DNA&lt;br/&gt;strands; the new geometric
information provided by the project will&lt;br/&gt;help to refine and extend
many other appications of this model in&lt;br/&gt;physics, biology, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;