* 0204002
* Topics in Differential Geometry and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Yat Sun Poon, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's first program in this
proposal is concerned with the &lt;br/&gt;geometry of Hermitian or hyper-
Hermitian connections with totally &lt;br/&gt;skew torsions. The results will be
applicable to an investigation &lt;br/&gt;in quantum mechanical black holes. The
PI's second program is to &lt;br/&gt;study the complex deformation theory and
Hermitian geometry of &lt;br/&gt;nilmanifolds. Parallel to the algebraic
analysis on the classical &lt;br/&gt;and extended moduli, he and his
collaborators investigatge the &lt;br/&gt;geometry on these spaces from the
viewpoint of special holonomy &lt;br/&gt;and symplectic structures. A senior
participant proposes to &lt;br/&gt;analyse the structures of compact
quaternionic Kaehler manifolds &lt;br/&gt;and the A-hat genus of non-spin
manifolds with finite second &lt;br/&gt;homotopy. Both issues are tackled
through an analysis of the &lt;br/&gt;rigidity of elliptic genus. Through the
theory of elliptic genus, &lt;br/&gt;the two proposers will jointly calculate a
Hilbert polynomial &lt;br/&gt;relevant to holomorphic contact structures or
rational curves &lt;br/&gt;invariant with respect to a holomorphic
automorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed projects here are enabled by
theoretical physicists' &lt;br/&gt;and mathematicians' knowledge on field
theory, complex deformation &lt;br/&gt;theory and differential topology of fixed
point sets. All proposed &lt;br/&gt;projects are intended to address issues
relevant to current &lt;br/&gt;physcial or mathematical issues. The PI's
projects will address a &lt;br/&gt;type of geometry less known to mathematicians
than to physicists. &lt;br/&gt;The results will increase mathematicians'
knowledge on Hermitian &lt;br/&gt;geometry and directly addresses issues to
theoretical physcists' &lt;br/&gt;concerns. The senior participant's project
addresses a long-&lt;br/&gt;standing conjecture in the field of holonomy. The
central tool in &lt;br/&gt;this project is a novel differntial topological
mechinary for &lt;br/&gt;studying fixed point sets with respect to group
actions. The &lt;br/&gt;investigators joint project will combine their expertise
to &lt;br/&gt;extract topological information on a class ofspace central in
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;