* 0204429
* Network Interface Support for High-Performance and Scalable Communication Services in Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 06/30/2005
* USD 260,601.00

Cluster computing systems are becoming increasingly popular for providing cost-
effective and affordable computing environments for a range of applications
(such as databases, data mining, visualization, collaborative computing, and
high performance computing). These applications require four fundamental
communication services from the underlying communication subsystem: point-to-
point communication, collective communication, synchronization, and Quality of
Service (QoS). Modern Network Interface Cards (NICs) for clusters incorporate
one or more programmable processors, DMA channels, and large amount of memory.
The NICs are becoming faster, smarter, and intelligent and are being designated
as Active Network Interfaces. Research is proposed along the following
directions to take advantage of such active network interfaces for implementing
and delivering scalable communication services for next generation clusters: 1)
Using multi-CPU NICs and their architectural features to provide fast point-to-
point communication, 2) Designing NIC-level support for high-performance and
scalable collective communication and synchronization, 3) Taking advantage of
programmable NIC-level features to provide QoS support, and 4) Experimentally
evaluating the benefits of the new/enhanced communication services for a wide
range of applications using message passing programming model. Through extensive
theoretical, experimental, and simulation studies, NIC-based solutions are
planned to be designed, developed, implemented, and evaluated for clusters with
Myrinet and Gigabit Ethernet interconnects.

