* 0204669
* Stochastic Systems and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Tyrone Duncan, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 430,600.00

0204669&lt;br/&gt;Duncan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major focus of this research
is the application of a stochastic &lt;br/&gt;calculus for a fractional Brownian
motion to stochastic systems, &lt;br/&gt;especially for the problems of
identification and control. The &lt;br/&gt;importance of a fractional Brownian
motion in stochastic models &lt;br/&gt;has been exhibited in a wide variety of
applications, such as, &lt;br/&gt;hydrology, economics and telecommunications.
One goal of the &lt;br/&gt;research is to develop further a stochastic calculus
for a fractional &lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion similar to the way that the
stochastic calculus for &lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion was developed to provide the
tools for solving &lt;br/&gt;problems of stochastic systems with a fractional
Brownian motion. &lt;br/&gt;Some tools of stochastic calculus that are planned
for development &lt;br/&gt;are necessary for solving the problems of
identification, filtering &lt;br/&gt;and control of a stochastic system with a
fractional Brownian &lt;br/&gt;motion. The fractional Brownian motions for study
include &lt;br/&gt;processes with values in both finite and infinite dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;spaces. The study includes the existence and the uniqueness of
&lt;br/&gt;solutions of stochastic differential equations and stochastic partial
&lt;br/&gt;differential equations with a fractional Brownian motion and
&lt;br/&gt;martingales that are formed from a fractional Brownian motion.
&lt;br/&gt;Another family of stochastic models that are planned for study is
&lt;br/&gt;hidden Markov models. An investigation of adaptive control for
&lt;br/&gt;systems described by both fractional Brownian motions and hidden
&lt;br/&gt;Markov models is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses
on a stochastic calculus for a fractional &lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion. A
fractional Brownian motion is a stochastic &lt;br/&gt;process that has been
important in modeling physical systems such &lt;br/&gt;as those arising in
hydrology, economics and telecommunications. &lt;br/&gt;Stochastic calculus
provides the basic tool for solving problems of &lt;br/&gt;stochastic models
that contain a fractional Brownian motion. &lt;br/&gt;Fractional Brownian
motions have a self similarity property and &lt;br/&gt;many have a long range
dependence property that often occur in &lt;br/&gt;physical phenomena. It is
planned to study the control of partially &lt;br/&gt;known systems that contain
fractional Brownian motion and &lt;br/&gt;hidden Markov models. Such control
problems naturally arise in &lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;