* 0204724
* Geometry and Topology of Orbifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Alejandro Adem, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 82,045.00

DMS-4724 Ernesto Lupercio

This proposal consists of a number of research projects on the topic of
cohomology theories for orbifolds and related subjects. The suggested methods
combine algebraic topology with techniques coming from stack theory in algebraic
geometry and tools arising in symplectic geometry. It proposes the use of the
theory of groupoids as a unifying tool in the solution these questions; a
methodology that has proved successful before in our study of orbifolds. The
following is a brief summary of some aspects of the project. The first project
is program whose objective is the study of the cohomological invariants that can
be naturally obtained from several natural spaces associated to an orbifold. A
second project consist of a study the orbifold elliptic genus, its modularity
and rigidity properties from the homotopy theory point of view. The third
project describes a program to define and study Orbifold Deligne cohomologies
and their relation to gerbes defined over the orbifold. The fourth is a project
to study the relation between the Hodge-Deligne numbers of an orbifold
resolution of singularities of an orbifold and the original orbifold.

Orbifolds are geometric spaces in which it is very important to keep track of
the local symmetries of the particular situation. So in general the points of an
orbifold are classified by the amount of local symmetry. In ordinary spaces all
points are equal, while in an orbifold points carry different weights
corresponding to the amount of local symmetry. Orbifolds have been used in the
study of structural crystallography allowing for a convenient book-keeping
device by reducing the redundant information in the space group diagrams of the
crystallographic groups. Orbifolds have also become extremely important in the
field of theoretical physics referred to as Superstring theory. In String
Theory, the multitude of particle types of classical high energy physics is
replaced by a single fundamental building block, a `string'. As the string moves
through time it traces out a tube or a sheet, according to whether it is closed
or open. Moreover, the string can vibrate, and different vibrational modes of
the string represent the different particle types, since different modes are
seen as different masses or spins. In an attempt to make these theories describe
the physical universe, physicists have been motivated to let the string move on
an orbifold space. In these cases the theory acquires properties that are very
desirable for it to model reality. The work proposed in this project involves
the development of rigorous mathematical methods to study the geometry of these
spaces.

