* 0204199
* Interactions and Self-Assembly of Particles in Complex Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,01/31/2006
* Venkat Ganesan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research on complex fluids.
The PI aims to combine field-theoretic and particle-based approaches to develop
hybrid simulation tools that can be used to study the thermodynamics and self-
assembly of particles in complex fluids. These hybrid techniques can account for
the disparate length scales accompanying particle dispersions in complex fluid
media, while efficiently incorporating steric and short-range interactions. Two
classes of studies and tools are proposed: (1) Field-Theoretic Simulations
(FTS), an approach recently developed by the PI, will be used to systematically
evaluate the interactions between particles of arbitrary geometries in different
complex fluids. The results may yield fundamental insights into the different
factors that influence fluctuation-induced forces, in particular, their
nonpairwise additive nature, as well as the interplay between energetic (arising
from a physical interaction between the complex fluid and the surface of the
particle) and entropic interactions. The results from these studies will also be
used in effecting an in vacuo simulation of the particles, in order to glean
insights into the self-assembly features of the particles. (2) The PI will
develop a hybrid multibody simulation approach to the self-assembly of particles
in complex fluids. A combination of FTS and mean-field equations for the fields
at every step determines the effective interactions between the rigid units.
These effective interactions will be used to "evolve" the rigid units through a
particle-based simulation. The studies are aimed to clarify the role of
multibody interactions, nonpairwise additivity of forces and excluded volume
interactions in modulating the self-assembly of a variety of mixtures of complex
fluids and particles. The research will be effected in the context of studies of
the interactions and self-assembly in polymer-particle mixtures, charge
stabilized colloidal dispersions, and multiblock rod-coil copolymers. These are
ideal model systems in which to study effects pertaining to fluctuations, self-
assembly, and dynamics. Each of these can be tuned independently and in a
controlled way by tailoring the synthesis conditions. This capability allows for
a synergistic interaction with experimental studies to compare predictions and
experiments. In each of these model systems, the PI plans to carry out studies,
linked by a common objective, to discern the self-assembly arising from a
competition between steric and energetic interactions, as well as the interplay
between nematic/smectic ordering, crystallization and microphase
separation.&lt;br/&gt;The successful implementation of these hybrid simulation
approaches is expected to have significant impact on the development of
multiscale computational approaches to the design of advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on complex fluids. The PI aims to combine
distinct and powerful computational approaches to develop hybrid simulation
tools that can be used to study the thermodynamics and self-assembly of
particles in complex fluids. These tools will be used to study the interactions
and self-assembly in polymer-particle mixtures, charge stabilized colloidal
dispersions, and multiblock rod-coil polymers to elucidate important issues in
the physics of complex fluids. The simulation tools also contribute to efforts
to use theoretical methodology to predict the morphological characteristics and
properties of advanced materials that result from specific molecular parameters.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;