* 0204414
* Efficient Techniques for High Quality Delay Testing of High-Speed Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Sandeep Gupta, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 180,000.00

High-speed circuits are highly pipelined, use latches as opposed to flip-flops,
and practice extensive time borrowing to reduce overheads of pipelining. Since
speed is a critical objective, high quality delay testing, such as path delay
testing, is imperative for such circuits. Use of latches and extensive time
borrowing have two important consequences that give rise to new problems in
delay testing. First, since the paths in one block interact with the paths in
the blocks in its fan in and fan out, it becomes necessary to test for delay
faults multi-block paths, i.e., paths that traverse multiple blocks of a
circuit. The number of such paths is often astronomical. Second, due to time
borrowing, values at a latch output are not applied at any fixed time, but at
some time within a range. Since the exact time when values are applied at the
outputs of a latch vary from vector to vector and from one fabricated copy of a
chip to another, it is impossible to design design-for-testability (DFT)
circuitry that mimics the timing of events during the normal mode of operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types of test application schemes are proposed that
can be implemented using scan designs that do not try to mimic the timing of
events during the circuit's normal operation but apply values and capture
responses at specific clock edges. It is then proven that it is indeed possible
to use such scan to precisely test, for path delay faults, latch based circuits
that use time borrowing. Techniques to use above DFT technique to efficiently
test such high-speed circuits will be developed. This will include development
of a technique to generate optimal test plans as well as tools that can generate
the types of tests and perform detailed design of DFT circuitry required by the
proposed approach. The proposed research will provide the first systematic
approach for achieving, at reasonable costs, efficient testing for path delay
faults in high speed circuits while providing provably high test quality. The
tools developed will be leveraged and extended for instructional purposes.
&lt;br/&gt;