* 0204536
* Evaluating Collective Action Theory Through Cross-Cultural Analysis of Pre-Modern States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Richard Blanton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 92,043.00

This research by two anthropologists will make use of probability sampling and
comparative research methods to better understand how collective action can
develop in the governance of pre-modern states. This is an interesting problem,
because collectively-based organizations may be unstable due to behavioral
problems. Ideally, compliant taxpayers produce surpluses that go to a communal
fund controlled by rulers that benefits the collectivity (public goods), but
tensions may develop owing to the fact that rulers and subjects will expect each
other to behave appropriately with respect to the production and distribution of
public goods. Ruler agency (appropriation of public goods for personal benefit)
and subject free riding (benefiting from public goods but not contributing to
their production) may threaten organizational stability. To assure that
collective organizations can function, institutions must be developed to detect
and control both agency and free riding. To evaluate the theory, and to better
understand how such institutional features have been developed in complex
societies, the research will code data from the Human Relations Area Files and
other sources on 40 to 50 well-described cases from all world areas. Variables
to be coded include measures of public goods (such as roads, public water
systems, public safety, and redistributive economies), subject tax compliance,
"voice" (the ability of subjects to communicate opinions to rulers), and "exit"
(the opportunity for dissatisfied subjects to leave the polity), as well as
ruler behavior monitoring and controls, ruler morality, and measures of income
and expenditures which affect policy. This research will advance our
understanding of the nature and causes of variation in pre-modern states and
will evaluate the degree to which collective action theory can be applied in
diverse social and cultural settings. The research should be of interest to a
wide range of students in the biological and social sciences interested in the
evolution of cooperative social behavior, including the social and cultural
origins of democracy.