* 0204973
* Continued Exploration of the Warm Ionized Medium using the Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Lawrence Haffner, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,519,934.00

AST 0204973 Reynolds

An accurate knowledge of interstellar matter and processes is crucial to
understanding the cycle of stellar birth and death and the evolution of
galaxies. The Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM), a remotely controlled Fabry-Perot
facility dedicated to the detection and study of faint diffuse interstellar
emission lines, has opened a new window to the interstellar medium by making it
possible for the first time to explore the warm ionized phase of the gas with as
much or more accuracy and detail as the other principal phases of the medium
have been explored. These optical emission line studies provide unique new
information about the nature of the interstellar medium and the principal
sources of ionization and heating within the disk and halo of the Galaxy,
information that cannot be obtained through other techniques at other
wavelengths.

Using the WHAM facility, Dr. Ronald Reynolds and his colleagues, at the
University of Wisconsin, will carry out a comprehensive study of the variations
in ionization and excitation conditions within the ionized gas and explore the
strength and spectrum of the radiation field. Their recently completed WHAM
Northern Sky Survey has given the first comprehensive picture of the
distribution and kinematics of this gas over the sky and thus provides the basic
foundation for this investigation. The complete set of survey data has been
released to the community and is available through the website:
http://www.astro.wisc.edu/wham/. In this second phase of the program the
investigators will observe fainter diagnostic emission lines to explore the
nature of the new emission features discovered by the survey and to study the
surprising differences in temperature and ionization state between this
widespread, low-density phase of the interstellar medium and the bright,
classical H II regions near hot stars. From observations of faint emission lines
of oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and helium, they will investigate the physical
conditions of the diffusely emitting gas, the faint WHAM "point sources", the
enormous filaments and loops of ionized gas that reach 1000 pc or more from the
Galactic midplane, and the relationship of the ionized gas to the warm neutral
hydrogen phase of the medium. By comparing these observations with those toward
classical O star H II regions and extended regions of ionized gas associated
with high latitude hot white dwarf stars, B stars, and supernova remnants, they
will study the relationship between these known sources of ionization within the
Galaxy and the warm ionized phase of the medium. Observations of the
intermediate and high velocity clouds will be used to trace the changing
conditions in the ionized gas and radiation field from the Galactic midplane to
the Galactic halo, while observations of H Beta/H Alpha will provide information
about the influence of interstellar dust along the lines of sight of these
optical line studies. The ability of WHAM to carry out the observations of these
and other faint emission lines was verified during the first phase of this
program. The diverse observational program in this second phase takes full
advantage of this powerful, unique facility and will produce a substantial
advancement in our understanding of interstellar matter and processes within the
disk and halo of the Milky Way. ***