* 0204078
* Applicability of Computational Language Technologies to Identify Independent Protein Folding Domains in Human Proteins
* CSE,EIA
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Judith Klein, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 11/30/2002
* USD 99,596.00

Several lines of evidence suggest that there exists a strong analogy between
natural languages and biological sequences, i.e. there appear to be organism-
specific words, phrases and paragraphs in the collective of proteins encoded by
the genomes of fully sequenced organisms. It is proposed that the biological
analogy of meaning in a natural text is the ability of a protein sequence to
fold into its functional three-dimensional fold. In natural languages, frequent
words carry little meaning, while rare words often allow identification of the
topic of a particular text. The hypothesis predicts, therefore, that rare
stretches of amino acids indicate the location of folding initiators. The
distribution of global properties along the sequence of lysozyme, a model
protein for protein folding studies, indicated that features in these properties
can be recognized when inverse frequencies of amino acid n-grams were plotted,
supporting the analogy to natural languages. In the next 12 months the focus
will be on studying the distribution of rare n-grams in the human genome. If a
correlation between folding domains and distribution of rare n-grams can be
established, this would (i) provide compelling support for the hypothesis and
(ii) shed light on one of the major unsolved questions in biology today, the
mechanism by which functional three-dimensional structures are formed from a
one-dimensional sequence of amino acids.