* 0204913
* Metal-Containing Molecules as Probes of Interstellar/Circumstellar Gas:  From Chemistry to Nucleosynthesis
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2005
* USD 262,519.00

AST-0204913&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Ziurys&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past
thirty years since the initial discovery of interstellar molecules at radio
wavelengths, much has been learned about the chemistry of such species, and
their subsequent use as tracers of the physical conditions in dense gas has
proved extremely valuable. Despite the obvious success of molecular
astrophysics, there are still many unanswered questions pertaining to
interstellar molecules, one of which concerns the chemistry and abundances of
species containing the metallic elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will continue the investigation of the chemistry of the metallic elements in the
interstellar medium through a joint laboratory/observational/chemical modeling
program. The observations will identify the major molecular carriers of the
metallic elements in&lt;br/&gt;circumstellar envelopes of evolved stars and in
dense clouds through measurements in the millimeter/sub-mm wavelength region.
This data will lead to the establishment of likely synthetic pathways, be it
gas-phase radiative association reactions, dust-grain processes or formation in
shock waves. The laboratory work will supply the necessary millimeter and sub-mm
rotational spectra from which rest frequencies for the astronomical searches are
obtained. Finally, chemical modeling of metal chemistry in circumstellar
envelopes will be performed in conjunction with new nucleosynthesis
calculations. A complete picture will thus be constructed of metal-containing
molecules, their abundances, formation mechanisms, and significance for
understanding mass loss of the heavier elements from circumstellar envelopes to
the interstellar medium.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;