* 0204243
* Macromolecular Fluids: Theory, Simulation and Experiment
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Qi Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 177,004.00

New classes of materials are processed as liquid mixtures of "designer"
macromolecules either in viscous solvents or in flexible polymer solutions.
These macromolecules range from small &lt;br/&gt; molecular weight, rod-like
liquid crystals to nano-clay platelets, targeting a diverse family of high-
performance materials and devices. The molecules are well approximated as
&lt;br/&gt; ellipsoids, precisely falling within the class of macromolecular
fluids accessible &lt;br/&gt; by emerging theory, computation, and experiment.
Furthermore, rigid-unit, &lt;br/&gt;monodisperse molecules suspended in viscous
solvent are fundamental model systems. &lt;br/&gt; Mathematically, they
represent the leading edge of theory; physically, they are the
&lt;br/&gt;foundation from which many micro-fluidic systems can now be ideally
modeled, and &lt;br/&gt;eventually understood. Conductivity or barrier
properties, while governing &lt;br/&gt;material end-use, are passive during
processing. Rather, the fundamental issue for&lt;br/&gt; design and control is
the emergence of structures during processing at length &lt;br/&gt;scales (up to
microns) far removed from individual molecules, called&lt;br/&gt;
mesostructures, which empirically dominate ultimate performance features.
&lt;br/&gt; Examples include sequestered island arrays of liquid crystals and
distinguished &lt;br/&gt; patterns that arise in rod-like and disc-like nano-
composites. The onset, &lt;br/&gt;development, and saturation of mesostructures
in prototypical flows of rigid-unit &lt;br/&gt;macromolecular fluids is the
primary focus of the workl. The work identifies &lt;br/&gt;open mathematical,
numerical, and experimental issues, and constructs collective
&lt;br/&gt;strategies toward their resolution, combining experimental,
theoretical and computational&lt;br/&gt; expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
class of materials are processed as liquid mixtures of "designer
macromolecules"&lt;br/&gt;either in viscous solvents or in polymer melts and
solutions, in which the designer&lt;br/&gt;macromolecules are of simple geometry
in a few to several hundred nanometers (1 nanometer is&lt;br/&gt;equal to 1
billionth of 1 meter). The material properties are dominated by the emergence of
the mesostructure at the micron level (1 micron is 1 millionth of 1 meter)
during the material processing. &lt;br/&gt;The PI, teamed up with a group of
leading experimentalists in the field of complex&lt;br/&gt;fluids, identifies
the open mathematical, numerical and experimental issues and
constructs&lt;br/&gt;collective strategies toward their resolution combining
experimental, theoretical and computational&lt;br/&gt;expertise.