* 0204871
* Superconductivity, Correlations, and Nonequilibrium Phenomena in Novel Low Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Philip Adams, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2006
* USD 315,057.00

This individual investigator award will provide support for a program that
focuses on the study of electron correlation effects in two-dimensional systems,
such as ultra-thin magnetic-impurity-doped Be films, and ultra-thin
superconducting Be and Al films. Some bulk materials with a strongly layered
structure such as superconducting LaSb2 and metamagnetic SmSb2 will also be
studied. One of the primary goals of the program is to investigate the transport
and tunneling characteristics of these systems in high magnetic fields and low
temperatures. Their behavior in such extreme environments gives insight into how
low dimensionality, disorder, and correlations can give rise to exotic effects
such state memory, reentrance, multifold magnetoresistance, non-equilibrium
fluctuations, and quantum transitions. Besides being at the forefront of
condensed matter research, the program will provide an important venue for the
training undergraduates, graduate students, and K-12 science teachers. The
latter will be made possible by sponsoring summer internships for "Teach For
America" corps members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award
provides support for a program that investigates how the repulsive interactions
between electrons affects their ability to conduct electricity and more
importantly how these interactions can orchestrate seemingly improbable behavior
such as memory effects and extremely large increases in resistance with the
application of magnetic field. Emphasis is placed on systems for which the
electron motion is confined to a plane such as is the case for metal films that
are only a few atoms thick. The behavior of these systems gives insight into how
low dimensionality, disorder, and electronic correlations can give rise to novel
and perhaps useful properties that may one day be of technological relevance.
This type of search and discovery research is important for maintaining the
health of the national research and development enterprise. The program also
provides an important venue for the training undergraduates, graduate students,
and K-12 science teachers. The latter is made possible by being a summer
internship sponsor for "Teach For America" corps members. &lt;br/&gt;