* 0204505
* Nonlinear Problems of Solid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Stuart Antman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2007
* USD 368,160.00

Proposal: DMS-0204505&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stuart S. Antman&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Maryland College Park&lt;br/&gt;Title: Nonlinear Problems of Solid
Mechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. S. Antman
proposes to treat a variety of dynamical and steady-state nonlinear problems for
rods, shells, and three-dimensional solid bodies. The bodies are composed of
nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic, plastic, viscoplastic, or magnetoelastic
materials. In each case, properly invariant, geometrically exact theories
encompassing general nonlinear constitutive equations are to be used. (Such
correctly formulated nonlinear problems of solid mechanics can seldom be
directly subsumed under available mathematical theories.) The goals of these
studies are to discover new nonlinear effects, determine thresholds in
constitutive equations separating qualitatively different responses, determine
general classes of constitutive equations that are both physically and
mathematically natural, examine important kinds of instabilities, determine how
existence, regularity, and well-posedness depend on material behavior,
contribute to the theory of shocks and dissipative mechanisms in solids, and
develop new methods of nonlinear analysis and of effective computation for
problems of solid mechanics. Among the specific areas to be studied are (i)
eversion of nonlinearly elastic shells, (ii) nonlinear stability of structures
subject to nonconservative loads, (iii) dynamic stability of inelastic bodies
subject to stick-slip friction, (iv) global multiparameter Hopf bifurcation, (v)
fluid-solid interactions, (vi) parametric resonance, (vi) attractors for
problems with forcing, (vii) dynamics of incompressible elastic and viscoelastic
rods,&lt;br/&gt;(viii) quasilinear hyperbolic problems from nonlinear
elasticity, (ix) asymptotics of small inertia, (x) dissipative mechanisms, (xi)
hysteresis, and (xii) control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. S. Antman proposes to
treat a variety of dynamical and steady-state nonlinear problems for a variety
of solid bodies composed of a variety of materials. The governing theories,
needed to describe accurately the behavior of bodies suffering large and rapid
deformations, possibly under&lt;br/&gt;extremes of temperature and loading,
present severe mathematical challenges and have seldom been analyzed. The
research is to encompass (a) the development of physical theory, (b) the
development of mathematical theory capable of handling the governing equations,
(c) contribution to the development of numerical methods, and (d) the treatment
of specific problems and classes of problems. Examples of the latter include:
(i) Large buckling (collapse) of shells under high&lt;br/&gt;pressure. (ii)
Dynamic instability of deformable structures under nonconservative loads. (Such
loads may be induced by rotations, by contact with moving fluids, or feedback.)
(iii) Stability of structures subject to periodic forcing. (iv) Fluid-structure
interactions, e.g., like that of a propeller or panel of a ship or a helicopter
in contact with a moving fluid and undergoing large and possibly destructive
oscillations. (v) Fluid-solid interactions in physiology, such as blood flowing
in an artery. (vi) Large motions of rigid bodies joined by deformable bodies
(like space vehicles joined by a tether). (vi) The analysis of problems of
electromagnetic solid mechanics with applications to the use of smart materials
to control the response of vibrating solids, e.g., to bring a vibrating part of
a submarine or space vehicle to rest in a short time.&lt;br/&gt;