* 0204432
* Constructing Large Complex Systems via Tractable Pairwise Composition of Software Components
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Paul Attie, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of the project is to produce useful and
practical&lt;br/&gt;methods for the development of large complex software
systems. The&lt;br/&gt;research will address the problem of composing software
components&lt;br/&gt;into large systems that have guaranteed correctness
properties.&lt;br/&gt;State-explosion (the exponential growth of the number of
possible&lt;br/&gt;system behaviors with the number of the system's components)
is&lt;br/&gt;avoided by analyzing interactions among every pair of
components&lt;br/&gt;separately, rather than inspecting the interaction of all
components&lt;br/&gt;at once. This local approach nevertheless enables us to
prove that&lt;br/&gt;the overall system behaves as desired. Since the number of
behaviors&lt;br/&gt;that have to be analyzed is much smaller, the amount of
effort needed&lt;br/&gt;to rigorously analyze and verify large systems is
greatly reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main activities
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop techniques for the precise description of
the&lt;br/&gt;required behavior of a software component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Develop practical methods for reasoning about the behavior
that&lt;br/&gt;results when a set of components are connected to form a
large&lt;br/&gt;system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefit of this research is to
reduce the cost of creating&lt;br/&gt;realistic size software systems that have
demonstrable correctness&lt;br/&gt;properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;