* 0204634
* Complex and Symplectic Geometry of Complexifications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Richard Hind, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 84,438.00

DMS-0204634 Richard Hind

One can associate to a smooth manifold a symplectic structure on its cotangent
bundle, and to a real-analytic Riemannian manifold a canonical complex structure
on a domain inside its cotangent bundle. This project will continue work of the
investigator studying these symplectic and complex structures. A broad aim is to
discover how closely the symplectic geometry relates to the smooth structure on
the original manifold, and how the complex geometry reflects the Riemannian
properties. Also, since much symplectic infomation is contained in properties of
compatible complex structures, it is also interesting to relate the symplectic
and complex geometry. Cotangent bundles are the simplest examples of symplectic
manifolds, yet many fundamental problems in symplectic geometry are still
elusive in these cases. The investigator will conduct research into the
uniqueness of symplectic structures and of isotopy classes of Lagrangian
submanifolds. The complex manifolds we study arise naturally in many branches of
mathematics, notably algebraic geometry and representation theory. Important
aspects of their geometry remain to be understood, together with analytical
problems which should have applications to number theory.

Symplectic geometry originated as the modern mathematical language of classical
and quantum mechanics. It is now an exciting area of pure mathematical research,
but continues to benefit from current physical ideas. Since the eighties it has
been clear that much insight into symplectic geometry can also be gained from
studying compatible complex structures. Fortunately the study of complex
geometry has long been a main focus of mathematics. This project will conduct
research into both symplectic and complex geometry, focussing on interactions
between the two. The specific objects of study arise as the first examples of
symplectic manifolds, and as examples of complex manifolds occuring frequently
in many branches of mathematics and theoretical physics.

