* 0204673
* An Analytical and Numerical Study of Dynamic Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Konstantin Lurie, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 269,999.00

This project focuses on the development and study of dynamic materials, i.e.,
material composites assembled on a microscale in space and time. Both analytic
and computational means will be used to analyze the effective properties of such
materials in many spatial dimensions and time. Analytically, by applying
homogenization to the relevant hyperbolic systems with spatio-temporally varying
senior coefficients, attainable bounds will be specified for the effective
parameters of the binary mixtures of isotropic dielectrics in the framework of
Maxwell's theory. Computationally, a direct numerical simulation of the original
equations will be used to better understand the physics of wave propagation
through heterogeneous media with complex microstructure. Together, both
approaches will lead to a correct formulation and analysis of optimal material
design in space time in response to a dynamic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By allowing spatio-temporal variability in the
material properties, it is possible to create effects that are unachievable
through purely spatial design. For example, by appropriately controlling the
design factors of an elastic construction, i.e., its mass and stiffness, it is
possible to selectively screen major parts of it from the invasion of
destructive dynamic disturbances caused by impacts&lt;br/&gt;or other dynamic
factors. Disturbances can be purposefully guided into regions where their effect
is less pernicious. Another example is related to electromagnetic or acoustic
waveguides. To function properly, a conventional waveguide must have a certain
minimum diameter relative to the wavelength of the signal. If the waveguide is
too narrow or the frequency of the waves is too low, then propagation will not
be possible. However, by allowing the material properties of the filling of the
waveguide to vary both in space and in time, it will become possible to transmit
waves of all frequencies.&lt;br/&gt;