* 0204846
* SGER: A Social Cognitive Model for Processing Health Risk Information About Anthrax Fears
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Dale Cohen, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 11/30/2002
* USD 15,150.00

This small grant for exploratory research examines how individuals respond to a
salient and pervasive health threat. This issue is particularly relevant in the
context of recent biochemical terrorism involving anthrax. Because all
individuals are at some risk to this health threat over which they have little
control, the public's temporary elevated concern represents a unique and
particularly salient context within which to study the cognitive antecedents and
consequences of a low probability, but potentially high consequence health
threat. Individual differences in health vulnerability beliefs will be assessed
and perceived control over the health threat will be experimentally manipulated.
The cognitive consequences of the health threat will include self-reported
assessments of perceived risk for contracting anthrax, a perceptual index of
attention to anthrax-relevant stimuli (as indicated by RTs on a modified Stroop
task), and an index of health goal behavior. This research will determine
whether individuals with health vulnerability beliefs are especially susceptible
to anthrax fears, and whether perceived control can mitigate these fears.
Because most individuals express health invulnerability beliefs (i.e., the
belief that they will not get ill), even when health threats are significant,
this research will explore some of the mechanisms that might result in these
invulnerability beliefs. Finally, the research can also help us understand why
individuals undertake, or fail to undertake, protective actions against various
health threats.