* 0204348
* Managing Evolution in Distributed, Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Premkumar Devanbu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 157,546.00

Distributed, heterogeneous (DH) software systems are critical for the operation
of modern, globalized organizations. Like all software, DH systems come under
evolutionary pressure as organizational needs evolve. Adapting DH systems to
meet changing needs in areas such as security is challenging: Co-ordinated
changes, made in different languages, and on different platforms must still
preserve type-safety, and must not increase complexity and/or complicate
maintenance. This project investigates enhancements to standards-based
middleware (e.g., CORBA) to support evolution. We preserve and enhance the core
IDL-based heterogeneous philosophy of middleware. First, interface-description
language (IDL), used to model the architecture-level interfaces of components,
is enhanced to support modeling of the evolutionary changes made to a DH
systems. Location of changes, types and life-times of new information to be
created are all explicitly modeled in an aspect-oriented style at the IDL level.
Code generation supports a wide range of implementation choices to realize these
architectural change-models. All implementations are fully inter-operable.
Finally, change-models and implementations can be "compononentized", packaged up
and added to existing systems. Like this research, our educational plans also
span several topics areas, including functional programming, object-orientation,
and architecture. We develop practically-grounded pedagogy on software
evolution, comparing the varying approaches to separation of concerns in object-
orientation, higher-order polymorphism (including monadic programming),
connectors, and aspects.



