* 0204868
* International Research Fellowship Program: Onsite Treatment of Domestic Wastewaters
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Andrew Logan, Logan                   Andrew         J
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 08/31/2005
* USD 123,330.00

0204868 Logan

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Andrew J.
Logan to work with Dr. Petter D. Jenssen at the Agricultural University of
Norway and with Dr. Trond Mahlum at the Norwegian Centre for Soil and
Environmental Research in Aas, Norway.

This project will explore the physical/chemical nature of soil treatment systems
by measuring the changing hydrophobicity with depth and operation time and
define how these changes affect pathogen collection. Pathogen surrogates
including virus and bacteria, will be introduced to vessels and allowed to
contact granular media with differing hydrophobicities. Collection behavior will
then be measured and the treatment efficiency of the systems will be measured
relative to pathogen removal. Results from this research can be used to provide
a strategy for the construction and operation of such treatment systems to
optimize pathogen collection and minimize the risk of pathogen discharge to
groundwater.

At these two institutions, current research includes developing enhanced
treatment systems for domestic wastewater, exploring the effects of wastewater
application regime on the treatment efficiency of soil-based systems, and
investigating pathogen transport in porous media.