* 0204222
* ITWF: WOMEN AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: A Comparative Study of Young Women from Middle Grades through High School and into College
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Sarah Berenson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 500,027.00

EIA-0204222 Vouk, Mladen A., Berenson, Sarah B., Michael, Joan North Carolina
State University

Title: Women and Information Technology: A Comparative Study of Young Women from
Middle Grades through High School, and into College

This ITWF award to North Carolina State University will support the development
and testing of a model of the factors associated with young women's decisions to
persist in advanced mathematics and computer science courses so as to prepare
themselves for, and decide to make Information Technology (IT), their career. IT
careers are defined as those requiring an electrical engineering, computer
science, or Computer engineering bachelor's degree. Success factors rather than
failure factors will be examined in order to make a significant contribution to
the research on gender and IT. The project's objectives are to:

a) Identify school, social, and personal factors associated with young women's
decisions to pursue undergraduate study in IT fields. b) Create and test a model
using the above factors to predict young women's decisions to pursue (enroll
into) IT undergraduate study. c) Disseminate the results of this study in
professional publications, professional meetings, advisory board meetings, and
in an electronic monograph to scholars, teachers, policy makers, parents, and
young women. d) Propose appropriate interventions to increase young women's
interest in IT careers based on this research model. To identify the factors,
the investigators will implement the inquiry from a grounded theory perspective.
Subjects will be young women, already identified as talented in mathematics in
middle school, who participated in the NSF Gender Equity project, Girls on Track
(GoT), beginning in the Summer of 1999.