* 0204149
*  Mechanical and Electrical Properties of Heterogeneous Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Guillermo Goldsztein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2005
* USD 86,146.00

Proposal: DMS-0204149 PI: Guillermo Goldsztein Institution: Georgia Institute of
Technology Title: Mechanical and electrical properties of heterogeneous solids

This project focuses on two problems related to heterogeneous materials: (1) the
effect of texture and grain anisotropy on the strength of polycrystals, and (2)
the electrical properties of high-contrast matrix-particulate composites. The
investigation involves analysis of the mathematical models as well as numerical
computations.

In most applications, crystalline materials are used in polycrystalline form.
Polycrystals of the same material but with different textures may exhibit
different behavior. One goal of the present research project is to gain a better
understanding of the dependence of the behavior of polycrystals on their
texture. Better understanding will lead to better guidelines for materials
selection and processing procedures. A second goal of this project is to
contribute to a better understanding of composite materials---materials composed
of two or more integrated pure phases. In general, a composite has better
properties than the pure phases alone. Examples of composite materials are
plastics that are reinforced with glass fibers or glass particles: the result is
a much stronger and stiffer material. The results of this project will be useful
for the design of composite materials with specific properties.