* 0204246
* ITWF: A Field Study of Individual Differences in the Social Shaping of Gender and IT
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Eileen Trauth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 434,196.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0204246&lt;br/&gt;Trauth, Eileen M.
&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: A Field
Study of Individual Differences in the Social Shaping of Gender and
IT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The under-representation of women in the information
technology (IT) field is a significant factor in the American IT skills crisis.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of sufficient theory to provide a basis for
explanation and prediction about this gender imbalance. The goal of this
research is to investigate the particular ways that women IT professionals in
America are influenced by and react to the social shaping of both gender
identity and IT. Three specific objectives are directed at the achievement of
this overall goal. The first objective is to refine an emergent theory of
individual differences about women's participation in the IT sector. The second
objective is to articulate the ways in which individual and environmental
factors are influencing American women in their professional development and
current working lives as IT professionals. The third objective is to develop
recommendations for proactive responses by public policy makers, employers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds upon and extends into the
American context the emergent theory and methodology that were developed by the
Principal Investigator and applied in Australia, New Zealand and Ireland.
Participants in the study are women who work in the IT field both as
practitioners and as academics. In-depth interviews with women in the IT sector
in selected geographic regions of the U.S. capture the influence of socio-
cultural factors in different geographic regions of the country. Four themes
about environmental influences that emerged from previous research are used to
structure the interview schedule: culture (expressed through societal and
workplace influences), educational institutions, family, and government policy.
The emergent theory of individual differences is used to focus the data analysis
on the ways in which these respondents - as individual women - are responding to
socio-cultural influences. Interview data is supplemented by participant
observation data and by documentary data about gender and the IT sector in the
regions involved in the study. Three themes that emerged from previous research
are used to focus the analysis of the data: personal characteristics of the
respondent, individual influences experienced by the respondent, and individual
responses to environmental influences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;