* 0204794
* Collaborative Research:   Mathematical Studies of Certain Geophysical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Edriss Titi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 259,998.00

Computer predictions of phenomena on large or global scales, for
example&lt;br/&gt;weather or climate forecasts, need to compromise between
accuracy of the &lt;br/&gt;predictions and available computing resources. It is
therefore a grand&lt;br/&gt;scientific challenge to derive global climate models
which are reliable &lt;br/&gt;and trustworthy. Exploiting certain geophysical
balances, such as &lt;br/&gt;geostrophic balance (due to earth rotation) or
hydrostatic balance &lt;br/&gt;(due to the shallowness of the ocean and
atmosphere) geophysicists derive&lt;br/&gt; reasonable, yet less complex,
balanced models. It is therefore essential to &lt;br/&gt;justify rigorously the
validity of these models, for the relevant spatial&lt;br/&gt;and time scales.
The focus of the proposed project is on the analytical,&lt;br/&gt;statistical
and numerical properties of solutions to nonlinear ocean &lt;br/&gt;dynamics
models and turbulent sub-grid models. The first aspect of this
&lt;br/&gt;project is to: show existence, uniqueness and continuous dependence
on &lt;br/&gt;initial data, to some of these reduced geophysical models. In
particular, &lt;br/&gt;a two-layer zonal jet model, a planetary geostrophic
``thermocline'' model, &lt;br/&gt;the lake equations with degenerate varying
bottom topography and the &lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional primitive equations. This
is the first and the most essential &lt;br/&gt;step in validating the derivation
of these models. In order to justify the &lt;br/&gt;long-time behavior of fluid
dynamical models, one has to compare the statistical &lt;br/&gt;properties of
their attracting invariant sets, rather than compare
individual&lt;br/&gt;solutions. To do so, it is necessary to focus on models
which include some &lt;br/&gt;mechanism of dissipation. This project addresses
questions related to the asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;derivation of these models and
the effect of numerical dissipation on their &lt;br/&gt;solutions, which include
boundary layer analysis. The second aspect of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to:
derive new large-eddy simulation models, the so-called alpha-models,
&lt;br/&gt;in the context of the two-layers geostrophic zonal jet models. The
alpha-models &lt;br/&gt;are asserted to reproduce the right energy spectrum for
a wide range of large &lt;br/&gt;scales. It is proposed to investigate this
claim using rigorous analytical tools. &lt;br/&gt;It is also proposed to perform
computational tests on the newly derived two-layers &lt;br/&gt;geostrophic zonal
jet alpha-model to verify the above assertion. Furthermore, &lt;br/&gt;it is
proposed to explore the implementation of the alpha-models approach as
&lt;br/&gt;sub-grid models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grand challenge in climate
prediction is that the mathematical equations &lt;br/&gt;governing the ocean and
atmosphere dynamics, are too difficult to study &lt;br/&gt;analytically, and
still prohibitively expensive computationally. Indeed, &lt;br/&gt;it is well
established, based on physical grounds and collected experimental
&lt;br/&gt;data, that atmospheric and oceanic turbulent flows involve a broad
spectrum &lt;br/&gt;of spatial and time scales. This in turn makes them
inaccessible to the most &lt;br/&gt;powerful and state-of-the-art computers.
However, due to the rotation of the &lt;br/&gt;earth and other geophysical
situations, such as the shallowness of the oceans &lt;br/&gt;and the atmosphere
- in the sense that they are much wider than they are deep -
&lt;br/&gt;geophysicists take advantage of certain geophysical balances to
derive simplified&lt;br/&gt;balanced models. The first theme of this project is
to: establish existence &lt;br/&gt;and regularity of solutions to some of these
nonlinear reduced models. This is&lt;br/&gt;a crucial step in justifying the
derivation of these models and their&lt;br/&gt;consistency with the physical
observations for the relevant length and time &lt;br/&gt;scales. Furthermore, in
global climate prediction one is interested in the &lt;br/&gt;long-time
statistical features of the climate. The second theme of this project
&lt;br/&gt;is to develop a systematic approach for deriving and studying new
averaged &lt;br/&gt;models, in the context of ocean and atmosphere dynamics,
which are reliable in &lt;br/&gt;reproducing the correct long-term statistics.