* 0204129
* Structured Ring Spectra and Chromatic Stable Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Paul Goerss, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 262,625.00

DMS-0204129&lt;br/&gt;Paul G. Goerss&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homotopy theory is the
study of topological phenomena that &lt;br/&gt;remain invariant under fairly
flexible sorts of continuous deformations. Most basically, we seek to compute
and to &lt;br/&gt;understand homotopy classes of maps between finite simplicial
&lt;br/&gt;or CW complexes, perhaps after some sort of stabilization.
&lt;br/&gt;Computation and understanding are not the same: we have forty
&lt;br/&gt;or more years of computations, but only lately have we begun
&lt;br/&gt;to have the language to in which to make a coherent theory out
&lt;br/&gt;of the data we have. This project is, therefore, as much about
exploring and refining the language as it is about calculations &lt;br/&gt;--
although there will be a mixture of both. The entry point &lt;br/&gt;is the
observation that any cohomology theory with a good &lt;br/&gt;theory of Chern
classes gives rise to a formal group law&lt;br/&gt;and, hence, a formal group.
Conversely, given a formal group&lt;br/&gt;we can ask whether there is an
associated cohomology theory.&lt;br/&gt;These cohomology theories then delineate
the finer structure&lt;br/&gt;of stable homotopy
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the chromatic picture of stable homotopy:
we seek&lt;br/&gt;to use the algebraic geometry of formal groups to organize and
&lt;br/&gt;direct investigations into the deeper structure of computations
&lt;br/&gt;and theory. This project seeks to develop this point of view
&lt;br/&gt;in two directions, one local and one global. The first, or
&lt;br/&gt;local, direction is an investigation into K(n)-local homotopy
&lt;br/&gt;theory in general and into the K(n)-local sphere in particular.
&lt;br/&gt;The second, or more global, direction, would be to make
systematic&lt;br/&gt;our knowledge of structured ring spectra using stacks and
&lt;br/&gt;the moduli stack of formal groups as the basic
parametrizing&lt;br/&gt;device.&lt;br/&gt;