* 0204309
* Simulations and Models for Sedimentation at Small Reynolds Numbers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Peter Mucha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 118,429.00

This award supports simultaneous mathematical and numerical study
of&lt;br/&gt;various low Reynolds number sedimentation flows. These systems
are&lt;br/&gt;complicated by the long range nature of the fluid flows generated
by&lt;br/&gt;individual solid particles as they fall, requiring
efficient&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for particle simulations, introducing variable
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;coefficients of different dependencies into model continuum
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations, and leading to nontrivial
distributions in the&lt;br/&gt;statistical mechanics of the interacting
particles. In this work,&lt;br/&gt;efficient algorithms specialized to dilute
wall-bounded sedimentation,&lt;br/&gt;previously developed to investigate the
scaling of velocity&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations in monodisperse sedimentation, will
be used to provide&lt;br/&gt;quantitative data for comparison with existing and
newly-developed&lt;br/&gt;kinetic and fluid models. The simulations will be
generalized to&lt;br/&gt;include effects due to inclined channels,
polydispersity,&lt;br/&gt;non-spherical particles, and small non-zero Reynolds
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between solid particles sedimenting
in a fluid are&lt;br/&gt;important in many natural and industrial processes,
including the&lt;br/&gt;settling motions of silt in rivers and dust in the air,
and in&lt;br/&gt;applications which use centrifugal or gravitational separation
such as&lt;br/&gt;those for proteins, minerals, waste water, and recyclable
plastics.&lt;br/&gt;While the mathematics describing the interactions between
individual&lt;br/&gt;particles and the suspending fluid are well known,
simulations of&lt;br/&gt;large scale flows based on these rules are
computationally&lt;br/&gt;prohibitive. It would be far preferable to use
macroscopic models&lt;br/&gt;which are less costly to solve because they neglect
the detailed&lt;br/&gt;motion of individual particles. Unfortunately, existing
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;models for sedimentation have very limited ranges of
validity. This&lt;br/&gt;work will consider restricted classes of sedimentation
systems in&lt;br/&gt;which efficient computation of the interactions between
large numbers&lt;br/&gt;of particles remains possible because of simplified
geometries and&lt;br/&gt;limits for the mathematical rules describing particle
motion. Results&lt;br/&gt;will be used to help identify improved macroscopic
models to describe&lt;br/&gt;both these restricted classes and more general
sedimentation flows.&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, this work will lead to improved
equations for modeling&lt;br/&gt;sedimentation flows in nature and for better
design of separation&lt;br/&gt;processes based on sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt;