* 0204329
* Inferences for Multivariate Semiparametric and Nonparametric Models with Applications to Risk Management
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Jianqing Fan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Xuming He
* 11/30/2003
* USD 225,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jianqing
Fan&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0204329&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this proposal
are to develop new and widely applicable approaches for semiparametric and
nonparametric estimation and inferences, to study theoretical properties of
these new approaches, and to evaluate their efficacy in data analyses. This
proposal not only introduces a number of innovative techniques, but also
provides various new and deep insights into statistical foundation. It will have
significant impact on the future research of statistical methodologies,
computation and theories. In particular, three inter-related areas are proposed
for study. Firstly, a family of flexible semiparametric and nonparametric models
is introduced. This allows one to study the extent to which response variables
are associated with their covariates. The generalized likelihood ratio
statistics is proposed for testing various hypotheses in multivariate
semiparametric and nonparametric models. Secondly, new semiparametric and
nonparametric models are proposed for understanding interest-rate dynamics, and
stock price volatilities. Furthermore, the information on state-domain is
incorporated to improve the efficiency of volatility estimation for bonds and to
more accurately estimate the market risks of a portofolio. Thirdly, new
techniques for variable selection, in the presence of a large number of
variables, are proposed via nonconcave penalized likelihood. The innovation is
that they estimate parameters and select variables simultaneously.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above techniques are widely applicable to many
scientific and engineering problems. Multivariate nonparametric, semiparametric
and large parametric models have been widely used. Statistical questions often
arise such as if certain variables or factors are important to public health; if
some risk factors contribute significantly to the survival time of patients; and
if interest-rate dynamics or stock price processes are time-dependent or follow
certain famous hypotheses, among others. Yet, there are no generally applicable
tools available to answer these questions in multivariate semiparametric and
non-saturated nonparametric models. The techniques proposed here permit one to
objectively test scientific hypotheses without restrictive model assumptions.
The techniques allow to better price financial derivatives and manage investment
risk, to identify important risk variables and their possible interactions in
the analysis of large epidemiological studies and to scrutinize famous
hypotheses on stock prices &lt;br/&gt;