* 0204311
* Invariants of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* G. Robert Meyerhoff, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2006
* USD 108,182.00

DMS-0204311&lt;br/&gt;G. Robert Meyerhoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The monumental
work of W. Thurston has shown the fundamental &lt;br/&gt;importance of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds within the study of 3-&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. The proposer
plans to work on a hard open problem in &lt;br/&gt;the theory of hyperbolic
3-manifolds, and to attempt to strengthen &lt;br/&gt;connections between number
theory and the study of invariants of &lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The
hard open question is the problem of &lt;br/&gt;finding the closed hyperbolic
3-manifold of minimum volume. The &lt;br/&gt;proposer, working jointly with D.
Gabai and P. Milley, and in &lt;br/&gt;consultation with N. Thurston, has a
computer-based scheme to &lt;br/&gt;attack this problem. The computational
aspects of the approach are &lt;br/&gt;interesting in their own right. The
connection between number &lt;br/&gt;theory/algebraic K-theory and invariants of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds &lt;br/&gt;is well-known, but a new approach to
understanding it is proposed. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, a new method for
computing the Chern-Simons invariant &lt;br/&gt;of a hyperbolic 3-manifold might
lead to interesting properties of the &lt;br/&gt;dilogarithm
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost 200 years ago, J. Bolyai, C. Gauss, and N.
Lobachevsky &lt;br/&gt;revolutionized mathematics by claiming that a legitimate
geometry &lt;br/&gt;could be constructed by taking the five classical postulates
of Euclid &lt;br/&gt;and negating the fifth postulate (the parallel postulate).
Further,&lt;br/&gt;they theorized that this new and mysterious non-Euclidean
geometry &lt;br/&gt;(now called "hyperbolic geometry") would have important
applications. &lt;br/&gt;Their theorizing has been borne out: hyperbolic
geometry is vitally&lt;br/&gt;important in the modern study of geometry. For
example, hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;geometry turns out to be much more important than
Euclidean geometry&lt;br/&gt;in the study of "3-dimensional manifolds" (our
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;Universe is an example of a 3-dimensional manifold). As
another&lt;br/&gt;example, it is quite possible that our Universe adheres to the
laws&lt;br/&gt;of non-Euclidean geometry rather than the laws of Euclidean
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The proposer, working jointly with D. Gabai and P. Milley,
and in &lt;br/&gt;consultation with N. Thurston, plans to work on a computer-
based &lt;br/&gt;approach to solving one of the hardest and most fundamental
problems &lt;br/&gt;about hyperbolic 3-manifolds: finding the smallest one. In
addition, the&lt;br/&gt;proposer will try to strengthen the already existing
connection between &lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic 3-manifolds and number theory. The
history of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;has borne out the importance of finding strong
connections between&lt;br/&gt;(supposedly) disparate areas of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;