* 0204613
* Stochastic Differential Systems Driven by Fractional Brownian Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Yaozhong Hu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2006
* USD 93,283.00

0204613&lt;br/&gt;Hu&lt;br/&gt; It is well-known that the fractional Brownian
motions are not semimartingales. The powerful stochastic calculus for
semimartingales are not applicable to them. Motivated by the urgent need from
applications the principal investigator and his collaborators have developed a
new stochastic calculus of Ito type based on the Wick product. He proposes to
continue this research topic and to study the stochastic differential systems
driven by fractional Brownian motions. First he shall study the existence,
uniqueness and approximation of global solutions to stochastic differential
systems driven by fractional Brownian motions. Many researchers have attempted
to obtain result on these aspects with little success. The principal
investigator has discovered a relationship between stochastic differential
systems driven by fractional Brownian motions and quasilinear hyperbolic
equations (of infinitely many variables). It is well-known that the latter
equations are also difficult to solve. However, there are a number of results
which are useful. This connection will lead to a better understanding of
stochastic differential systems and the PI plans to explore this relation.
Secondly, in application of the stochastic systems driven by fractional Brownian
motions, one also needs to identify the coefficients and the Hurst parameter.
The PI proposes to study one such identification problem and apply it to the
investigation of the stochastic volatility model in financial market.
&lt;br/&gt; To obtain the maximum benefit from a physical or social system, one
needs to understand the system in the most precise way possible. This requires
building a mathematical model for the dynamic evolution of the system. When the
system is under the influence of some uncertain factors, the system should be
modeled by a random process. Up to now one of the random processes which has
received the most attention and has been studied the most is stochastic
differential equations based on the so-called Brownian motion. Brownian motion
has some nice properties such as Markovian: Its future state depends only on the
present state and does not depend on the past. This simplicity makes the
mathematics for it easy and very profound results have been achieved. In fact
there have been enormous work on it over the past century. However, this elegant
property also limits the applicability of such a random process, since it cannot
be used to describe those systems whose future depend not only the present but
also on past history! Fractional Brownian motions are random processes having
this long range dependence and may be used to describe such systems. This
proposal aims to construct mathematical tools for the fractional Brownian
motions which have already found applications in hydrology, climatology, network
traffic analysis, and finance. This research will have impact on these areas as
well as in life science. &lt;br/&gt;