* 0204677
* Collaborative Proposal: Physical, Mathematical, and Engineering Problems in Slow Granular Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 181,907.00

This research effort addresses a spectrum of fundamental and applied problems in
the slow flow of granular materials. It is organized into four projects, chosen
partly because of their importance in the field of granular materials, but also
because they raise intriguing mathematical and scientific issues of broader
significance. The first project attacks a fundamental physical problem: How to
include micromechanical effects in a continuum description of granular flow,
especially the effect of velocity fluctuations. The second project concerns the
mathematics surrounding multidimensional continuum models for granular flow,
specifically the issue of extracting mathematically rigorous information from
ill-posed partial differential equations. The third project proposes to extend
Jenike's radial solution for flows in axisymmetric hoppers to conical hoppers
with a general cross section. The fourth project deals with flows of fine
granular materials, where the interstitial gas significantly affects the flow.
The research program involves coordinated efforts in modeling, analysis,
numerical simulations, and experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this
research project is a basic question concerning the flow of granular materials:
"What behaviors of slowly flowing granular material can be understood in terms
of a continuum formulation?" This question may be viewed as an attempt to
reconcile continuum models, used in industrial design and engineering problem
solving, with discrete models, introduced to understand the results of small- to
medium-scale physical experiments. Continuum models are highly desirable since
they are much more tractable analytically and computationally than particle
dynamics simulations, which treat the discreteness of the flow directly. An
important issue that arises from this basic question, and which is addressed in
this project, is the form that a continuum description should take. This issue
has been the subject of debate in the engineering literature ever since Janssen
in 1895 demonstrated that stresses in a column of granular material do not
increase indefinitely with depth, but approach asymptotically to a constant. The
research program has significance well beyond the context of granular materials
in mathematics as well as physics. The project is supported by a long-standing
industrial collaboration.