* 0204978
* NER:  Nanoscale Molecular Spintronic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2004
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 01/31/2004
* USD 85,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
focuses on (a). the fabrication of planar spin-valve and light-emitting devices
using ferromagnetic eletrodes and pi-conjugated materials; (b) the study of
organic/inorganic interfaces and the effect of the interfaces on spin-transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although spin-dependent effects have been widely studied
in a variety of metals and conventional semiconductors, very little has been
done in organic semiconductors for nanoscale device applications. There are two
main advantages for using organic semiconductors, in particular pi-conjugated
semiconductors for spin-electronics. Firstly, the spin relaxation time in these
materials is relatively long, typically of the order of a microsecond at room
temperature. This is caused by the light atoms from which these semiconductors
are made and the small hyperfine interaction of the pi-electron wave function.
The second advantage is that the main mechanism for carrier injection into
organic semiconductors is by tunneling, which preserves spin states, so that the
acute problem of conductance mismatch between the ferromagnetic spin aligner and
the semiconductor is less troublesome. In addition, organic materials offer a
wide range of work function values so that the tunnel barrier can be relatively
easily engineered for spin-dependent low tunneling resistance, which is
essential for high-density information storage and memory applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our feasibility study consists of two types of nanoscale
devices. The first type is the planar spin-valve devices using pi-conjugated
materials as a spacer. The objective is to explore low tunnel barrier spin-
valves with high magnetoresistance. The second type is the organic spin light-
emitting devices, where the electroluminescence emission will be modulated by an
external magnetic field. The improved emitted light efficiency and magnetic
field sensitivity are anticipated. These two types of devices involve with new
material fabrication, fine lithography, and new material processing, which are
highly non-trivial and of high risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and co-PI (Shi
and Vardney) have expertise in magnetic tunnel junction materials and nanoscale
device fabrication, polymer synthesis, organic crystal growth, magneto-
transport, optics, and magneto-optics. Thus the two graduate students and two
undergraduate students participating in this project will be well-trained in a
rather interdisciplinary field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;