* 0204937
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Hyperbolic Formulations of the Einstein Equations for the Binary Black Hole Problem
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2006
* USD 55,200.00

0204937&lt;br/&gt;Pullin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this US-Argentina award, Dr.
Jorge Pullin of Louisiana State University will collaborate with Dr. Oscar Reula
of the Universidad Nacional de Cordoba in Argentina to study the application of
hyperbolic formulations of the Einstein equations of general relativity in order
to provide stable evolution schemes for the binary black hole coalescence
problem. Among the studies they will undertake is the use of linearized and
other approximation techniques and lower dimensional modeling to determine
stable configurations of equations, boundary condition issues, and how various
gauge choices influence the stability of the schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
problem of how to solve Einstein's equations numerically for astrophysically
interesting simulations is one of the most urgent problems in general relativity
today. To numerically model the collision of two black holes is of critical
importance, since that is expected to be one of the main sources of
gravitational radiation to be detected by the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer
Gravity Wave Observatory (LIGO). It is expected that the last moments of the
collision will produce a significant burst of gravitational radation that, due
to the strong field nature and lack of symmetries of the problem, can only be
predicted by numerical simulation. The combined knowledge and experience of this
international collaboration will work toward solving this important
problem.&lt;br/&gt;