* 0204723
* Multivariate Nonparametric Methodology Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2005
* David Scott, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 10/31/2005
* USD 265,148.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204723 PI: David Scott Title: Multivariate nonparametric
methodology studies

The investigators will study new nonparametric methodology focusing on the mid-
range and high-range dimensions to better understand data modeling, the curse of
dimensionality, and problems associated with massive data sets in multivariate
regression and density estimation as well as closely related problems in
clustering, mixtures, pattern recognition, and dimension reduction. A new data-
based parametric estimation algorithm, based upon integrated squared error, will
be investigated for its flexibility and robustness. By applying the criterion to
the fitting of local polynomials, a new robust nonparametric regression
algorithm can be proposed, which will be applied to automatic detection of
hundreds of overlapping tracks in subatomic detector experiments. This project
will examine semiparametric models for density estimation that can work better
than ordinary nonparametric algorithms, extending feasibility by several extra
dimensions. Of special interest, this algorithm can be used to fit subsets of a
full mixture model. Applications include regression, image processing,
clustering, outlier detection, density estimation, and visualization. The
project will extend work on spatial modeling and the combination of multiple
data surveys into useful data modeling and maps of conditional estimators of
factors and their covariates. Currently, simultaneous mapping of variables is
difficult to interpret, due to the availability of data only in discrete spatial
areas (e.g. census tracts) and cross-tabulation of the two variables of
interest. By constructing a smooth map of one variable as a second variable
varies, a more faithful and accurate understanding of the spatial relationship
may be obtained.

Nonparametric methodology is widely used in one and two dimensions, but less so
in higher dimensions. This research focuses on the mid-range and high-range
dimensions and provides a deeper understanding of the implications to data
modeling of the curse of dimensionality and problems associated with massive
data sets. Particular emphasis will be given to multivariate regression and
density estimation problems, and closely related applications such as
clustering, mixture estimation, pattern recognition, and dimension reduction.
This proposal examines new points of view, especially related to locally
adaptive and spatial estimation, as well as some recent extensions of
nonparametric criteria to parametric problems. The new parametric approach has
potential for new nonparametric formulations and applications. At a recent
National Research Council workshop, numerous scientists identified critical
statistical needs in their work with massive data sets: alternatives to
principal components, specialized visualization tools for exploring massive
data, better clustering algorithms, and techniques for handling nonstationary
data. Results from this research directly impact three of these four critical
opportunities. This program represents a comprehensive and long-term attack on a
host of important data analytic problems in multivariate estimation. The results
will be of long-term theoretical interest and will provide near-term solutions
to real-world problems.