* 0204823
* Collaborative Research:  Homological Methods in Crystallography
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Benji Fisher, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 57,718.00

Proposal: DMS-0204823, DMS-0204845&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Benji
Fisher, David Rabson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A B S T R A C
T&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisher and Rabson are classifying the symmetry types of
quasicrystals&lt;br/&gt;in two and three dimensions and studying the physical
consequences of&lt;br/&gt;these symmetries. The classification generalizes the
work begun in&lt;br/&gt;the nineteenth century on space groups of crystals. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;follow the Fourier-space approach to crystallography,
which has the&lt;br/&gt;advantage of avoiding space groups in higher dimensions.
Thus the&lt;br/&gt;classification starts from the known list of finite subgroups
of the&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal groups O(2) and O(3). They introduce techniques of
group&lt;br/&gt;cohomology, some of which have long been used in "direct space,"
to&lt;br/&gt;the Fourier-space formulation. These techniques lead to
both&lt;br/&gt;theoretical simplifications and efficient computational methods.
One&lt;br/&gt;important application of these ideas is the description of
certain&lt;br/&gt;gauge invariants in terms of group homology. The two simplest
types&lt;br/&gt;of homology class are connected with known physical
phenomena:&lt;br/&gt;systematic extinctions in diffraction patterns and crossing
of&lt;br/&gt;electronic bands ("band sticking"). The next simplest type
first&lt;br/&gt;occurs in a rank-five tetragonal modulated crystal and should
be&lt;br/&gt;connected with some similar phenomenon. Tiling models are
produced,&lt;br/&gt;and the ideas are also extended to magnetic and color
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystallography underlies and informs much of
physics, chemistry, and&lt;br/&gt;geology. The present research has applications
to recent experiments&lt;br/&gt;in liquid crystals (related to the popular LCD
displays on&lt;br/&gt;wristwatches and other electronic equipment), plasmas, and
modulated&lt;br/&gt;crystals, highly symmetric systems that cannot be described
by the&lt;br/&gt;classical theory of crystals. Ever since 1784, when the French
abbot&lt;br/&gt;Rene Just Hauy deduced the microscopic structure of crystals, it
had&lt;br/&gt;been believed impossible for a crystal to have the symmetries of
an&lt;br/&gt;icosahedron (or a soccer ball). Precisely 200 years later,
such&lt;br/&gt;materials, called "quasicrystals," were discovered, and much
research&lt;br/&gt;has ensued into their properties. Quasicrystals possess
strange&lt;br/&gt;electronic and physical properties and have already found
application&lt;br/&gt;as high-quality, non-stick coatings on electrosurgical
blades. The&lt;br/&gt;present research aims to classify the symmetry types of
crystals and&lt;br/&gt;to study physical properties associated with these
symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded jointly by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences&lt;br/&gt;and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;