* 0204474
* Geometric Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jerrold Marsden, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2005
* USD 101,000.00

Proposal #0204474 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Jerrold E. Marsden&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
California Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometric
Mechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this NSF
grant will develop geometric mechanics and reduction theory in the context of
several problems of interest: integration algorithms and reduction theory for
discrete mechanics, the symplectic nature of collision algorithms, controlled
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian systems with symmetry, reduction in the context of
covariant field theory (such as electromagnetism and gauge fields) using
covariant Poisson brackets as well as Lagrangian reduction, and bifurcations in
mechanical systems with symmetry using the blowing-up technique, including the
establishment of connections with singular reduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combination of geometric and analytical techniques continues to play an
important role in many aspects of mechanics. This includes developments in
computational algorithms. For instance, recent advances in variational
integration algorithms have produced state of the art collision codes, for
example, for collisions between elastic bodies and elastic shells. The work in
this proposal further develops the mathematical framework that led to these
algorithms in the first place. This includes proving, in a precise sense, that
the algorithms respect the special structure of mechanics, such as conservation
laws. In addition, studying the effect of symmetry on such algorithms and
factoring out this symmetry directly on the discrete level is an important
aspect of these algorithms which is only understood in special cases at the
moment; this proposal will develop and extend these techniques. Another area
where symmetry and geometric techniques are important is that of the control of
mechanical systems (such as how rotors are used to control spacecraft
orientation). Symmetry reduction for the control of such mechanical systems is
one of the techniques that will be developed under this grant.&lt;br/&gt;