* 0204449
* New Directions in Scattered Data Analysis via Radial and Related Basis Functions with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,10/31/2005
* Joseph Ward, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 10/31/2005
* USD 208,184.00

Error estimates for both interpolation and approximation are central in
developing rigorous algorithms or numerical methods in any application. A major
difficulty in scattered-data problems has been that the class of data-generating
functions for which the methods are known to converge is much smaller than what
one encounters in practice. This is problematic in numerically solving partial
differential equations via Radial Basis Function collocation, since target
functions need to be smoother than the basis functions, which is a major
restriction in hyperbolic problems. One of the goals of this project is to
obtain error estimates for a greatly expanded class of target functions. In our
very recent work on interpolation via a restricted class of Spherical Basis
Functions on the sphere, such estimates were obtained. This provides hope that
the broader goal is attainable. Another important goal is to develop and
implement rigorous, computationally efficient algorithms for numerical partial
differential equation problems, neural networks, and problems from the
geosciences requiring scattered-data surface fitting on the
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation of scattered-data modeling is of
great potential importance for the understanding of earth based phenomena of
every kind. Fitting surfaces to meteorological or geophysical data collected via
satellites or ground stations is a good example of such an application.
Spherical basis functions (SBFs) have been used in such problems. Radial and
periodic basis functions have been extensively employed in a variety of neural
networks, including architectures used for direction-finding via phased-array
radar. Very recently, they have been employed in grid-free numerical methods for
solving partial differential equations, and to do computer graphics and computer
aided design problems. Calculations assocaited with these are time consuming.
Recent advances have ameliorated these difficulties and the work under this
project will continue to improve efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;