* 0204375
* SGER: NanoPort: Intelligent Web Searching for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2002
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Cyrus K. Aidun
* 12/31/2002
* USD 99,980.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0204375&lt;br/&gt;H. Chen, The University of Arizona,
Tucson&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to investigate the feasibility of applying
intelligent search techniques for the filed of nanoscale science and engineering
(NSE) on databases and websites. The motivation for the research is that
searching the World Wide Web for information in NSE with conventional search
engines (like Google or Yahoo!) yields several thousand "hits," most of which
are of low value or relevance to the search objective while other related data
are missed. Therefore, customized intelligent search techniques are needed to
enable NSE researchers and the public to learn about recent developments in the
subspecialties of NSE in which they may have interests. The focus is on the
academic and industrial data, in US and abroad. A phased approach is proposed: a
prototype portal (web site) and vertical search engine in three months, based on
adaptations of existing tools plus NSE discipline knowledge, followed by
enhancing in the subsequent six months with intelligent searching and
clustering, post-retrieval analysis, automated directory generation, and user
testing and evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation of a domain-
specific portal and intelligent search capability for NSE will benefit not only
academic community but also the government and industry users.&lt;br/&gt;