* 0204293
* RUI: Geometric Techniques for Quadrilateral and Hexahedral Mesh Generation with Applications in Medical Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Suneeta Ramaswami, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/2007
* USD 134,789.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0204293&lt;br/&gt;Suneeta Ramaswami&lt;br/&gt;Rugers U New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal of this project is the complete
development of robust algorithms for the modeling&lt;br/&gt;and visualization of
data in a specific application domain, namely medical imaging. The focus
of&lt;br/&gt;the proposal is on the generation of quadrilateral and hexahedral
meshes for medical data obtained&lt;br/&gt;from structural studies (MR and CT)
of human organs.&lt;br/&gt;The generation of good quadrilateral and hexahedral
(quad/hex) meshes is not well-understood&lt;br/&gt;and several important
questions remain open. By exploiting the geometry that is central to
these&lt;br/&gt;problems, we aim to develop algorithms for generating
guaranteed-quality surface and volume&lt;br/&gt;meshes composed of quadrilateral
and hexahedral elements. Algorithmic techniques and data struc-&lt;br/&gt;tures
from computational geometry will be utilized towards this end. We also
investigate adaptive&lt;br/&gt;quad/hex meshes, i.e., meshes designed to have
varying levels of refinement depending on factors&lt;br/&gt;such as the desired
level of detail in a localized part of the input domain. The algorithms will
be&lt;br/&gt;designed for and tested on medical imaging data. Improved surface
and volume meshing algorithms&lt;br/&gt;will directly impact automated clinical
analysis of medical data, which is typically carried out by&lt;br/&gt;procedures
that require finite element simulations on discrete anatomical models. Some
examples&lt;br/&gt;of such procedures are elastic matching and viscous uid ow.
Our work will be done in collabo-&lt;br/&gt;ration with researchers in the area
of brain image analysis in the Department of Radiology at
the&lt;br/&gt;University ofPennsylvania.