* 0204725
* Some Studies on Non-Uniformly Hyperbolic Attractors and The N-Body Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Qiu-Dong Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 78,072.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204725. PI: Qiu-Dong Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
proposal is mainly on the subject of non-uniformly&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic strange
attractors. We propose to apply an abstract &lt;br/&gt;setting we previously
formulated and studied to rigorously prove&lt;br/&gt;the existence of non-
uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors&lt;br/&gt;in certain systems of ordinary
differential equations, including a modified&lt;br/&gt;system of van der Pol and
certain periodically excited systems experiencing&lt;br/&gt;Hopf bifurcations.
We also propose to analytically establish the fact that&lt;br/&gt;non-uniformly
hyperbolic strange attractors naturally arise when&lt;br/&gt;an asymptotically
stable periodic solution of a given system&lt;br/&gt;of ordinary differential
equations is periodically excited by generic&lt;br/&gt;external forcing. These
non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors have &lt;br/&gt;properties that
include most of standard mathematical notions associated&lt;br/&gt;with chaos:
positive Liapunov exponents, positive entropy, SRB
measure,&lt;br/&gt;exponential decay of correlation, nice symbolic coding of
orbits etc.&lt;br/&gt;We also propose to study the geometric structure of the
integral manifold&lt;br/&gt;of the spatial four-body
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposal is mainly on the
subject of non-uniformly hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;strange attractors. In general an
attractor is a state to which a system will &lt;br/&gt;eventually evolve. One of
the most important way of studying systems in nature &lt;br/&gt;is to first
model then study them as solutions of certain differential &lt;br/&gt;equations.
We propose to apply a theory we previously developed &lt;br/&gt;to prove the
existence of a class of strange attractors in some systems of
&lt;br/&gt;differential equations arisen from various scientific disciplines
including &lt;br/&gt;in the studies of turbulence, fluid mechanics and plasma
mechanics. The &lt;br/&gt;attracting states we propose to study have very
complicated dynamical &lt;br/&gt;properties and sophisticated geometric
structures. They were observed in&lt;br/&gt;many numerical and laboratory
experiments but their existence were rarely &lt;br/&gt;established
mathematically in the past. We also propose to study the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure of the integral manifold of the spatial four-body
problem. This is a &lt;br/&gt;long standing mathematical problem with potential
applications on orbit design&lt;br/&gt;for artificial celestial objects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;