* 0204639
* Is Deliberate Misspecification Desirable?    Statistical Study of Financial and Other Time-Dependent Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2007
* Per Mykland, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 510,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0204639&lt;br/&gt;PI: Per
Mykland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gambling has been one of the main sources for
conceptual understanding of statistics and probability, ever since the invention
of the latter in the 1600s. Following this tradition, the development of ideas
and results in statistics is pursued, on the basis of an application that
resembles gambling in many respects. The application is derivative securities
such as options. Among the conceptual issues to be investigated, two stand out
as recurring themes. One is the need to integrate statistical inference with the
needs of the application. The other is that this need often leads to
deliberately misspecified models, beyond what is usually the case in ordinary
statistics. This proposal is also about the application. Options trading differs
from gambling both in its importance to the economy, and (most of the time) in
its social value. It is also an industry where mistakes and insufficient
understanding can lead to substantial calamity for the rest of society. One of
the primary goals of this project is to improve understanding of the (data)
processes involved in options trading, and to facilitate government regulation.
The dual intentions are conceptual development in statistics and the study of
the major sectors of contemporary economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reason why
these two aims go together is that statistics relates to three of the most
substantial problems facing the derivatives industry today. One is the common
failure to incorporate statistical findings into decisions of pricing, trading
and regulation. Another is the effect of big discontinuities (jumps, due to
various shocks, or simply endogenous) in the prices of securities. And, finally,
the frequent lack of transparency in the setting of options values. These are
the applied questions to be answered. The three difficulties are of keen
interest to regulators and financial institutions alike. Results from the
project should be broadly useful to the economy, benefiting both consumers of
derivatives and governments trying to regulate a business that is opaque from
the outside. The problems are also often mirrored in the setting of corporate
governance. On the theoretical side, the proposed project is about statistical
inference with a twist, in that the goal is to take the application and
integrate it with the process of inference. Since inference will be for
longitudinal data, such as diffusions and jump diffusions, the conclusions will
also give insights to general inference for such data. A main contention of the
project is that the chain from data analysis to actual trading and regulation is
best studied by taking apart its different links. These can then be studied
separately, often with different methods and deliberately different model
specifications, or frequently even useful misspecifications. This permits the
isolation of those links, which makes an integrated analysis quite ill posed.
And it gives greater transparency to those other links, which are amenable to a
reliable analysis. This willingness to use separate tools for separate purposes
appears to be quite successful, both from a statistical and a financial
perspective. A main example is the analysis of variance (ANOVA) for diffusions.
This device leads to trading that can adapt to the markets in more sophisticated
ways than by calibration or modeling alone. &lt;br/&gt;