* 0204010
* Ultra High Performance Digital Circuit Design and Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,03/31/2007
* Carl Sechen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

The focus of this proposal is on extremely high performance (very high speed,
but also energy efficient) digital IC design. The proposed research has three
tasks: 1) high performance digital logic techniques, 2) CAD tool development to
aid rapid deployment of the high performance logic techniques, and 3)
applications of the high performance logic techniques; in particular, the design
of circuit blocks that demonstrate unprecedented speed, while still having
reasonable energy efficiency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 1: Research on High
Performance Digital Logic Techniques: &lt;br/&gt;Focus is on maximizing the
performance of the output prediction logic (OPL) technique, and developing yet
faster and/or more energy efficient logic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task
2: CAD for Rapid Implementation of High Performance Digital
Logic:&lt;br/&gt;Techniques&lt;br/&gt;Two CAD tools will be developed to ease
design and verification of OPL circuits under this proposal: 1) A static timing
analysis tool for OPL circuits, and 2) an automatic transistor/gate sizing tool
for OPL circuits that minimizes energy consumption subject to delay goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Also a powerful convex-optimization-based tool for
automatic transistor and gate sizing for OPL circuits is being investigated. The
tool will minimize energy consumption while achieving a specified delay
target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task 3: Research on Applications of High
Performance Digital Logic&lt;br/&gt;Techniques:&lt;br/&gt;Applications include:
1) a new 64b adder architecture having a simulated worst-case&lt;br/&gt;delay
(under severe process, voltage and temperature variations) of
3.3&lt;br/&gt;fanout-of-four inverter delays. 2) a very fast floating-point
divider with the possibility of a latency of 6ns for a 0.20-micron TSMC process.
This divider will run at a frequency of at least 3 GHz in this 0.20-micron
process, enabling the use of division for the very first time in signal
processing and communications circuits. 3) a new FPGA architecture, called OPL-
FPGA, which suggests an FPGA could approach the circuit speeds obtained by
standard cell ASICs. Mapping common datapath circuits to this architecture
further suggests that speedups of at least 3.3X over state-of-the-art commercial
FPGAs are attainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;