* 0204687
* Geometry and Analysis on Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Andrzej Zuk, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 97,543.00

DMS-0204687&lt;br/&gt;Andrzej Zuk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project
the PI proposes to study &lt;br/&gt;different problems related to geometry,
analysis and &lt;br/&gt;probability on discrete groups. The groups the PI is
&lt;br/&gt;interested in are lattices in Lie groups, groups generated
&lt;br/&gt;by finite automata, random and hyperbolic groups in&lt;br/&gt;the
sense of Gromov, groups acting on buildings. &lt;br/&gt;The PI found recently
new examples of groups with &lt;br/&gt;property (T) and the PI intends to
continue the study &lt;br/&gt;of groups with this property. In particular, the
PI would &lt;br/&gt;like to find other groups with property (T) and continue
&lt;br/&gt;the study of automata groups. During this study the PI
&lt;br/&gt;plans to investigate properties of these groups related &lt;br/&gt;to
amenability, torsion, growth and the following famous &lt;br/&gt;conjectures:
the Atiyah conjecture about L2 Betti numbers, &lt;br/&gt;the Baum-Connes
conjecture, and the Kaplansky-Kadison conjecture &lt;br/&gt;about the
idempotents. The PI proposes also to continue &lt;br/&gt;the study of spectral
properties of random walks operators&lt;br/&gt;and more generally the Hecke
operators for groups generated &lt;br/&gt;by finite automata and
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Property (T) is a quite abstract property of
some groups,&lt;br/&gt;but which found applications in constructions of computer
and communication networks. The PI proposes to find new groups&lt;br/&gt;with
this property which would have applications to several &lt;br/&gt;problems
related to efficiency of certain algorithms. The &lt;br/&gt;other project
concerning automata groups combines the &lt;br/&gt;problems from the abstract
group theory and applications &lt;br/&gt;in computer science. The PI plans to
give several mini-courses &lt;br/&gt;for graduate students based on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;