* 0204676
* Limit Set, Spectral Analysis, and Traveling Wave Solutions for Functional Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Wenzhang Huang, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2006
* USD 84,730.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop new methods to study the existence
and stability of traveling wave solutions for a class of functional differential
equations arising from applications. A dynamical approach combined with an
analytic method will be developed. A particular type of flow&lt;br/&gt;generated
by the proposed functional differential equations is defined. A traveling wave
is given by the equilibrium of this flow that will be identified from the
positive limit set corresponding to a bounded solution. This will be achieved by
extensive investigation of the property of a positive limit set and analysis of
the spectral property for the variational equation associated to a global
solution contained in the positive limit set. The advantage of the proposed
approach is that it will provide information on both the asymptotical behavior
of a solution and the existence and stability of a traveling wave solution. The
method will also have the potential of application to other problems, such as
the existence of traveling wave solutions for spatially discrete systems and the
existence of heteroclinic solution for the delay differential equation arising
from singular perturbation problems. The techniques of spectral analysis
developed in this research will also be a contribution to the spectral theory of
operators in Banach space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traveling waves have been
observed in many models in the fields of biology, ecology, chemistry, and
physics. In particular, the existence of the existence of stable traveling waves
provides the most important information on the asymptotical behavior of a
dynamical system or identifies the target pattern that describes the most
interesting phenomenon. The functional differential equations studied in this
proposal include a large class of models found in the literature. These models
address questions of interest to ecologists and epidemiologists that include
competition, dynamics of disease transmission and persistence, and that how the
time delay and diffusion&lt;br/&gt;jointly affect the existence of traveling
waves. Results from the proposed research will increase our understanding of
mechanisms responsible for observed patterns and the common feature
of&lt;br/&gt;wave propagation in nature. The proposed research project will also
be incorporated into the research and education programs in the University of
Alabama in Huntsville. The research project will expose graduate students to
biologically important and mathematically interesting questions to attract them
to the field of functional differential equations and mathematical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;