* 0204594
* General Theory of Minimum Aberration and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Boxin Tang, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 111,823.00

Proposal ID: DMS-0204594&lt;br/&gt;PI: Boxin Tang&lt;br/&gt;Title: General
theory of minimum aberration and its
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
and his colleagues consider the problem of design selection for fractional
factorials. In situations where there is little or no knowledge about effects
that are potentially important, it is appropriate to select designs using the
minimum aberration criterion. Very often, the experimenter may have reasons to
believe that certain two-factor interactions are important. Appropriate designs
under such circumstances are those allowing joint estimation of all main effects
and these potentially important interactions.&lt;br/&gt;If the effects not in
the postulated model, which consists of the main effects and potentially
important interactions, cannot be completely ignored, they bias the estimates of
the effects in the model. In the proposed research, this problem of design
selection is solved by developing a general theory of minimum aberration. The
general criterion of aberration to be introduced generalizes the usual criterion
of minimum aberration, and it has the robust property that the best designs
given by this criterion sequentially minimize the contamination of nonnegligible
effects on the estimation of the effects in the postulated model. Developing a
general theory of minimum aberration is also motivated by the desire of unifying
various versions of minimum aberration in the literature. Is it possible to
derive these versions of minimum aberration from a general theory that is based
on a sound statistical principle? The general theory of aberration provides a
positive answer to this question. What is more important is that such a general
theory enables researchers to derive other versions of minimum aberration that
may be more appropriate for given design situations. In the proposal, many
research problems are discussed and in some cases, solutions are outlined.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design of experiments is an area of study in statistics
that concerns efficient data collection for industrial experiments and many
other areas of scientific investigation. Fractional factorial designs are a
class of experimental plans and their importance, both theoretical and
practical, cannot be overstated. As exploratory designs, they are directly
useful in identifying important factors at the early stage of an investigation.
They also form a basis on which other more sophisticated designs can be built.
In the proposed research, the investigator and his colleagues study the problem
of selecting the best fractional factorial designs when certain prior knowledge
regarding the effects of factors is available. The problem is solved by
developing a general theory of design selection criteria. In addition to solving
the above practical problem, the general theory unifies various existing design
selection criteria, and allows researchers to derive other criteria that are
more appropriate for their situations. Involving students in research activities
is an important aspect of the proposed research. The proposed research sheds new
light on the study of fractional factorial designs, leads to new economical
designs for the experiments in the physical, chemical, and engineering sciences,
and most importantly, promotes the application of factorial designs in the areas
such as biotechnology and medical research that have huge potential to benefit
further from the design methodology.&lt;br/&gt;