* 0204728
* Inner Models, Fine Structure and Large Cardinals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Martin Zeman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,698.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0204728&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Martin Zeman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on
various aspects of the inner&lt;br/&gt;model theory and can be divided into two
areas. The first area&lt;br/&gt;puts emphasis on the determining the internal
structure of&lt;br/&gt;extender models, fine structure theory and
infinitary&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics. The PI has done extensive research here,
making&lt;br/&gt;substantial contributions to the existing results.
Extender&lt;br/&gt;models are generalizations of Goedel's constructible
universe&lt;br/&gt;which admit a very complex structure of large
cardinal&lt;br/&gt;axioms. The key element behind the inner model theory
is&lt;br/&gt;iterability -- a method which enables us to iterate
countable&lt;br/&gt;structures that are elementarily embeddable into initial
segments&lt;br/&gt;of these models. Granting iterability, the author and
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators were able to develop a fine structure theory
of&lt;br/&gt;these models, which is a means enabling to investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;internal structure and combinatorics (Jensen's principles)
of&lt;br/&gt;these models abstractly, without any direct reference
to&lt;br/&gt;iterability. The aim of this project is to extend the
existing&lt;br/&gt;methods in a manner that would yield the complete description
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial properties of extender models. The open
problems&lt;br/&gt;are related mainly to cardinal transfer theorems and
stationary&lt;br/&gt;reflection. This part of the project includes also
direct&lt;br/&gt;applications of the inner model theory in determining
the&lt;br/&gt;consistency strength of various principles from
infinitary&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics. The focus here is on improving the PI's
results on&lt;br/&gt;Jensen's guessing principle. The second part of the
project&lt;br/&gt;consists of two areas that are less tightly related to the
PI's&lt;br/&gt;past research, namely the construction of inner
models,&lt;br/&gt;iterability and applications in the descriptive set
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of set theory is the analysis of
methods which arise&lt;br/&gt;in mathematics. The methods that are widely
accepted by the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical world have been formalized into so-
called&lt;br/&gt;Zermelo-Fraenkel system of axioms (briefly ZFC). However,
it&lt;br/&gt;turns out that we more and more often encouter questions
whose&lt;br/&gt;solutions require more than mere ZFC. Set theory provides us
with&lt;br/&gt;tools for recognizing such problems and approaches which
enable&lt;br/&gt;us to determine which methods to use. More precisely, set
theory&lt;br/&gt;provides us with a general method for determining the
complexity&lt;br/&gt;of various problems quantitatively. The scale used here is
the&lt;br/&gt;hierarchy of the large cardinal axioms. Extender models play
a&lt;br/&gt;crucial role here -- there are the actual technical means
which&lt;br/&gt;enables us to establish the connection between various
concrete&lt;br/&gt;problems from mathematics and large cardinal
axioms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on various aspects of
the inner&lt;br/&gt;model theory and can be divided into two areas. The first
area&lt;br/&gt;puts emphasis on the determining the internal structure
of&lt;br/&gt;extender models, fine structure theory and
infinitary&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics. The PI has done extensive research here,
making&lt;br/&gt;substantial contributions to the existing results.
Extender&lt;br/&gt;models are generalizations of Goedel's constructible
universe&lt;br/&gt;which admit a very complex structure of large
cardinal&lt;br/&gt;axioms. The key element behind the inner model theory
is&lt;br/&gt;iterability -- a method which enables us to iterate
countable&lt;br/&gt;structures that are elementarily embeddable into initial
segments&lt;br/&gt;of these models. Granting iterability, the author and
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators were able to develop a fine structure theory
of&lt;br/&gt;these models, which is a means enabling to investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;internal structure and combinatorics (Jensen's principles)
of&lt;br/&gt;these models abstractly, without any direct reference
to&lt;br/&gt;iterability. The aim of this project is to extend the
existing&lt;br/&gt;methods in a manner that would yield the complete description
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial properties of extender models. The open
problems&lt;br/&gt;are related mainly to cardinal transfer theorems and
stationary&lt;br/&gt;reflection. This part of the project includes also
direct&lt;br/&gt;applications of the inner model theory in determining
the&lt;br/&gt;consistency strength of various principles from
infinitary&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics. The focus here is on improving the PI's
results on&lt;br/&gt;Jensen's guessing principle. The second part of the
project&lt;br/&gt;consists of two areas that are less tightly related to the
PI's&lt;br/&gt;past research, namely the construction of inner
models,&lt;br/&gt;iterability and applications in the descriptive set
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of set theory is the analysis of
methods which arise&lt;br/&gt;in mathematics. The methods that are widely
accepted by the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical world have been formalized into so-
called&lt;br/&gt;Zermelo-Fraenkel system of axioms (briefly ZFC). However,
it&lt;br/&gt;turns out that we more and more often encouter questions
whose&lt;br/&gt;solutions require more than mere ZFC. Set theory provides us
with&lt;br/&gt;tools for recognizing such problems and approaches which
enable&lt;br/&gt;us to determine which methods to use. More precisely, set
theory&lt;br/&gt;provides us with a general method for determining the
complexity&lt;br/&gt;of various problems quantitatively. The scale used here is
the&lt;br/&gt;hierarchy of the large cardinal axioms. Extender models play
a&lt;br/&gt;crucial role here -- there are the actual technical means
which&lt;br/&gt;enables us to establish the connection between various
concrete&lt;br/&gt;problems from mathematics and large cardinal
axioms.&lt;br/&gt;