* 0204127
* Lunar Laser Ranging at the University of Texas at Austin
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2008
* Peter Shelus, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 05/31/2008
* USD 598,055.00

AST-0204127&lt;br/&gt;Shelus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lunar Laser Ranging (LLR)
experiment accurately measures the round-trip travel time for a &lt;br/&gt;laser
pulse that is emitted from an observing station on the Earth and returns after
bouncing off &lt;br/&gt;of a retroreflector array on the surface of the Moon.
Such observations have been made at &lt;br/&gt;McDonald Observatory for more
than 30 years. The data provide for varied, multi-disciplinary &lt;br/&gt;and
inter-disciplinary science results in areas of solid Earth sciences, geodesy and
geodynamics, &lt;br/&gt;solar system ephemerides, terrestrial and celestial
reference frames, lunar physics, general &lt;br/&gt;relativity and gravitational
physics. Standing alone or combined with data from other observing
&lt;br/&gt;techniques, LLR expands the understanding of the precession of the
Earth.s spin axis, the lunar &lt;br/&gt;nutation, Earth orientatation, the
Earth.s obliquity to the ecliptic, the intersection of the celestial
&lt;br/&gt;equator and the ecliptic, lunar and solar solid body tides, lunar
tidal deceleration, lunar physical &lt;br/&gt;and free librations, the structure
of the moon and energy dissipation in the lunar interior. LLR
&lt;br/&gt;provides input into lunar surface cartography and surveying and helps
determine Earth station &lt;br/&gt;and lunar surface retroreflector locations
and motions, mass of the Earth-Moon system, lunar and &lt;br/&gt;terrestrial
gravity harmonics and Love numbers, relativistic geodesic precession, and the
&lt;br/&gt;equivalence principle of general relativity. Due to the passive
nature of the reflectors and the &lt;br/&gt;improvement of observing equipment
and data analysis capabilities with time, LLR data will &lt;br/&gt;continue to
provide for improved results. Gains are steady and, as the data base expands, we
are &lt;br/&gt;striving to learn even more by applying more clever observation
strategies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Under this proposal, we continue the LLR
observational effort at the McDonald Laser Ranging &lt;br/&gt;Station (MLRS).
With routine single-person operation and a 24 hour/day, 7 day/week schedule,
&lt;br/&gt;lunar coverage will be substantial in the years to come, as we share
the use of the MLRS with &lt;br/&gt;artificial satellite laser ranging (SLR)
efforts. We are cooperating with other observing efforts &lt;br/&gt;around the
world, especially the French LLR/SLR station in the south of France. In addition
to &lt;br/&gt;the observations, an analysis effort with world-wide
communication, cooperation, and &lt;br/&gt;coordination will be ongoing here at
the University of Texas at Austin. We cooperate with &lt;br/&gt;analysis efforts
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the
&lt;br/&gt;Paris Observatory, and the BKG in Frankfurt and Munich. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Also, the University of Texas McDonald Observatory, since the
inception of the International &lt;br/&gt;Laser Ranging Service (ILRS) in 1998,
houses the ILRS LLR Operations and Analysis Center. &lt;br/&gt;The small size of
the LLR observing network, and the relatively small number of LLR analysis
&lt;br/&gt;centers, dictate the unique nature and operational procedures of this
LLR Operations/Analysis &lt;br/&gt;Center. The responsibility of the LLR
Operations Center has evolved to be one that assures the &lt;br/&gt;smooth flow
of data through the LLR network, in a form and format that is useful for
obtaining &lt;br/&gt;scientific results. The center also coordinates the
observations and their scheduling in a manner &lt;br/&gt;to maximum the
scientific gains. Predicts are coordinated on-site at each LLR station and the
&lt;br/&gt;data are automatically transferred from all observing sites to the
ILRS data centers. LLR data &lt;br/&gt;analysts can secure their data directly
from the data centers as needed. Feed-back from these &lt;br/&gt;analysts often
goes directly back to the individual observing stations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Under the auspices of this National Science Foundation Grant, we are
looking forward to &lt;br/&gt;additional years of successful LLR observation and
analysis, resulting in the steady and rapid expansion of scientific results.
&lt;br/&gt;***