* 0204100
* Poisson geometry, riemannian geometry, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2008
* Alan Weinstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 640,594.00

DMS-0204100 Alan Weinstein

Recently, for reasons arising from mathematical physics (string and membrane
theory) as well as from deformation theory, increased attention is being paid to
nonassociative algebraic structures and, along with them, bracket operations
which do not satisfy the Jacobi identity. Weinstein applies his previously
developed theory of Courant algebroids and Dirac structures to investigate
geometric models for some of these nonassociative structures, generalizing
Poisson structures. A second part of the research concerns convexity theorems
for momentum mappings of hamiltonian symmetry groups and related questions about
the linearization of proper Lie groupoids. The search for the ``optimal''
convexity theorem in Poisson geometry is related to the problem of describing
the local structure of proper groupoids in terms of group actions. The analysis
of proper groupoids leads in turn to the problem of averaging families of
submanifolds in riemannian geometry. Previous results on this problem are being
extended and improved, with one goal being an understanding of the metric
geometry of infinite dimensional spaces of unparametrized submanifolds. Finally,
applications to mechanics are be investigated: groupoids applied to discretized
lagrangian systems, and generalized Poisson structures applied to nonholonomic
systems.

Weinstein's research concerns symmetry in geometry, with applications to
physics. Traditionally, symmetry has been described mathematically in terms of
the operation of groups, and the corresponding infinitesimal operation of Lie
algebras. Recently, for reasons arising from mathematical physics (string and
membrane theory) as well as from deformation theory in mathematics, increased
attention is being paid to more general notions of symmetry, involving algebraic
structures lacking the associativity of a group operation and, along with them,
bracket operations which do not satisfy the Jacobi identity essential to the
notion of Lie algebra. The study of these (and more traditional) symmetries also
involves the use of ``groupoids,'' where different groups are operating on
different parts of a space with symmetry. Weinstein's study of these symmetries
involves a combination of algebra and differential geometry, as well as some
very concrete geometric questions, a simple form of which is ``what is the
average of two nearby unparametrized curves in space?'' This question is easy to
pose and may have applications in computer graphics, but it is surprisingly
difficult to solve. Finally, Weinstein is using groupoids in the analysis of
discrete lagrangian systems used to create numerical algorithms.