* 0204267
* ITWF: The Research Component of a Model Information Technology (IT) College
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Mary Good, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Caroline E. Wardle
* 06/30/2005
* USD 244,984.00

EIA-0204267 Good, Mary L., Mitchell, William M. U. Arkansas, Little Rock

Title: The Research Component of a Model IT College

This ITWF award provides support to the University of Arkansas, Little Rock to
use the tools of IT to serve the educational enterprise in the same way that
these tools support business enterprises. In 1999 the state of Arkansas
recognized the shortage of IT workers and created the College of Information
Science and Systems Engineering, called the Cyber-college of Arkansas, at the
University of Arkansas at Little Rock. The Cyber-college will design a database
that will house data on every facet of the college's recruitment and first-year
student experience across four computer-based four-year degree programs. The
database will:

provide a test-bed for conclusions derived from demographic and pedagogic
research from other studies.

be mined for new associations and clusters of experience and behavior patterns
that will suggest research in new directions.

provide data on the IT students of Arkansas and on the efficacy of the various
strategies that the Cyber-college has implement to achieve its mission.

prototype recruitment and retention databases that could be installed in other
IT college and thereby contribute an important tool to further the understanding
of the efforts of IT colleges to serve underrepresented population groups.

Once built, this dynamic data model will be sustained within the Cyber-college
and the data that it collects and the analysis that it engenders will provide
insight to the longitudinal problem of maintaining the supply of college-trained
professionals in the IT workforce nationally.

