* 0204601
* Cohomological Approach to Rigidity in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Nicolas Monod, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 76,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to establish rigidity and finiteness results
for&lt;br/&gt;infinite groups, both in geometric and dynamical contexts. In
an&lt;br/&gt;attempt to broaden the scope of rigidity as initiated by
Mostow,&lt;br/&gt;Margulis, Zimmer and others, we aim at results for very
general&lt;br/&gt;(finitely generated) groups, notably fundamental groups
arising&lt;br/&gt;in geometry. The proposed methods are however also new
and&lt;br/&gt;relevant for the more classical study of arithmetic
and&lt;br/&gt;S-arithmetic groups. There are three aspects to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;The first is to construct cohomological invariants
characterizing&lt;br/&gt;various geometric situations; a typical example is
the&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of negative curvature in terms of
bounded&lt;br/&gt;cohomology that we propose with Shalom. The second step is
to&lt;br/&gt;develop a suitable theory to handle these invariants in
an&lt;br/&gt;efficient way, notably by using tools from ergodic theory.
Last,&lt;br/&gt;one has to apply this to concrete situations. We focus
in&lt;br/&gt;particular on superrigidity and cocycle superrigidity
for&lt;br/&gt;non-linear groups and on orbit equivalence of ergodic
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last forty years have witnessed the birth and
remarkable&lt;br/&gt;development of what is now called ''rigidity theory''. The
first&lt;br/&gt;discovery in that field was this: Even though a flat space
(which&lt;br/&gt;is the kind of space one thought we live in, from the
ancient&lt;br/&gt;Greeks to Newton) can be deformed in many ways, some
curved&lt;br/&gt;spaces (whose relevance to our world has been discovered
by&lt;br/&gt;Einstein) are in a sense rigid. Later came a discovery
regarded&lt;br/&gt;as yet much more fundamental: The most symmetric geometric
spaces&lt;br/&gt;turn out to be in fact arithmetic objects. The project
under&lt;br/&gt;consideration here is to broaden the scope this rigidity
theory&lt;br/&gt;to many more geometric spaces, and especially to deal
with&lt;br/&gt;situations in which the geometry cannot be reduced
to&lt;br/&gt;arithmetics. Actually, we propose new methods that stand out
by&lt;br/&gt;their abstract nature and allow us to tackle situations which
do&lt;br/&gt;not even stem from geometry, but rather regard the study
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. (Dynamics is the theory of systems that evolve
in&lt;br/&gt;time, typically ocean currents or galaxies, and may have
chaotic&lt;br/&gt;behaviours.) Our project proposes new methods for obtaining
more&lt;br/&gt;results both in this dynamical setting and in geometry, and
this&lt;br/&gt;in a unified way.&lt;br/&gt;