* 0204188
* Bound States, Singularities, and Supersymmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Mark Stern, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 186,999.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0204188.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
seek analytic realizations of "stringy"&lt;br/&gt;cohomology of singular
varieties with trivial canonical bundle. He will study&lt;br/&gt;the
implications of such analytic realizations (and their
generalizations)&lt;br/&gt;towards providing new explanations of gauge symmetry
enhancement mechanisms in&lt;br/&gt;string theory. In collaboration with S.
Sethi, the PI will continue his program&lt;br/&gt;to analyze the supersymmetric
matrix model quantum mechanics which has been &lt;br/&gt;conjectured to provide
a definition of M theory. Graduate student G. Firestone, &lt;br/&gt;will study
the L2 index theory for the nonFredholm Dirac operators whose
L2&lt;br/&gt;kernels give the ground states for this theory. Sethi and the PI
will examine&lt;br/&gt;methods for computing gravitational anomalies of field
theories arising from&lt;br/&gt;string theories on singular spaces. S. Paban, S.
Sethi, and the PI will examine&lt;br/&gt;the constraints imposed by
supersymmetry on deformations of the supersymmetry&lt;br/&gt;algebra associated
to an isolated five brane. The PI will investigate the&lt;br/&gt;extension of
Witten's spinor technique of proving the positive mass conjecture&lt;br/&gt; by
replacing the hypothesis of a smooth spin structure by the assumption of
a&lt;br/&gt; spin structure degenerating on a codimension 2
submanifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;M theory gives a potential framework for
providing a physical theory which&lt;br/&gt;incorporates both gravitation and
the quantum physics describing high energy&lt;br/&gt; particles. The precise
form of this theory is not yet fully developed. The &lt;br/&gt; measurable
consequences are even further from being fully worked out. This &lt;br/&gt;
project attempts to determine, for branches of this theory, fundamental
&lt;br/&gt; consequences, such as the number of particles of different types,
when these&lt;br/&gt; particles combine to make more complex matter, and the
size &lt;br/&gt; and shape of these particles and their
combinations.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing the physical consequences of M
and string theory,&lt;br/&gt;such computations can be used to check for
potential errors in the underlying &lt;br/&gt;hypotheses of M theory. This
project also seeks a better understanding of a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model for
the physical interactions between certain "particles"&lt;br/&gt; known as 5
branes, whose existence is predicted by M theory. &lt;br/&gt;