* 0204134
* Covalidation of Timing Faults in Hardware-Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Ian Harris, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2004
* USD 209,877.00

This project investigates the detection of functional errors caused by timing
faults in hardware-software systems. A hardware-software system can be defined
as one in which hardware and software must be designed together, and must
interact to properly implement system functionality. The widespread use of these
systems in cost-critical and life-critical applications motivates the need for a
systematic approach to verify functionality. The complexity of the verification
problem for large, heterogeneous hardware-software systems necessitates the
development of simulation-based covalidation approaches, which uniformly
validate hardware, software, and their interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware-software systems are typically composed of
several behaviors, or processes, which may be mapped to different hardware and
software components. The correctness of process interactions depends on the
synchronization between the executions of communicating processes. Correct
synchronization depends on the adherence of the system to numerous timing
relationships between inter-process communication events. Verifying these timing
relationships is central to the hardware-software covalidation problem, and is
the focus of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research effort
is to provide hardware-software system designers with a set of CAD tools that
partially automate the timing covalidation process. The CAD tools are being
developed to support a generic codesign/covalidation flow. At different
intermediate steps of the codesign process, cosimulation is performed using a
functional test sequence. Designers need the ability to evaluate the
completeness of an existing functional test sequence, and the ability to
automatically generate a functional test sequence. To support this codesign
flow, we explore the following specific research
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a design fault model to describe
design errors in hardware-software systems, specifically targeting errors in the
timing of inter-process communication events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a
fault simulation approach for the design fault model which evaluates the degree
to which a given test sequence detects all design
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop techniques for automatic test pattern
generation (ATPG) for a hardware-software description. The ATPG tool developed
must target the proposed design fault model in order to ensure the detection of
design errors.&lt;br/&gt;