* 0205875
* Properties of Low Mass Stars and Brown Dwarfs:    Single vs. Close Binary Environments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Paula Szkody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 272,438.00

AST 0205875&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Hawley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) has demonstrated that it is an unsurpassed resource
for finding low mass stars, brown dwarfs and close binaries such as cataclysmic
variables. This project will use the ongoing SDSS photometric and spectroscopic
data during the next 3 years to amass a large database on low mass stars, both
single and in close binaries. Additional follow-up data will be obtained.
Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the observations and
analysis of the data. An on-line database will be made available for scientists,
the public, and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Measurements of the
magnitudes, colors, spectral types, magnetic activity levels, rotation rates and
ages of the late type stars will be used to infer basic physical properties
(temperature, luminosity, mass and strength of the magnetic dynamo), which then
will be compared for objects at different evolutionary stages in both single and
close binary environments to assess the dependence of magnetic activity on
rotation rate, to discover and characterize close interacting binary systems
with lower mass secondaries than have previously been found, study the influence
of irradiation on the low mass secondaries in close binaries, to determine if
this strongly affects the outbursts in cataclysmic variables, and to determine
the space density and luminosity function of low mass single stars compared with
their counterparts in binary systems. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;