* 0205869
* SGER:Novel Disk Architecture for Extremely High Magnetic Storage Densities
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2002,02/29/2004
* Yip-Wah Chung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,143.00

SGER: NOVEL DISK ARCHITECTURE &lt;br/&gt;FOR EXTREMELY HIGH MAGNETIC STORAGE
DENSITIES&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey L. Streator, Georgia Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Yip-Wah Chung, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the demand
for ever-increasing density of information storage, new recording technologies
must be developed. For example, a stated goal of the National Storage Industry
Consortium is to achieve a storage density of 1 terabyte per square inch (1
Tb/in2) by 2005. In this vein, researchers at Georgia Tech and Northwestern
University propose a collaborative effort to investigate the viability of a new
magnetic domain architecture for achieving ultrahigh recording densities. The
novel architecture consists of a patterned perpendicular recording media with
discrete, electrically insulated magnetic domains that are slightly recessed
below the disk surface. The discrete nature of the domains prevents the thermal
instabilities associated with continuous media and the superparamagnetic limit.
Having the domains slightly recessed 1 to 2 nanometers--as opposed to protruding
10-12 nanometers as with conventional patterned media concepts--is expected to
provide much better flying characteristics through reduction of spacing
modulation. In addition, by having the domains electrically insulated, potential
corrosion problems, which become increasingly likely with decreasing overcoat
thickness, are virtually eliminated. Fabrication of the patterned media will be
accomplished in two ways: (1) via nanosphere lithography and (2) via a focused
ion beam (FIB) technique. The nanosphere lithography will employ an array of
monodispersed nanospheres as a lithographic mask, while the FIB method will
involve direct high-resolution mask-less etching. Characterization and
evaluation in the proposed study will include topographical measurements,
flyability studies and corrosion monitoring. In addition, the investigation will
involve numerical simulation of slider flight as well as fabrication process
modeling. Execution of this research plan will involve close collaboration
between the two research groups. If successful, the study will provide a
blueprint for developing a cost-effective and robust means of meeting the high-
density storage demands of the information storage
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;