* 0205841
* U. S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Foraging and Processionary Behavior of Phelypera Distigma (Coleoptera:Curculionidae)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Terrence Fitzgerald, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2005
* USD 8,370.00

0205841&lt;br/&gt;Fitzgerald&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support Dr. Terrence Fitzgerald of SUNY at Cortland, in a research collaboration
with Dr. Alfonso Rubio Pescador of the Universidad de Colima in Tecoman, Mexico.
The researchers intend to describe and analyze the trail-based foraging system
of the larva of Phelypera distigma, a beetle larva. Studies of social
caterpillars conducted over the last two decades have shown that the
caterpillars of some moths and butterflies use pheromones to define the limits
of their foraging arenas and to facilitate en masse movements between resting
and feeding sites. The communication systems allow successful foragers to direct
siblings to food finds and they resemble the recruitment systems of ants and
termites. Compared to the extensive knowledge of pheromone-based communication
in other insects, very little is known of the extent to which caterpillars use
pheromones to facilitate group living and cooperative foraging. The research
proposed here will be the first study of trial marking and processionary
behavior in these communal beetle larva.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators
will bring complementary skills to the project. The Mexican counterpart
scientist has many years of field experience in the tropics and knowledge of the
biology and ecology of tropical insects, particularly insect larvae. The US
investigator brings to the project a broad background in the study of sociality
in caterpillars and of the methods needed to study and analyze their
communication systems. In addition, an undergraduate student will be involved in
the research. The study will lead to a better understanding of the similarities
between foraging systems of different insects and provide perspective on the
role of ecological factors in the evolution of trail-based communicative
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;