* 0205789
* Collaborative Research:  Fundamental Properties of Local Subdwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Darren DePoy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2005
* USD 126,917.00

AST 0205789&lt;br/&gt;Terndrup&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many outstanding issues
concerning the formation and evolution of the Milky Way require
improved&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the kinematics and chemical enrichment patterns
of local metal-poor subdwarfs in the&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy's halo and thick disk, and
how these compare to globular cluster stars. Even after several
recent&lt;br/&gt;efforts, current samples do not adequately cover the range of
metallicities and kinematics seen in globular&lt;br/&gt;clusters, while
observations of local metal-poor giants give tantalizing evidence of significant
differences&lt;br/&gt;between local halo stars and those in globular clusters of
the same metallicity.&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the observational
situation by obtaining accurate and self-consistent&lt;br/&gt;measures of
temperature, reddening, and composition for a critically selected sample of
approximately&lt;br/&gt;150 subdwarfs identified in recent surveys for metal-
poor stars. There will also be new theoretical efforts&lt;br/&gt;to explore the
dependence of the main-sequence luminosity on detailed stellar chemical
composition and&lt;br/&gt;on often-neglected physics such as helium diffusion
and rotation. This project will also yield valuable&lt;br/&gt;information on the
kinematics and star formation history of the halo and the metal-poor tail of the
thick&lt;br/&gt;disk, identify samples of subdwarfs that are well matched in
abundance patterns and kinematics to&lt;br/&gt;globular cluster stars, and
improve the temperature and abundance scales of globular cluster
main&lt;br/&gt;sequences for comparison to spectroscopic determinations on the
giant branch. There will also be a&lt;br/&gt;systematic study of the relative
and absolute ages of globular clusters, with a focus on reducing the
errors&lt;br/&gt;in the theoretical plane.&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, this project
will enable the community to take full advantage of the future FAME
and&lt;br/&gt;SIM satellite missions, which will measure accurate parallaxes for
the subdwarfs in the sample and&lt;br/&gt;thereby yield the absolute calibration
of the main-sequence luminosity for globular clusters and hence&lt;br/&gt;their
distances. Current distance estimates are only good to 10 - 15%, resulting in
age errors of about&lt;br/&gt;30%, insufficient to reliably explore the age
spread in the globular cluster system or even set lower limits&lt;br/&gt;to the
age of the Universe by comparison with the predictions of stellar evolution
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;