* 0205644
* ITR: Human-centered Design of Context-aware Computing: Scalability, Usability and Privacy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* John Canny, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,312,000.00

When humans interact with each other and their environment, there are breakdowns
that naturally result due to the mismatch in their understanding of the current
situation. This is often exacerbated by computers because they only have a
minimal understanding of human dialogue and interaction. The breakdowns can be
smoothed out by making computers more aware of the physical and social contexts
they are a part of. This project seeks to investigate user-centered methods and
technologies to assist designers and developers in the design, prototyping, and
evaluation of real-world context-aware applications, focusing on issues that
have yet to be addressed, including usability, privacy, and scalability. This
work focuses on (1) exploring new user-centered methods and tools for designing,
prototyping, and evaluating context-aware applications, (2) understanding the
nature of privacy concerns with respect to context-aware systems and developing
mechanisms for addressing these concerns, and (3) providing an infrastructure to
help programmers to build these applications for a large number of users and
sensors. This work will be evaluated by developing two socially relevant
applications: (1) emergency response support for coordinating, communicating,
and allocating resources, and (2) an augmented wheelchair providing word
prediction for individuals with motor impairments&lt;br/&gt;