* 0205303
* ITR:  Building Practical Compilers Based on Adaptive Search
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2008
* Linda Torczon, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,612,000.00

The information age is built on software. Web browsers and servers, office
productivity tools, anti-lock brake systems, cellular telephones, and online
trading systems are all implemented in software. Most of that code is prepared
for execution using a compiler.

For four decades, compilers have applied a fixed sequence of transformations to
the code. The fact that different transformations, applied in different orders,
can produce different results has been known, but the techniques for picking
effective transformation sequences have not. The computational power available
with modern processors makes it possible to experimentally discover good
transformation orders.

This project will systematically explore the problems of choosing transformation
sequences. This five-year program will develop practical techniques for building
adaptive compilers - compilers that change their behavior in response to the
input program and the end-user's stated goals for optimization. This will
require experimentation, algorithm development, application of techniques from
machine learning, and basic software engineering.

This project will produce the tools, techniques, and insights needed to make
adaptive compilation both practical and productive. The resulting compilers will
give users greater control over the run-time characteristics of their programs
and will reduce the performance variability that plagues compiled code today.

