* 0205781
* An Integrated IT Approach for Teaching Undergraduates Spectroscopy and Photochemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 304,998.00

This project is using the twin themes of spectroscopy and photochemistry as a
conceptual basis for developing chemistry lectures and chemistry laboratories in
upper level undergraduate courses which are logical extensions of the materials
presented in the lower level courses. This intergrated approach aims to provide
students with a clearer connection between the concepts presented at different
stages in their undergraduate education in chemistry. The project is also
producing software modules which are "Spectroscopy Tutors" that aim to
facilitate the learning of spectroscopy (IR, UV-VIS, NMR) and assist in the
intergration of spectroscopy and photochemistry throughout the undergraduate
curriculum including undergraduate research. These visions are being achieved
through a collaboration with Professor Leonard Fine and students at Columbia
University. In addition, partnerships have been established with faculty at two
undergraduate institutions (Professor Tom Poon, Claremont Colleges and Professor
Raymond Dominey, University of Richmond) and a community college (Professor Ron
Rusay, Diablo State College). The project couples the undergraduate institutions
by establishing an undergraduate exchange program in which students from the
undergraduate institutions spend a summer at Columbia University under the
mentorship of the PI, extending and enriching research projects, which are
initiated in the academic year. The PI is also mentoring an undergraduate
selected from Columbia Unversity's Minority Affairs summer research program for
undergraduates. The PI is mentoring a postdoctoral associate who is involved in
all aspects of the project and in particular the intergration of research and
education of undergraduates. The postdctoral associate is assisting the PI in
the development of course materials, the development of IT tools for courses and
laboratories and in the development of course materials, the development of IT
tools for course and laboratories, and the development of the photochemical
experiments for the undergraduate laboratories and for undergraduate research.
The outcomes of the project will be disseminated through presentations at
professional meetings, publications in professional journals and an annual
workshop led by the partnering faculty. As part of the dissemination effort, the
Spectroscopy Tutors produced will be made available to undergraduates across the
nation via the world wide web. In addition, the PI is producing a web based
video course in which he teaches undergraduates spectroscopy and organic
photochemistry. As part of the course, modules are being developed to assist the
students in learning the fundamental principles of organic photochemistry. It is
anticipated that the course and laboratory materials, as well as IT modules
developed in the project, can also be profitably employed in the curriculum for
the non-SMET education of undergraduates. In collaboration with the Associate
Dean for Assessment at Columbia University, the PI is defining the desired
educational objectives for the students' experiences in the courses and
laboratories and IT modules. This assessment process aims to measure student
performance on course-specific tests and on the effectiveness of the
Spectroscopy Tutors in the enhancing of learning by students.