* 0205827
* High-Precision Computational Spectroscopy Of Fe-Peak Elements
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Anil Pradhan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 09/30/2007
* USD 255,162.00

AST 0205827 Pradhan

The spectra of iron and iron-peak elements are of fundamental interest in
astronomy. Although produced as the end-products of stellar life cycles in
supernovae, these elements trace the chemical and physical history of the
Universe even to high redshifts (z). Iron in particular is ubiquitous in most
astronomical sources: stars, active galactic nuclei (AGN), supernova remnants
(SNR's), and the interstellar and intergalactic media (ISM and IGM). Some of the
basic questions are: How accurately can we analyze the spectra and determine
abundances in various types of stars? Is the abundance of iron a `chronometer'
of the earliest epochs of stellar formation? Can the spectra of iron-peak
elements be used for spectroscopic calibration of supernovae as `standard
candles'? The spectra of iron-peak elements are complicated. A considerable
effort by the new generation of telescopes and instruments will be directed
towards their high-resolution spectroscopy. But high resolution in observations
demands high precision in theory. Spectra obtained with great effort and expense
remain inadequately analyzed owing to the absence or paucity of fundamental
atomic parameters. This is especially true of iron and iron-group elements.

However, large-scale computations with high precision are difficult and very
time consuming. In spite of the progress made in the past decade, the requisite
precision and quantity of the atomic parameters for iron-peak elements has not
been attained to enable sufficiently accurate numerical models. Much of the
progress in the recent past has been due to two major international projects in
atomic astrophysics - the Opacity Project and the Iron Project. While most of
the state-of-the-art theoretical tools were developed under these projects, the
actual computations are yet to be carried out and require further developments.

Dr. Anil Pradhan and colleagues at the Ohio State University will carry out a
comprehensive effort based on recent advances in relativistic calculations for
atomic processes for iron and iron-peak elements. These relate primarily to
electron impact excitation, photoionization, recombination, and radiative
transition probabilities. Dr. Pradhan's effort is aimed at some outstanding
problems that entail numerical spectroscopy of: (I) iron spectra from AGN and
strong Fe II emitting quasars, (II) Fe-peak elements (Cr, Mn, Fe, Zn) in the
IGM, (III) Fe-Co-Ni spectra in SNR's, (IV) Non-LTE monochromatic opacities for
stellar modeling and abundance determinations, (V) an exact treatment of
radiative transfer in Non-LTE models, using the new atomic data, for important
ions such as Fe I-IV and Ni II, and (VI) for studies of iron spectra in AGN, Fe
II/Mg II ratio vs. redshift, and Fe II/Ni II abundance anomalies in SNR's and
galaxies. Physical excitation mechanisms such as Lyman-alpha and UV fluorescence
will be studied. The targeted atomic species are in low-ionization states
observed mainly in the Optical and Near-IR from ground-based observatories. As
massive computational resources are an a priori requirement for this
undertaking, Dr. Pradhan has secured a large allocation of computation time at
the Ohio Supercomputer Center in Columbus, Ohio. ***



.