* 0205232
* ITR: Computational Tools for Multicomponent Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Qiang Du, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 2,900,000.00

This award is made under the Information Technology Research initiative and is
funded jointly by the Division of Materials Research and the Advanced
Computational Infrastructure Research Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research project involves two materials scientists, a
computer&lt;br/&gt;scientist, a mathematician, and two physicists from academia,
industry and a national laboratory. The project is a synergistic effort that
leverages the overlapping and complimentary expertise of the researchers in the
areas of scalable parallel scientific computing, first-principles and atomistic
calculations, computational thermodynamics, mesoscale microstructure evolution,
and macroscopic mechanical property modeling. The main objective of the proposal
is to develop a set of integrated computational tools to predict the
relationships among the chemical, microstructural, and mechanical properties of
multicomponent materials using technologically important aluminum-based alloys
as model materials. A prototype GRID-enabled software will be developed for
multicomponent materials design with efficient information exchange between
design stages. Each design stage will incorporate effective algorithms and
parallel computing schemes. Four computational components will be integrated,
these are: (1) first-principles calculations to determine thermodynamic
properties, lattice parameters, and kinetic data of unary, binary and ternary
compounds; (2) CALPHAD data optimization computation to extract thermodynamic
properties, lattice parameters, and kinetic data of multicomponent systems
combining results from first-principles calculations and experimental data; (3)
multicomponent phase-field modeling to produce microstructure; and (4) finite
element analysis to obtain the mechanical response from the simulated
microstructure. The research involves a parallel effort in information
technology with two main components: (1) advanced discretization and parallel
algorithms, and (2) a software architecture for distributed computing system.
The first component includes: (a) a coupling of spectral and finite element
approximations, (b) local adaptivity and multi-scale resolution, (c) high order
stable semi-implicit in time schemes, (d) parallelization through domain
decomposition, and (e) scalable sparse system solvers. The second component
involves computational GRID-enabled software for the overall design process;
this software architecture enables the use of geographically distributed high
performance parallel computing resources to reduce application turnaround time
while providing a flexible client-server interface that allows multiple design
cycles to proceed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be integrated
with education and training of graduate students in the broad area of
computational science and engineering through the participation of students and
the PIs in the "High Performance Computing Graduate Minor" offered through the
Institute of High Performance Computing at The Pennsylvania State University.
Existing programs at Penn State will be used to integrate undergraduates into
the project.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award is made under the Information
Technology Research initiative and is funded jointly by the Division of
Materials Research and the Advanced Computational Infrastructure Research
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project involves two
materials scientists, a computer&lt;br/&gt;scientist, a mathematician, and two
physicists from academia, industry and a national laboratory. The project is a
synergistic effort that leverages the overlapping and complimentary expertise of
the researchers in the areas of scalable parallel scientific computing, first-
principles and atomistic calculations, computational thermodynamics, mesoscale
microstructure evolution, and macroscopic mechanical property modeling. The main
objective of the proposal is to develop a set of integrated computational tools
to predict the relationships among the chemical, microstructural and mechanical
properties of multicomponent materials using technologically important aluminum-
based alloys as model materials. Prototype GRID-enabled software will be
developed for multicomponent materials design. Effective algorithms and parallel
computing schemes will be incorporated into the design. The GRID-enabled
software allows geographically distributed high performance parallel computing
resources to be harnessed bringing greater computational power to bear on a
given problem and enabling practical application of these computational tools.
The prototype software, with improved predictive power in multicomponent
materials design, may enable scientists to develop new materials with unique
properties and to tailor existing materials for better
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will be integrated with
education and training of graduate students in the broad area of computational
science and engineering through the participation of students and the PIs in the
"High Performance Computing Graduate Minor" offered through the Institute of
High Performance Computing at The Pennsylvania State University. Existing
programs at Penn State will be used to integrate undergraduates into the
project.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;