* 0205813
* RR Lyrae Stars of the Inner Halo and Thick Disk
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Horace Smith, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 111,246.00

AST 0205813&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RR Lyrae stars are among the
oldest stars in the Galaxy, and have long been recognized as&lt;br/&gt;important
probes of the processes by which the halo and thick disk formed. Nevertheless,
our&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the RR Lyrae population within several kiloparsecs of
the Sun remains very&lt;br/&gt;incomplete. Dr. Horace Smith at Michigan State
University will use observations obtained by the Robotic Optical Transient
Search Experiment (ROTSE) to identify and characterize RR Lyrae stars north of
declination -30 degrees. RR Lyrae stars of Bailey types ab and c will be
detected to a limiting magnitude of &lt;V&gt; = 15, corresponding to a distance
of about 8 kpc. This survey is expected to include about 5000 RR Lyrae stars.
Most of these variable stars will be newly discovered in this survey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ROTSE survey will enable Dr. Smith to investigate how
the density and properties of RR Lyrae stars change as a function of distance
from the galactic center and distance from the galactic plane.&lt;br/&gt;He will
test the hypothesis that field RR Lyrae reveal the presence of a dual halo: an
inner flattened system, with RR Lyrae stars that have the characteristics of
those in Oosterhoff type II globular clusters, and an outer, less flat, system
with RR Lyrae stars that have the characteristics of those in Oosterhoff type I
globular clusters. The RR Lyrae sample will also be used to make a new estimate
of the local RR Lyrae density and of the scale height of the RR Lyrae of the
thick disk. The ROTSE survey will make it possible to trace the distribution and
properties of RR Lyrae stars throughout the Galaxy, from the bulge, through the
solar vicinity, to the distant halo. It will also provide a database to be used
in selecting stars for follow-up spectroscopic studies. Dr. Smith will begin
this process with the determination of spectroscopic metal-abundances and radial
velocities for the hitherto often neglected RR Lyrae of Bailey type c. These
will be used to determine a statistical parallax solution and to study the
motions of RRc variables. The ROTSE survey will also systematically identify
multi-mode RR Lyrae stars in the solar vicinity, including double-mode stars and
Blazhko effect variables.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;