* 0205148
* Analysis and Control of Layered Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Oleg Emanouilov, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,708.00

0205148&lt;br/&gt;Hansen&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed
research is to analyze controllability and &lt;br/&gt;stabilization properties
of systems of partial differential equations (PDE's) &lt;br/&gt;that model
layered elastic media. Specific layered elastic systems we are
&lt;br/&gt;concerned with include constrained-layer damping models, laminated
&lt;br/&gt;plates, plates with surface-mounted and/or embedded actuators and
&lt;br/&gt;general multilayer plate theory. For a given layered structure,
generally &lt;br/&gt;there are many different PDE systems of varying complexity
that could be &lt;br/&gt;used to model the vibrations. Often the various PDE's
are connected &lt;br/&gt;through a perturbation, which may be singular. The
central concern will be &lt;br/&gt;to determine the dependence of stability and
controllability upon the &lt;br/&gt;perturbation parameters that connect the
possible models. This way model &lt;br/&gt;dependence, accuracy, and robustness
properties of control and feedback &lt;br/&gt;strategies can be tested. The plan
is to apply this type of analysis to &lt;br/&gt;practical control applications
such as optimal design for constrained-layer &lt;br/&gt;damping and the
stabilization of elastic structures using surface-mounted &lt;br/&gt;and
embedded piezoelectric actuators. Several theoretical challenges
&lt;br/&gt;present themselves in attempting to develop control methods that are
&lt;br/&gt;useful for multilayer plates. In particular, it is hoped to develop a
theory &lt;br/&gt;of Carleman multipliers that is applicable to boundary control
of layered &lt;br/&gt;systems. The objective is to obtain the sharpest possible
results regarding &lt;br/&gt;boundary control.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the modeling, control and stabilization of layered
elastic &lt;br/&gt;systems is becoming increasingly important due to the rapid
advances in &lt;br/&gt;material sciences, fabrication of composite materials,
and speed of &lt;br/&gt;processing. The models considered are motivated by
practical real-world &lt;br/&gt;applications involving composite layered
structures. These include the &lt;br/&gt;design of ship hulls and airplane
fuselage, sound-proofing in auto bodies &lt;br/&gt;and the design of sporting
goods such as skis and tennis rackets. Often, it &lt;br/&gt;is possible to
utilize a composite construction to achieve a far superior &lt;br/&gt;design
compared to what is possible with a single material. Developing a
&lt;br/&gt;theory for control and feedback of these structures is a challenging
&lt;br/&gt;problem due the complicated nature of the coupling between the
layers. &lt;br/&gt;On the other hand, for a model to be useful in practical
engineering &lt;br/&gt;applications, various crude approximations need to be
made to reduce the &lt;br/&gt;complexity. Thus, a large part of the goal is to
quantify the connection &lt;br/&gt;between an accurate, but complex mathematical
model and a simplified, &lt;br/&gt;but more useful engineering model. Specific
problems of practical &lt;br/&gt;interest which will be addressed include:
feedback control of vibrating &lt;br/&gt;structures using strategically placed
actuators, optimal design and stability &lt;br/&gt;analysis for damping in
layered and laminated composites.&lt;br/&gt;