* 0205423
* ITR:Information Theoretic Secure Hyper-Encryption and Protocols
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Yan Ding, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 956,000.00

The overall objective of this proposal is to study and implement provably
information theoretic secure methods for encryption and derive applications to
important security tasks such as message and user authentication and commitment
protocols. The great interest in quantum cryptography demonstrates the need for
absolutely secure encryption. The approach will use existing networks to
transmit large streams of encrypted data. The proposed implementation can be
widely deployed within the near future. Having a practical, provably secure
against any attack, method for preserving secrecy of messages is of great
importance for protection of personal privacy and commercial correspondence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years a new paradigm for encryption, one that
does not depend on as yet unproven computational intractability results, was
proposed. The customary assumption that the would be code-breaker is
computationally bounded,is replaced by an assumption that he is storage space
bounded. The Sender and Receiver share a small private key and employ an
unending intense stream of random bits readable by them and possibly by
adversaries. The bandwidth and duration of the bit stream renders the permanent
storage of a comparable number of bits by the adversary economically infeasible.
Methods for generating and broadcasting or transmitting the bit stream, and the
viability of the storage bound assumption, will be studied and implemented. In
recent years, strong results concerning the information theoretic everlasting
secrecy of a practical encryption algorithm (Hyper-Encryption) in the bounded
storage model were proved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will comprise four
interleaving lines of work. &lt;br/&gt;1. System design: Satellite, web page,
and fiber optics based systems for the distribution of the random bit streams
will be specified and analyzed in consultation with experts in these
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Protocols and applications: Innovation
and development of Hyper-Encryption based protocols for e-commerce and network
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Web page hopping based Hyper-Encryption:
Detailed development of a complete Hyper-Encryption system employing random walk
over pages of the World Wide Web as a pragmatic source of randomness and
evaluation of its viability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Theoretical foundations:
Improving the Hyper-Encryption algorithm. Employing randomness extraction
methods to enhance the safety of the WWW based
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projected achievements: &lt;br/&gt;A usable
detailed system for provably secure communications and protocols based on Hyper-
Encryptions. Complete theoretical foundation for Hyper-Encryption and its
applications.