* 0205186
* Statistics of Electromagnetic Propagation and Localization
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2002,10/31/2006
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2006
* USD 335,000.00

This individual investigator award will support a project with the objective of
using microwave and optical measurements to study the changing character of both
static and dynamic aspects of electromagnetic transport in the transition from
diffusive propagation to localization. By using a wide variety of samples,
measurement techniques, and methodologies, it is expected that a description of
wave propagation will be developed that can deal effectively with the complexity
of the Anderson localization transition, which is the touchstone of wave
transport in disordered systems. A new statistical approach will be pursued, in
which the statistics of transport in a single sample, rather than in an ensemble
or random samples, will be studied. The statistical approaches that will be
developed are expected to further our understanding of a full range of
fundamental and applied problems including: electronic mesoscopic physics,
lasing in random media, propagation in photonic band gap materials, liquid
crystals, and structured thin films, multiantenna cellular communication,
medical imaging, atmospheric communication and sensing. The success of this work
will strengthen the nascent CUNY Photonic Center, established to strengthen the
technological base of the New York City metropolitan area and to serve as a
magnet for students and researchers from our immediate area and around the
world. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in this research will
receive world-class training in skills and ideas that will be of use to their
future academic or technological careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual
investigator award will support a project with the objective of using microwave
and optical measurements to chart the changing character of static and dynamic
aspects of electromagnetic transport in the transition from diffusive
propagation to strong trapping of radiation. By using a wide variety of samples,
measurement techniques, and methodologies, it is expected that a description of
wave propagation will be developed that can deal effectively with the complexity
of wave transport in random media. The research will further our understanding
of such fundamental issues as electronic conduction, lasing in disordered media,
and wave propagation in photonic materials, liquid crystals, and fabricated thin
films. In addition, the research will have an impact on applied problems
including bandwidth enhancement for cellular communication, medical imaging, and
atmospheric communication and sensing. The success of this work will strengthen
the nascent CUNY Photonic Center, established to strengthen the technological
base of the New York City metropolitan area and to serve as a magnet for
students and researchers from our immediate area and around the world. The
graduate and undergraduate students involved in this research will receive
world-class training in skills and ideas that will be of use to academic or
technological careers.&lt;br/&gt;