* 0205785
* Galaxy Evolution Studies with Metal-deficient Blue Compact Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2008
* Trinh Thuan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2008
* USD 81,282.00

AST 0205785&lt;br/&gt;Thuan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy formation is one of the
most fundamental problems in astrophysics. Most high-z
objects&lt;br/&gt;observed thus far are found to be rich in heavy elements, thus
not qualifying as bona fide primeval&lt;br/&gt;galaxies. An alternative approach
is to search among nearby galaxies that may be actively forming&lt;br/&gt;stars
for the first time at the present epoch. The best candidates for such a search
are extremely metalpoor blue compact dwarfs (BCDs). They constitute excellent
laboratories for pursuing the following cosmological problems. The standard hot
big bang model of nucleosynthesis (SBBN) is one of the key quantitative tests of
big bang cosmology. The primordial abundance Yp of 4He, together with that of
Deuterium, is crucial for checking the consistency of SBBN. The relative
insensitivity of 4He production to the baryonic matter density means that Yp
needs to be determined to a precision of better than 1%. Dr. Trinh Thuan, at the
University of Virginia, will evaluate systematic effects and correct Yp for them
to attain that precision. He will search for more extremely metal-deficient BCDs
in the newly released Sloan Digital Sky Survey spectral data base to improve the
determination of Yp. The study of the BCD stellar populations will allow them to
understand the properties of massive stellar populations in very low metallicity
environments, like those prevailing in the era of galaxy formation. Moreover,
Cold Dark Matter models predict that low-mass dwarf galaxies could still be
forming at the present epoch because they originate from density fluctuations
considerably smaller than those giving rise to the giant ones. Thus establishing
the existence of young dwarf galaxies in the local universe will put strong
constraints on the primordial density fluctuation spectrum. Dr. Thuan will apply
age-dating techniques which he has developed and refined to a sample of very
metal-deficient BCDs. There is a dichotomy in the way star formation proceeds in
BCDs. In some, star formation occurs in a "passive" low-level diffuse fashion,
with a low extinction. In others, "active" star formation occurs at a high level
in Super Star Clusters, mixed with dense gas and a large amount of dust. Dr.
Thuan will study the physical parameters which&lt;br/&gt;govern that dichotomy.
Dr. Thuan will also study how the metallicity of the neutral gas compare with
that of the ionized gas. Is the metallicity of the H ii region higher because of
self-enrichment? Which constraints can be put on the time scale for the mixing
of newly formed heavy elements in the H ii region with the HI gas? If the
metallicity of the HI gas is very low, that would put constraints on the amount
of metal pre-enrichment by the hypothetical Population III stars during the
early pregalactic epoch. Such studies will shed new light on the study of
abundances in high-redshift damped Lyman-alpha systems. Finally, Dr. Thuan will
use these models to study correlations of the efficiency of mass exchange
between the galaxy and its environment with global properties of BCDs such as
their sizes, luminosities, metallicities, star formation rates, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;