* 0205324
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  Image-Based Rendering in Forensic Reconstruction and Historical Preservation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* David Luebke, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 270,736.00

Valuable information about the world around us is being lost. Every day we lose
information of both current and historical significance, simply because it is
too difficult to capture 3D models of our environment. Today, such models are
primarily created by hand, making measurements with tape measures and entering
the results manually. Even after models are constructed, we do not know the best
ways to visualize them effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes
to design and develop an end-to-end solution to the problem of documentation,
dissemination, and display of real-world environments. To focus the research,
two driving problems are targeted: forensic science and education. This research
brings together an interdisciplinary team including the law enforcement
community, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology. Additionally, one of our team members, from the New Orleans Museum of
Art, is directing a major exhibition in which we propose to include a virtual
environment of Monticello, President Jefferson's home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
will tackle the problems of acquiring, processing, representing, rendering and
display of real- world data, focusing on the two target applications. Our goal
is to design and build a complete end-to-end prototype system. The work
includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition. We will mount an accurate
rangefinder on a motorized cart and tackle the problem of capturing as complete
a model as possible. This requires accurate tracking and a solution to the next
best view problem in a practical sense, including resolution, reflectance, and
importance of the surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;Processing. A very difficult problem is
the registration of color with depth data, and of scans from multiple locations.
We will develop algorithms to robustly register the data, and filter to reduce
outliers and noise.&lt;br/&gt;Representation. We will develop algorithms to
process the massive amounts of data (100 MB per scan, tens of scans per room)
into both efficient geometric and image-based representations. We will compare
and contrast the representations in terms of quality and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;Rendering. We will develop hierarchical and out-of-core
algorithms to render the image- based and geometric models at interactive rates,
and research perceptually driven rendering techniques to maximize rendering
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;Display. This is perhaps the most difficult part of the
problem because it involves the way humans perceive the environment. We will
develop a hybrid projector/head-mounted-display system to provide stereo views
to multiple viewers in a life-sized walking environment. The goal is to give the
participants a sense of presence, of being in Mr. Jefferson's
house.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;