* 0205288
* ITR:  Scalable Algorithms Enabled by Problem Structure and Applications to Computer Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2008
* Igor Markov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,500,000.00

This research involves the discovery and development of scalable algorithms for
solving hard computational problems that routinely arise in engineering. In
particular, the investigators observe that man-made artifacts have innate
structures that make those artifacts tractable for design, synthesis, and
verification independent of their absolute size. Artifacts such as the Internet,
integrated circuit chips, and large distributed software systems, continue to
increase in size at a breath-taking pace. Algorithms that deal with such
artifacts (e.g., searching the Internet, synthesizing integrated circuits, or
verifying the correctness of software systems) but which are oblivious to their
inherent structure and regularity are unable to cope with their ever-increasing
complexity. Scalable algorithms, on the other hand, recognize, and take
advantage of, the structure and regularity of the objects they manipulate in
order to bring computational complexity down. The study and development of
scalable algorithms, thus, is essential for maintaining progress in our fast-
changing technological world.&lt;br/&gt;Despite the fact that many of the
computational tasks employed in designing, synthesizing, and verifying human-
engineered objects are worst-case NP-hard, such objects continue to increase in
complexity and are routinely made and deployed. Well-known examples range from
aircraft crew scheduling to microprocessor verification and the routing of
field-programmable gate arrays, yet the sheer complexity of problem instances
often defies modern solution methods. Reuse of intellectual property does not
always imply reductions of computational problem instances to smaller ones, and
even when such reductions are applied they may lead to sub-optimality's. The
ability to solve large instances of hard problems is critical to the design of
leading-edge computer hardware, and instance size will increase rapidly with
advances in silicon lithography (EUV, X-ray, electron beam, etc.), nano-
manufacturing (molecular electronics) and integration complexity (system-on-a-
chip). Therefore, empirical improvements in solving mainstream NP-complete
problems are critical to sustained increase in sophistication of Information
Technologies. This project aims at significantly extending the performance
envelope of practical algorithms in order to handle very large hard problem
instances through intelligent utilization of problem structure. The
investigators are pursuing this goal through generic and fundamental results
with applicability beyond currently popular worst-case bounds that are at
variance with empirically observed performance.&lt;br/&gt;