* 0205143
* Bar Strength and the Structure of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Ronald Buta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2006
* USD 227,295.00

AST 0205143&lt;br/&gt;Buta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of Dr.
Ronald Buta's project is to use a new, direct technique for quantifying the
strengths of bars in disk galaxies, and to derive the distribution of bar
strengths in order to evaluate various scenarios for the origin of bars. The
technique involves using near-infrared images to infer the gravitational
potentials of galaxies, and then from these potentials estimating the actual
torque due to the bar. The maximum value of the ratio of the tangential force to
the mean radial force (called the relative bar torque parameter Qb) provides a
single number that can characterize the bar strength of a whole galaxy. It is
the most promising, direct technique for quantifying bar strength, and should
supercede a host of other indirect methods that have been used in the past. Dr.
Buta will refine the technique to improve its accuracy. A second objective of
this project is to examine correlations between bar strength and other
properties of galaxies, such as the shapes of bar dust lanes, chemical abundance
gradients, the shapes and orientations of rings, the distribution of star
formation, global star formation rates, nuclear activity, and bar ellipticity.
These correlations are important because they allow us to understand how bars
affect galaxy structure once they have formed. Secular evolution of structure is
of critical importance in barred galaxies, and the role of bar strength on that
evolution can be evaluated by studying these
correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring the distribution of bar strengths
in galaxies is a critical piece of information that has&lt;br/&gt;not yet been
used to constrain bar formation models. The origin of bars is a fundamental
problem&lt;br/&gt;in astronomy. Through their nonaxisymmetric potentials, bars
are thought to generate or at least&lt;br/&gt;influence the development of a
host of phenomena including circumnuclear starbursts, bulge growth, global
spiral structure, secondary bars, lenses, noncircular motions, and inner and
outer rings. Bars are so pervasive, being found in at least 70% of disk
galaxies, that they are clearly important to the structure and evolution of
galaxies. Models can predict the distribution of expected Qb values for a given
bar-formation scenario.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;