* 0205039
* International Research Fellowship Program:  The Technology of Cosmetics Fabrication in Middle Kingdom Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Christopher Deeb, Deeb                    Chris          W
* Fellowship
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2004
* USD 88,069.00

0205039 Deeb

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Christopher
Deeb to work with Dr. Jacques Castaing at the Centre de Recherche et de
Restauration des Musees de France (C2RMF - the Scientific Laboratory at the
Louvre Museum) in Paris, France.

This project involves the examination of the methods by which the ancient
Egyptians processed raw mineral powders into cosmetics. Artifact powders from
Egyptian tombs dating between 2000-1200 BC have previously been studied to
determine their mineral composition. These powders are composed of a suite of
naturally occurring materials - galena (PbS) and cerussite (PbCO3) - and
materials which are not naturally occurring - laurionite (PbOHCl) and phosgenite
(Pb2CL2CO3). By consultation with Greco-Roman texts, it is presumed that the
latter compounds are the result of wet chemistry. The Ancient Egyptians then
performed a certain degree of mechanical grinding and annealing to form the
final product. The relationship between the mined and chemically derived raw
materials, mechanical processing, and annealing temperature and time will be
determined and compared to the actual artifact powders. By this method the Pis
will reveal the processing conditions the Egyptians used to make these powders
and also shed light on the processing available at that time. Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) will be the main tool used, resulting in a precise
definition of the processing conditions used by the Ancient Egyptians being the
end result.

Dr. Castaing has a long history of international collaborations in a wide array
of materials science related projects.