* 0205752
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fine-Scale Pelagic Predator-Prey Interactions: Hawaiian Spinner Dolphins and the Mesopelagic Boundary Community
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Whitlow Au, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 9,065.00

"Fine-scale pelagic predator-prey interactions:&lt;br/&gt;Hawaiian spinner
dolphins and the mesopelagic boundary"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whitlow W. L.
Au&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Student: Kelly J. Benoit-Bird&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spinner
dolphins in Hawaii feed at night on small fish, shrimp, and squid. Their prey is
very deep during the day but migrates close to the surface and near the
coastline every night. Spinner dolphins follow the movements of their prey. They
move inshore and offshore along with their prey's migration and they dive to the
depths at which their prey is most abundant. Spinner dolphins also forage
specifically on high-density prey patches, small areas that have more prey than
those around them do. Other studies of pelagic predators, however, have not
shown this type of overlap with prey. Data will be collected on both spinner
dolphin predators and their prey simultaneously using scanning sonar, a device
that will allow the location and abundance of predator and prey to be plotted in
three-dimensions. Foraging dolphins will be tracked from a boat with the
scanning sonar and the density and geometry of prey patches will be measured.
Changes in these characteristics will be observed as the dolphins forage to
observe how they affect the behavior of their prey. Dolphins probably use
echolocation, a natural sonar system, to find their prey. How this system is
used by animals in the wild to forage has however, not been studied. To begin to
understand echolocation's role in foraging, the rate of echolocation clicks,
individual sonar signals, will be measured while measuring the distance of the
dolphins from their food. If spinner dolphins are using echolocation to find
their food, the number of clicks and their production rate should increase as
dolphins get closer to their prey. This work will determine if pelagic predators
can overlap with their prey at small scales, which behaviors allow this to
happen, and what role echolocation plays in dolphin's search for food.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;