* 0205413
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Parallel Computing Techniques with Applications to Computational Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Thomas Quinn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 999,926.00

Parallel machines with over a hundred thousand processors are now being built.
NSF's widely accessible TeraScale facilities have already deployed a 3,000
processor machine. Algorithmic advances have made it possible to solve problems
at a much faster rate. However, complexity of these algorithms and parallelizing
them remain a hindrance to advances in scientific computing. This project will
develop an object based methodology to simplify development of highly efficient
parallel applications. A run-time system will be developed to automatically
distribute the user's object based application among various processors. This
novel system observes the running program to apply dynamically an intelligent
suite of strategies to effect optimization. Parallel components can be plugged
in and out of running computations and exchange data with each other in a
flexible manner. &lt;br/&gt;The development of this infrastructure will provide
a framework to allow easy building of particle-oriented parallel programs to be
used to model galaxies, dark matter, stars, planets, and gas particles in
computational astrophysics. The new framework will allow simulations to operate
efficiently with billions of particles and tens of thousands of processors.
These simulations will be able to make direct contact with satellite and ground-
based astronomical data to obtain cosmological parameters with high precision
and to study how planets form.&lt;br/&gt;