* 0205803
* Center for Advanced Materials and Smart Structures
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Jagannathan Sankar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,871,172.00

&lt;br/&gt;There is a keen interest in developing advanced ceramics and
innovative composites for a wide variety of applications including structural
components, energy-efficient environmental and thermal barriers, and high
performance electronic and sensor materials. Structural ceramics have unique
properties that can be used to great advantage in advanced high temperature
applications (diesel engines, turbines). Innovative ceramic composites are also
being developed for use in high-temperature applications, wear resistant
materials, and novel sensor and smart structure applications. Smart ceramics and
piezo ceramic patch sensors may be attached to the external surfaces of
structures, or directly embedded within materials to provide in-situ
measurements of structural behavior. Thin film oxide-based structures and
ferroelectric perovskites, are needed for fabrication of electronic devices such
as sensors, transducers, nanomagnetics, filters and non-volatile
memories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This continuation proposal focuses on the basic
science issues affecting both advanced structural ceramics and composites and
electronic ceramic materials in a synergistic manner using innovative materials
processing methods including nanoengineering. The subproject areas of particular
interest to the Center for Advanced Materials and Smart Structures (CAMSS)
include:&lt;br/&gt;o Nanoengineered and surface engineered coatings and
materials (functionally gradient coatings, fuel cell materials,environmental and
thermal barrier coatings, and metal-ceramic joining)&lt;br/&gt;o Nanocomposites
and other innovative composites (nanostructured ceramic composite coatings,
self-reinforced Si3N4 composites, nanomagnetics, and advanced oxide based fiber
composites) and&lt;br/&gt;o Electronic and smart materials and structures
(advanced electronic materials, novel sensor materials and health monitoring-
smart structures)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed center continuation activity
will develop strong research and education programs in the science and
technology of nanostructured and other advanced materials. Nanoscale science and
technology is expected to revolutionize next-generation technology ranging from
structural materials to smart structures, microelectronics tomedicine. To
position US industry strategically in a leadership role, we need to equip
students with the multidisciplinary skills needed for nano and other innovative
engineering fields. We seek to create a crossdisciplinary infrastructure that
transcends departmental barriers and lends itself to the integration of research
and education in this vital field of advanced materials and smart structures.
The primary goals of this program are: (1) continue to promote advanced
materials engineering as a unifying research and education discipline; (2)
continue to develop multidisciplinary curricula for training the new generation
of graduate students; and (3) continue to recruit talented undergraduate and
graduate students from underrepresented groups into this field of immense
technological importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the subproject areas of this
continuation proposal listed above will emphasize the following aspects of
advanced and nanocrystalline materials in a coherent way, utilizing the
complementary skills of the research teams at NC A&amp;T SU, NCSU, ORNL,
industry and other educational partners: 1) synthesis and processing; 2)
characterization (macro, micro and nano); 3) structure-property correlations;
and 4) modeling. &lt;br/&gt;Research facilities associated with NSF/CREST, NCSU-
NSF/Atomic Resolution Electron Microscope Facility, NSF/ERC -University of
Florida (connectivity) and the ORNL/ High Temperature Materials Laboratory
facilities will play a pivotal role in the research based training of these
students. The NSF Atomic Resolution TEM Facility at NCSU under the direction of
NCSU Co-PI (JN) represents a unique research facility in the country, where
students can be trained in atomic-level characterization techniques that are
essential for nanoengineering of novel materialsand structures. The above
research facilities (mechanical test equipment, innovative processing facilities
and various characterization facilities) will provide a unique platform to
foster multidisciplinary approaches for integrating graduate education and
research, recruiting minority graduate and undergraduate students, and
introducing new course curricula in this field of vital importance. The results
of these fundamental studies will be used to develop models to explain novel
advanced materials and unusual properties of the nanostructured materials.The
eventual aim of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for
designing advanced and novel nanostructured materials with unique properties so
that a knowledge base for "creating materials by design" will be established.
Strong outreach and technical transfer efforts targeted towards the local and
global community will also continue as a part of the center
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;