* 0205518
* A Program of High-Resolution Infrared Astronomical Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* John Lacy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2006
* USD 281,100.00

AST-0205518&lt;br/&gt;Lacy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With previous NSF support, Dr.
John Lacy, at the University of Texas, developed the Texas Echelon Cross Echelle
Spectrograph (TEXES). TEXES can be used in several modes: high resolution cross-
dispersed, low to medium resolution long-slit, and source-acquisition imaging.
It operates in the 5-25 micrometer spectral region. TEXES's high resolution
capabilities are unique. No other mid-infrared astronomical spectrograph has a
comparable combination of resolution and sensitivity. TEXES is operated by the
instrument team, but is available to all members of the astronomical community.
Observational projects to be carried out by Dr. Lacy and colleagues with this
award include studies of molecular gas in star-formation regions, ionized gas in
ultracompact HII regions, molecules in protoplanetary disks, and molecules in
planetary atmospheres. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infrared spectroscopy provides
several unique probes of interstellar molecules, notably the
ability&lt;br/&gt;to study molecules like C2H2 and CH4 without permanent dipole
moments. Initial observations&lt;br/&gt;with TEXES of C2H2 and HCN in the KL
star-formation region in Orion show the lines to consist&lt;br/&gt;of multiple
narrow components indicative of fine-scale clumping of the gas. Further
observations&lt;br/&gt;will provide information about the interaction of a
protostellar wind with surrounding gas, as well&lt;br/&gt;as measurements of the
abundances of several molecules showing the influence of star formation
on&lt;br/&gt;molecular cloud chemistry. Six regions of high-mass star formation
will be studied. Ultracompact HII regions are prominent sign-posts of young,
very massive stars, but their structure and especially their longevity is not
well understood. Infrared ionic fine-structure lines have significant advantages
over other probes of such obscured ionized gas in that they provide information
about abundances, physical conditions, and kinematics without the large thermal
broadening of hydrogen lines. A survey of ultracompact H II regions of various
morphologies will be carried out with the goal of distinguishing among different
models of these objects. In contrast to near-infrared and millimeter
observations, mid-infrared spectroscopy of gas disks around young stars probes
the 1-10 AU planet-forming region. Lines of H2, H2O, and possibly C2H2 and NH3
should be observable with TEXES, although initial observations appear to
contradict conclusions from spectra taken with the ISO satellite. If line
Doppler profiles can be measured, they will provide information on the
distribution of molecules with radius in the disks, perhaps showing the
signature of forming planets. Mid-infrared spectroscopy is probably the most
important probe of the atmospheres of the giant planets. Most of their emitted
radiation is in the mid-infrared, and their molecular constituents have their
spectral signatures in the mid-infrared. TEXES will be used for a variety of
planetary studies, with current plans concentrating on stratospheric molecules
and atmospheres of moons. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;