* 0205959
* Dissertation Research: The Effect of Plant Community Composition and Land-use Change on Soil Microbial Community Composition and Function
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Pamela Matson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,395.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Land-use change and alterations of plant diversity and
composition have been shown to&lt;br/&gt;influence ecosystem processes. Until
recently, however, there has been little evaluation of&lt;br/&gt;the role of
microbial community changes in mediating process change. Shifts in land-
use&lt;br/&gt;and plant diversity may alter the composition, and thus collective
physiology, of soil&lt;br/&gt;microbial communities, leading to differences in
process rates. To understand more fully&lt;br/&gt;the factors that influence
microbial communities and their functioning, our research&lt;br/&gt;addresses
the following questions: 1) Does plant diversity and/or land-use influence
soil&lt;br/&gt;microbial community composition? 2) Do these changes in microbial
composition&lt;br/&gt;influence nutrient cycling rates? We are addressing these
questions using an experiment&lt;br/&gt;in Costa Rica that manipulates plant
community composition and diversity as well as a&lt;br/&gt;set of land-use
sites, including forest and pasture. To address the first question, we
are&lt;br/&gt;examining microbial community composition using phospholipid fatty
acid analysis&lt;br/&gt;(PLFA) and terminal restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (T-RFLP). PLFA data&lt;br/&gt;suggest that microbial communities
differ significantly across plant diversity and land-&lt;br/&gt;use gradients.
We request funds to proceed to the crucial second question and test,
using&lt;br/&gt;controlled laboratory experiments, whether soils with distinct
microbial communities&lt;br/&gt;differ in two critical ecosystem functions:
nitrification and litter decomposition.