* 0205611
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Parallel Computing Techniques with Applications to Computational Cosmology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Marianne Winslett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,012,000.00

This project is advancing the state of art in both computational cosmology and
parallel computing simultaneously and synergetically. Breakthroughs in
cosmology, which improve our understanding of the formation of galaxies and
planets, are enabled by advances in parallel computing being made in this
project. Parallel machines with over hundred thousand powerful processors are
now being built. NSF's widely accessible TeraScale facilities have already
deployed a 3,000 processor machine in 2001. At the same time algorithmic
advances have made it possible to solve problems at a much faster rate. Yet the
complexity of algorithms combined with the difficulty of parallelizing them on
such large machines remains a hindrance to advances in Science and Engineering.
This project explores an object based methodology that is simplifying the
process of developing highly efficient parallel applications. This approach
allows users to write applications at the level of natural entities in the
application domain, without explicit regard to which processors will house such
entities and&lt;br/&gt;carry out associated computations. To make this possible,
the "runtime system" must be able to make fine-grained resource allocation
decisions automatically. Advances in parallel computing are being sought to that
end. Specifically, application developers may specify a program in terms of a
collection of millions of objects that communicate with each other in several
stylized patterns. In addition, parallel components can be plugged in and out of
running computations, and exchange data with each other in a exible manner.
Based on this infrastructure, this project is building a framework that makes it
easy to build "particle-oriented" parallel programs. In addition to
computational cosmology, which predomi-nately involves simulations that
represent galaxies, dark matter, stars, planetary bodies and gas as particles,
such programs are used in other fields as well. The framework contains highly
efficient parallel algorithms that operate on collections of billions of
particles, spread across machines with tens of thousands of processors. These
advances are being used to carry out scientific studies in cosmology. Large,
detailed simulations of structure formation powered by parallel computers are
necessary to make quantitative predictions from cosmological theories. By
calculating the non-linear gravitational and gas dynamics of the formation of
galaxies and clusters of galaxies, we are creating galaxy catalogues, X-ray
maps, and other observables that can be compared directly with new satellite and
ground-based data, and thereby constrain the parameters of cosmological
theories. These parameters include the amount and nature of the dark matter, the
existence and equation of state of any dark energy, the total amount of baryons,
and the nature of the initial uctuations in the Universe. Similar simulation
studies are being used to study how planets form from a proto-solar disk in
order to create an ab initio theory of planet formation. The software developed
via this project is being made available to a wide community of researchers.
Also, the research results of simulations can be downloaded or visualized via
the web.&lt;br/&gt;