* 0205893
* High Spatial and Spectral Resolution Images of Titan at Infrared Wavelenths: Observations and Analysis
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Imke de Pater, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2006
* USD 224,880.00

AST 0205893&lt;br/&gt;dePater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Imke dePater, of the
University of California at Berkeley, will direct a program of ground-based high
resolution imaging, spectroscopy, and modeling of Titan. The program will use
some of the world's largest optical/infrared telescopes, the 10-m Keck
Observatory and the 8-m Gemini Telescope, to obtain diffraction-limited images
of Titan in narrow band filters between 1 and 2.5 micron wavelength. To
investigate Titan's atmosphere and surface in even greater detail, Dr. dePater
and her team will obtain spectral image datacubes of Titan using the near-
infrared spectrometer NIR-SPEC together with the Keck Adaptive Optics system.
Spectra of Titan will not immediately reveal surface composition, since sunlight
reflected from the surface will in part be absorbed by methane gas (as well as
other absorbers) in Titan's atmosphere, and will undergo scattering by haze
particles. Since Titan's surface albedo varies significantly across its surface,
a single observation of Titan does not give the necessary constraints to
determine the atmospheric haze and methane cloud distribution and properties. To
better constrain Titan's atmosphere and surface, this team will observe the same
surface features through multiple atmospheric paths. In parallel the team will
develop advanced models of Titan's atmosphere, to simultaneously extract surface
reflectance spectra and the vertical haze distribution as a function of location
on Titan's disk. To better understand the formation and removal processes of the
atmospheric haze particles, as well as their chemical and physical properties,
this group will complement the data with observations at mid-infrared
wavelengths, sensitive to Titan's high-altitude hazes and various hydrocarbon
gases.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;