* 0205061
* ITR:   A Twin-Framework To Analyze, Model and Design Robust, Complex Networks Using Biological and Computational Principles
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* T. Dewey, Keck Graduate Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2006
* USD 3,054,269.00

EIA- 0205061&lt;br/&gt;Ray, Animesh &lt;br/&gt;Keck Graduate Institute
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A Twin-Framework To Analyze, Model and Design
Robust, Complex Networks Using Biological and Computational
Principles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vulnerability of natural
networks (such as the Internet, power supply grid, or gene regulatory circuits
of cells) to accidental or deliberate attack is an important area of study. To
date most work has focused on observations of existing static networks or on
computer simulations, because most natural networks are difficult to manipulate
experimentally. The complex molecular machinery regulating the synthesis of RNA
molecules in the nucleus of budding yeast, a single-celled organism, is a real-
world instance of a natural network that can be experimentally perturbed by
defined genetic manipulations, and the results of these perturbations can be
studied at the molecular level with unprecedented accuracy by current genomic
techniques. The goal of this project is to develop a biology-driven
computational framework for network robustness. To achieve this goal, a
biological test-bed of sufficiently complexity, the gene regulatory network of
sporulation in yeast, has been adopted as an experimental network model.
Systematic gene knockout mutations (equivalent to node removal), and regulatory
site deletion mutations (equivalent to edge removal), are being used as tools to
actively alter the network. Effects of these perturbations in the gene
regulatory network architecture are being analyzed at the level of whole-genome
transcriptional profiles. A generic data model for large-scale networks is being
developed. The relevant experimental behavior of the biological network is being
emulated with the data model. Design principles underlying the architecture of
complex networks selected through evolution are being probed through
mathematical modeling and testing. Insights obtained from these studies will be
valuable for defensive strategies in complex network design, with implications
in, among others, communication technology, disaster response, and in designing
robust communication infrastructure resistant to planned
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;