* 0205956
* Probing the Deep Interiors of Accreting White Dwarfs through Studies of their Non-Radial Oscillations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Lars Bildsten, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 309,410.00

AST-0205956&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI
Bildsten&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;White dwarfs (WDs) are the most common
collapsed objects produced as end points of stellar evolution. Their
astrophysical behavior depends on their interior composition affecting both the
rate at which these objects cool from birth and how they explode as supernovae
if heated to high temperatures later in life by accreting material from a nearby
companion star. Deep interior compositions may be probed by studying the
properties of certain volumetric oscillations having periods of 100-1000
seconds. This project is a theoretical investigation of these non-radial
oscillations and it addresses certain frontier questions. The most abundant
atomic nucleus in the WD interior after carbon and oxygen is an isotope of neon
that tends to sink towards the WD center. Interpreting observations of these
objects requires the theoretical modeling of this project to understand how the
oscillations and the cooling times are affected by the neon sedimentation and
consequent composition gradient. A second aspect of this project follows from
the recent discovery of a pulsating WD in a mass transferring binary system.
This finding has opened up a new field in astrophysics. Another set of
theoretical calculations are required for such objects in this environment in
order to convert observed pulsation periods that are comparable to the rotation
periods of these stars into measurements of WD properties such as mass and the
rotation rate.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;