* 0205121
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  The Contribution of Woody Tissue Respiration to the Carbon Balance of Forest Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Kevin Griffin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 07/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

0205121&lt;br/&gt;Griffin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Dr. Kevin
Griffin of Columbia University for a three-year collaborative research project
with Dr. David Whitehead of Landcare Research Institute and Dr. Matthew Turnbull
of the University of Canterbury, both in New Zealand. The research will assess
the contribution of woody tissue respiration to the carbon balance in a forest
ecosystem. Objectives include 1) making continuous real time measurements of
respiration from stems, branches and roots for periods of days to weeks under
field conditions, 2) determining the processes influencing wood respiration by
monitoring responses to natural environmental variability in different forested
ecosystems, and 3) quantitatively describing these responses for use in a model
to estimate ecosystem carbon balance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
processes that regulate the carbon balance of forest ecosystems is a critical
issue in predicting how forests will impact the atmospheric carbon dioxide
balance in the future. This collaboration brings together the efforts of
international laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
facilities. The project will also enhance the international research competence
of the American graduate student who will participate in the research in New
Zealand. &lt;br/&gt;