* 0205097
* Collaborative Resarch:    Star Formation Processes in Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Bruce Elmegreen, IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 08/31/2005
* USD 68,685.00

AST 0205097&lt;br/&gt;Elmegreen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dwarf irregulars are the
most common type of galaxy in the Universe. They evolve relatively slowly over
time and chemically resemble the outer parts of present-day spirals and young
galaxies seen at high redshift. They have no density waves and little shear.
Some are very close to us, permitting the resolution of clusters and star-
forming regions. As a result, dwarf irregulars are ideal laboratories for
studies of star formation in a pristine environment. They are also useful for
comparisons with spirals, leading to a better understanding of
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to determine what
regulates star formation in dwarf galaxies on a wide range of scales, and then
to apply this knowledge to other galaxies. Why do star formation rates in normal
dwarf galaxies span a factor of over 104, and why are young stars always limited
to the inner galaxy regions, far inside the radial extent of other stars and
gas? What governs how and where dense molecular clouds form? To address these
questions, Dr. Deidre Hunter, at Lowell Observatory, and Dr. Bruce Elmegreen, at
IBM, have observed 139 reasonably normal, non-interacting, nearby galaxies
without spiral arms. The data include optical and near-infrared
images&lt;br/&gt;that allow the star formation to be determined over the
lifetimes of these galaxies, atomic HI maps that show the raw cloud material and
environment for cloud formation, and observations of the warm and cold molecular
clouds that give birth to the stars themselves. Although a previous grant
emphasized data collection and processing, these investigators have already
analyzed the properties of the HII regions in the sample, including their sizes,
pressures, luminosities, and locations. They studied the neutral interstellar
structure in the LMC and combined all their data for a comprehensive study of
NGC 2366. The results have led to a revision in the theoretical framework for
star formation: global instabilities and threshold column densities for star
formation are less important than local processes and conditions; the thermal
equilibrium properties of the interstellar medium are as important as self-
gravity; turbulence and phase changes generally structure the gas into
&lt;br/&gt;cloud and intercloud media, yet global disturbances such as bars and
interactions change this, producing anomalously massive bound clusters. The
results have also enhanced our &lt;br/&gt;perspective on star formation
processes in normal spiral galaxies by illustrating how the expansion of shells
and the condensation of clouds becomes more severe at low shear. With this new
award, the investigators will capitalize on their large, multi-wavelength survey
to finish the project by addressing the "big-picture" questions posed above.
They will find how star formation evolves over space and time in a dwarf galaxy;
consider the special effects at galaxy edges; show how the star formation
history relates to the gas structure and other conditions for cloud formation;
determine the formation requirements for star forming regions of different sizes
and densities; determine the porosity of the interstellar medium and its role in
possible feedback; and determine the overall structure of the dwarfs. Many of
these results will have applications to other galaxy types and to other epochs
in the Universe. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;