* 0205590
* ITR ACTS - Adjoint Complier Technology & Standards
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Carl Wunsch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2006
* USD 2,022,973.00

0205590 Wunsch

Automatic program compilation (and its related task of interpreted program
execution) has been a vital ingredient in the creation of ever more complex
software tools. Indeed, modern compilers and interpreters have been central to
exploiting exponential advances in digital hardware capability. Without
compilers and interpreters to automate the task of correctly transforming a
high-level language description of an algorithm, modern computer systems could
barely exist. With modern computational capabilities, workers in numerous fields
use large-scale numerical simulation of complex interacting elements to
understand physical, chemical, biological and economical phenomena. The Adjoint
Compiler Technology & Standards (ACTS) project aims to provide scientists,
engineers, academics, and students with techniques, tools, reference projects,
and easily accessible expertise allowing for new approaches to investigating
numerical models of real-world problems based on mathematically precise
derivative information. Considering the large-scale applications motivating the
ACTS project there is not sensible alternative to Automatic Differentiation (AD)
as the methods of choice. AD transforms the program implementing the original
model into derivative code by augmenting it with instructions for computing
partial derivatives. For example, the investigation of numerical sensitivities
of certain values with respect to certain parameters becomes possible. Where
observations are to be combined with model output so as to account for the
information content of both, one has a very large-scale optimization problem.
The solution to this problem lies with the ability to generate derivative code
as well. Because of the sheer size of the application programs that AD has to
deal with efficiency of the generated derivative code is crucial. Inefficiency
of the codes generated using AD will often mean inapplicability caused by
infeasible hardware requirements. This project has potential to impact fields
ranging from engineering design optimization projects to basic research to
complex physical system monitoring endeavors. The proposal brings together
computer scientists, physical scientists and engineers in a group effort to
create a standard, reference implementation of an extensible toolkit for AD of
numerical codes. Such a toolkit is a key asset in improving the fidelity and
productivity of increasingly complex simulation code development efforts in many
fields. In summary the goals of this project are three fold 1. development of an
extensible, standards based, infrastructure that will allow research in the
field of AD to flourish and that will allow academic developments and emerging
commercial efforts to collaborate in a mutually advantageous manner; 2.
development of an open-source, freely available reference compiler and support
material that is as easy and reliable to use as a traditional compiler and that
will nurture widespread adoption of AD as an key element of all manner of
numerical simulation; 3. establishment of clear and form connections between the
mainstream compiler communities in computer science and the mathematics,
physical science and engineering communities that have historically been at the
forefront of AD tool development. For mathematical, scientific and engineering
codes, the work proposed can have far reaching consequences. Just as
conventional compiler developments have provided the foundation for new
generations of simulation tools the project proposed here will also provide a
foundation for new generations of mathematically rigorous and robustly
manufactured analysis, diagnostic and forecast software.