* 0205635
* ITR:  (Software &amp; Hardware Systems) Piazza: A Platform for Wide-scale Distributed Data Sharing and Integration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2005
* USD 790,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to create a new global-scale information
facility&lt;br/&gt;on the Internet in which structured data, rather than raw
text, is the&lt;br/&gt;key element supported. Currently, the information
provided on the&lt;br/&gt;Internet consists of simple text-based documents
(HTML), or other&lt;br/&gt;unstructured types such as images and streams. The
new facility will&lt;br/&gt;allow data sources to be described by schemas and
their content to be&lt;br/&gt;indexed and located. Sophisticated query-oriented
database-style&lt;br/&gt;operations will be possible over simple or complex data
sources, and&lt;br/&gt;new views of multiple data sources can be created and
shared with&lt;br/&gt;other clients. A new class of data processing services
will be&lt;br/&gt;possible to collect, manipulate, analyze, and store
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of project is to define the basic
architecture of a&lt;br/&gt;client, allowing it to share its data with other
peers, participate in&lt;br/&gt;distributed query processing, and cooperate with
other clients. A&lt;br/&gt;specific data integration formalism will be designed
that will allow&lt;br/&gt;clients to integrate their data with others' using
both global-as-view&lt;br/&gt;and local-as-view data integration paradigms.
Building on this&lt;br/&gt;arthictecture, a new query processing technique will
be developed that&lt;br/&gt;can adapt to both data integration paradigms. The
project will then&lt;br/&gt;develop intelligent data placement techniques for
storing query&lt;br/&gt;results on different clients, thus enabling dramatic
performance&lt;br/&gt;improvments for subsequent queries. The data such placed
on servers&lt;br/&gt;may become stale, when the source data gets updated: the
project will&lt;br/&gt;develop specific update propagation techniques for
publishing and&lt;br/&gt;disseminating updates. Finally, the project is
developing novel data&lt;br/&gt;indexing techniques that allow clients to search
data items globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;