* 0205643
* Moduli Spaces and Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Emma Previato, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 103,998.00

Proposal Number DMS - 0205643 Investigator Emma Previato ep@math.bu.edu Moduli
spaces and differential equations

This project combines projective geometry and differential algebra. For a few
decades now, moduli spaces of vector bundles over curves have been prominent in
mathematical physics. A few interrelated open problems are the object of this
research. In projective space, models of moduli of vector bundles still don't
have explicit description, by equations or by classification. The generalized
theta functions (sections of higher-rank vector bundles) are not developed to
the point that one can describe flows of completely integrable hierarchies or
perform the necessary calculations of quantum field theory (partition function,
e.g.) Finally, flows of commutative rings of partial differential operators
(generalized KP flows) have not been described explicitly. In the proposed work:
on the projective-geometry side, equations for moduli spaces of higher-rank
bundles and dimensions of Brill-Noether loci will be calculated by methods of
representation theory and correspondences between Grassmannians. On the analytic
side, differential equations for the Kleinian functions (which generalize the
Weierstrass p-function) will be derived and applied to integrate new Hamiltonian
systems and the generalized KP flows. A theme that runs through the proposed
research is the classical problem of reduction: Weierstrass' students
Koenigsberger and Kowalevski, respectively, characterized the abelian integrals
of genus 2, 3 respectively, that reduce with "multiplicity" 2 to an elliptic
integral; since then, very little was found in general (e.g., higher genus or
multiplicity). Progress on this problem is now under way, partly due to results
that revisit the Kleinian functions, and partly to the aid of computer algebra.
The problem of reduction is linked with the problem of curves with
automorphisms, and the project includes applications of the results to
differential Galois theory, monodromy of ordinary differential equations, and
decoding algorithms for algebraic (Goppa) codes.

Elliptic functions have an "unreasonable effectiveness",to borrow E.P. Wigner's
phrase. They occur when modeling harmonic oscillators, shooting billiards,
measuring the amplitude of ocean waves, computing the partition functions of
quantum field theory. The word "elliptic" refers to the number of periods of the
functions (one over the real, two over the complex numbers). Theta functions are
the multi-periodic analog of elliptic functions. Although Old Masters such as
Klein, H.F. Baker and O. Bolza, obtained equations for genus-2 (4 complex
periods) theta functions, most properties of theta functions are still
inexplicit, including their dependence on the period lattice. New impetus in the
study of such functions came from the theory of integrable PDEs, such as the
Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation, and the attendant algebraically completely
integrable systems that have been intensively studied since the 1970s. This
project will combine projective geometry and differential algebra to identify
differential equations satisfied by the (Kleinian) theta functions, and apply
them to find exact solutions of Hamiltonian systems and non-linear PDEs. At the
same time the project will pursue the other major, "non-abelian" generalization
of theta functions, by embedding moduli spaces into projective space. Theta
functions that can be reduced to expressions in elliptic functions will be
characterized geometrically and used in effective decoding algorithms.

