* 0205806
* Physics of Accretion Disks Around Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Julian Krolik, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2006
* USD 358,207.00

AST 0205806 Krolik

Black holes are tremendously powerful sources of light. In aggregate, the total
light power produced by black holes in the Universe is almost as much as that
generated by stars. However, the mechanism by which black holes are able to
radiate so much light has remained mysterious for many years. The fundamental
reason for this mystery is that, without friction, matter in orbit around a
massive object would go round and round forever, and no energy would be released
at all. Except for the region immediately outside its edge, this rule is as true
for a black hole as for an ordinary object. Because friction caused by ordinary
viscosity is far too weak to account for the observed rate at which mass is
swallowed by black holes; the source of this friction had been a mystery for
decades. During the 1990s, however, we gradually gained confidence in what was
once the speculative suggestion that tangled magnetic fields would spontaneously
grow in strength in accreting matter, and the forces they create would be strong
enough to provide the necessary "friction".

Since calculations of tangled magnetic field forces are very complex they must
be done with large computer simulations. This project will conduct a coherent
program of large-scale numerical simulations with a pair of goals: a) to compute
how the magnetic forces control the total amount of energy released in black
hole accretion; and b) to show how the released energy finds its way into heat,
and then the light that we see. ***