* 0205737
* ITR: Advanced Programming Languages for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Richard Kieburtz, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,996.00

Mark P. Jones and Richard B. Kieburtz&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0205737&lt;br/&gt;"Advanced
Programming Languages for Embedded Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
few decades we have witnessed remarkable changes in the way that computers are
both used and programmed. For example, many of the computers in use today are
hidden in embedded systems. From everyday appliances---such as washing machines
and televisions---to safety and security critical systems---such as vehicle
navigation and control, defense applications, or medical devices---the use of
embedded computers allows manufacturers to build systems with much greater
flexibility,&lt;br/&gt;functionality, and sophistication than has ever been
possible before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the same time, new programming
languages have been developed with features that increase developer productivity
and allow the construction of produce more reliable and flexible systems. For
example, module systems help to manage the complexity of large projects, type
systems can be used to detect bugs at compile-time, and automatic storage
management techniques eliminate a common source of
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In industry, however, much of the embedded software
that is being developed today is still written using older languages, or lower-
level assembly languages, without the benefits that modern languages can
provide. The problem is that the results and focus of recent programming
language research have not been a good match for the challenges and context of
embedded systems development. As a result, where some might have expected
embedded systems developers to embrace modern programming languages, it might
seem instead that many have chosen to ignore them!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
source of problems arises from difficulties in capturing so-called non-
functional aspects of behavior---such as execution time, power consumption, and
adaptivity---that are critical requirements for many embedded systems.
Unfortunately, these are exactly the kinds of things that language designers
have abstracted away from in the hope of increasing productivity and
portability. Other difficulties occur as the result of complicated treatments of
features such as concurrency and event handling, which again play a central role
in many embedded applications. Significant bugs can occur if programmers do not
adhere to a carefully worked out discipline of coding when they use such
features, but there is very little that the underlying type system or semantics
can do to help in detecting these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
working to bridge the gap between these two important fields, and to demonstrate
how embedded systems development can benefit from and inform programming
language research. In particular, the project is focusing on the ongoing
development and use of a high-level language called Timber that supports an
implicit notion of concurrency, asynchronous communication, and non-blocking,
reactive programming. All of these features are directly relevant in the context
of embedded systems design. In addition, the project is developing new analysis
and compilation techniques that enable non-functional aspects of behavior to be
specified using high-level constraints and policies for graceful degradation.
Because they are specified at a high level, these constraints can continue to
serve as meaningful descriptions of required&lt;br/&gt;behavior, even as
programs evolve to accommodate new functionality or to support new platforms.
The key to success is a declarative approach in which programmers focus on what
is required, while compilers determine how it should be accomplished, using the
results of analysis to guide the selection of an appropriate, low-level
implementation strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the transition from research
to industry in mind, the project is focusing on tools for PC/104 systems, which
is an industry standard and an important sector in today's embedded systems
market. In the longer term, the project is contributing to shifts in attitude
and beneficial changes in the role that programming language technology can
plays in the delivery of more widespread, more flexible, more reliable, and more
secure embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;