* 0205362
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Achieving Innovative and Reliable Services in Unlicensed Spectrum
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Christopher Rose, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2005
* USD 832,553.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of unlicensed communication
bands has successfully encouraged innovation, most recently in wireless devices
and infrastructure that use unlicensed spectrum to provide connections to the
Internet. A key aspect of Internet usage is an almost unlimited capacity for
growth. For unlicensed wireless, the transition from 11 Mb/s 802.11b to 54 Mb/s
802.11a marks the start of an industry race toward ever-higher data rates. The
combination of increasing data rates and a proliferation of devices could easily
lead to inefficiency in the use of unlicensed spectrum due to a combination of
overuse and failure to develop mechanisms for efficient sharing of this
resource. While the overload of any finite band may be inevitable, this project
is addressing the increase in capacity of the available unlicensed bands as much
as possible, and is developing approaches that can predict overloads and prevent
sudden, unexpected failure modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary
project seeks efficient use of unlicensed spectrum by combining an engineering
and technology perspective with insights from the literatures on regulation,
property rights, and economic coordination. The team includes researchers with
expertise in property rights, networking fairness, and wireless communications
and network engineering. This team is developing a general framework for
understanding cooperation in unlicensed band wireless networks by studying the
following issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Property rights as applied to spectrum
management&lt;br/&gt;Protocols for collaboration between technology neutral
wireless devices&lt;br/&gt;Pricing mechanisms for efficient and fair sharing of
congested unlicensed spectrum&lt;br/&gt;Radio-level interference avoidance
techniques&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above problems are being studied with a
combination of formal and conceptual analysis, simulation and experimental
methods, including a dynamic spectrum management testbed which implements
potential collaboration protocols and cooperation models. The thrust is to
preserve the "creative chaos" of the unlicensed bands while creating a degree of
long term stability and predictability that is appropriate to the size of the
investments being made and the strategic importance of these uses to the nation.
Results from the project are of value to both policy makers and emerging
unlicensed band wireless Internet providers as well as wireless
technologists.&lt;br/&gt;