* 0205093
* Analysis of Optimal Controls for Biomedical Models of Cancer and HIV
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Heinz Schaettler, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 108,958.00

0205093&lt;br/&gt;Ledzewicz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, optimal control
problems will be investigated which arise as &lt;br/&gt;mathematical models for
biomedical systems in the chemotherapy of &lt;br/&gt;diseases which have a
strong cell proliferation aspect such as cancer or &lt;br/&gt;AIDS. Three
directions of research will be pursued: the analysis of models &lt;br/&gt;in
cancer chemotherapy, an analysis of models for HIV-infection and
anti-&lt;br/&gt;viral treatment of AIDS, and the design and analysis of a
general &lt;br/&gt;mathematical framework which combines common features of both
cancer &lt;br/&gt;and HIV models. The investigators will use their previous
experience &lt;br/&gt;working on cancer chemotherapy models and apply new tools
based on &lt;br/&gt;the method of characteristics and high-order conditions for
optimality. In &lt;br/&gt;compartmental models for cancer chemotherapy the cell-
cycle is &lt;br/&gt;controlled by clustering its phases into compartments and
using phase &lt;br/&gt;specific cytostatic killing and blocking agents. The goal
is to maximize the &lt;br/&gt;number of cancer cells that the cytostatic agent
in the drug kills while &lt;br/&gt;keeping the toxicity to the normal tissue
acceptable. In this project a &lt;br/&gt;synthesis of optimal controls for these
models will be constructed. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, more complex mathematical
models that take into account &lt;br/&gt;additional aspects such as evolving
drug resistance or bone marrow &lt;br/&gt;destruction will be analyzed. Due to
the complexity of HIV infection, &lt;br/&gt;mathematical models for AIDS have
only recently been developed and &lt;br/&gt;still are constantly being revised
and updated taking new medical data into &lt;br/&gt;account. With the main
attention so far given to the form of the dynamics &lt;br/&gt;that best models
the interactions between the virus and the human immune &lt;br/&gt;system under
drug treatment, many of these models still have not been &lt;br/&gt;formulated
as optimal control problems. The investigators will analyze a &lt;br/&gt;variety
of these models in the framework of optimal control and compare &lt;br/&gt;the
solutions aiming at a design of optimal treatment
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, the investigators will consider
mathematical models in the &lt;br/&gt;chemotherapy of diseases that have a
strong cell proliferation aspect such &lt;br/&gt;a cancer or AIDS. These models
will be analyzed as optimal control &lt;br/&gt;problems with the drug dosage
serving as control parameter with the goal &lt;br/&gt;of maximizing the number
of cancer cells killed by the drug in the case of &lt;br/&gt;cancer
(respectively maximizing the number of uninfected cells in the case
&lt;br/&gt;of chemotherapy for AIDS) while minimizing the harmful side effects
and &lt;br/&gt;cost of the chemotherapy. Although individually these problems
are very &lt;br/&gt;different in their specifics, they also have many aspects in
common and &lt;br/&gt;can be put into one general mathematical model that
encompasses them &lt;br/&gt;all. Thus, while on one side there is a need to
consider these problems &lt;br/&gt;separately to understand the implications for
the underlying disease, on the &lt;br/&gt;other side there are simplifications
and insights to be gained by looking at &lt;br/&gt;the general properties common
to these models. This project will address &lt;br/&gt;both directions. A
biomedical interpretation of the conditions that optimal &lt;br/&gt;controls
satisfy will be given in terms understandable by biomedical &lt;br/&gt;personnel
and the conditions will be related to the underlying biological
&lt;br/&gt;situation. It is expected that the outcomes of this project will be
of interest &lt;br/&gt;to the medical community by giving some insights into the
analysis of &lt;br/&gt;existing chemotherapy protocols for cancer or HIV and
possibly aid in the &lt;br/&gt;design of new improved protocols. These results
are particularly important &lt;br/&gt;for HIV treatments which so far do not
cure the disease, but only provide a &lt;br/&gt;long-term maintenance
program.&lt;br/&gt;