* 0205947
* Transforming Introductory Undergraduate Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Richard McCray, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/2007
* USD 305,000.00

This project addresses three questions: 1) How can we transform introductory
math and science courses to provide a more interactive experience for students
within the financial constraints of a large state university? 2) In what ways
can information technology be used effectively to improve undergraduate science
education? and 3) How can research departments and schools of education work
together effectively to recruit and train talented students into careers in K-12
math and science education? The author of this proposal has developed a
transformed section of introductory undergraduate astronomy that emphasizes
inquiry-based and collaborative learning with the aid of web-based information
technology. Key elements of the transformed class include: a) Replacing lectures
with content delivery through a web-based hypertext that is rich in multimedia
simulations and links for exploration; b) Dividing a large (~200 students) class
into "learning teams" of ~12 students each who meet once a week in a computer
classroom to prepare answers to pre-posed "discussion questions" and so work
collaboratively on team projects; c) Software and course design to facilitate
synchronous and asynchronous communication among students in learning teams; d)
Blocks of instruction for inquiry-based collaborative learning using Java-based
simulations; and e) The employment of undergraduate learning assistants to
supervise the learning teams. The author has also worked with faculty from other
science and math research departments and faculty of the school of education in
a collaboration with Sun Educational Systems to employ undergraduate and
graduate students, programmers, and in-service teachers in summer internships at
Sun to develop Java-based blocks of instruction intended for secondary school
math and science education and to test these blocks in local school districts.
The current project extends this work in the following directions: a) The author
is continuing to improve and develop the transformed astronomy course, making
the resources available and easy to use for other faculty members in the
department; b) The author is working with the administration faculty in other
math and science departments at the University of Colorado to help them adopt
some of the methodology of the transformed course, including software and the
employment of undergraduate learning assistants for their own introductory
courses; c) The author is working with the administration, faculty in science
and mathematics research departments, faculty in the School of Education, and
with Sun Educational Systems to develop an attractive undergraduate curriculum
to recruit and train talented students for careers in K-12 science and
mathematics education.