* 0205881
* A Study of Volatile Molecules in the Inner Preplanetary Disks Around Herbig AeBe Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Terrence Rettig, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 05/31/2006
* USD 308,962.00

AST-0205881

PI Rettig

To clarify the physical structure, gas and dust content, as well as the
potential for planet formation around the poorly understood inner circumstellar
disk regions of Herbig AeBe young emission line stars, the PI has begun a high
resolution infrared (3-5mm) study of various molecules such as CO and H 3+ that
are expected to be present. The near-infrared is a challenging spectral region
to work, but this spectral region is optimal to explore CO as well as the
symmetric hydrocarbons (e.g. CH 4 , C 2 H 6 , C 2 H 2 ) and H 3+ in material
around hot young stars. For Herbig AeBe stars, it is not clear that primordial
gas and dust can remain sufficiently long in the inner regions (1-50 AU) close
to the star for planet formation to occur. The PI has already presented results
for several such stars showing the detection of CO, CH 4 , and H3+ (the first
detection of H 3+ emission outside the Solar System ever made). This research
will use fundamental CO lines (4.7mm) to measure temperatures, column densities,
and mass of CO in the inner disks around these stars. Observations of H 3+ may
provide a more quantitative understanding of the chemical processing and the
importance of energetic photo-processing in inner disks of these pre-main
sequence stars. H 3+ is important as a direct probe of the ionization rate in
preplanetary disks and is important in disk chemistry as nearly all ion-neutral
reactions are initialized by this molecule. The detection of CO, CH 4 , and H 3+
are important to quantify the physical and chemical evolution of the inner disk
and also constrain the gas dissipation rate and potential for planetary
formation. Secondly, H 3+ is shown as a potential method to search for evidence
of planet formation and/or disk evolution that will provide theorists an
additional avenue to constrain disk and extra-solar planet formation.