* 0205738
* First Light In The Universe:   Probing the End Of The Dark Ages
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Piero Madau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2006
* USD 222,655.00

AST 0205738 Madau

In currently popular cosmological scenarios at very early times, the gas within
protogalactic halos with masses comparable to those of present-day dwarf
ellipticals experienced rapid cooling and fragmentation. These fragments formed
massive stars , which in turn synthesized heavy elements, and exploded as Type
II supernovae, enriching the surrounding medium. These subgalactic stellar
systems then generated the ultraviolet radiation and mechanical energy that
reheated and reionized most of the hydrogen in the cosmos. The history of the
Universe during and soon after these crucial formative stages is recorded in the
thermal state, ionization degree, and chemical composition of the all-pervading
intergalactic medium (IGM). Throughout the epoch of structure formation, the IGM
becomes clumpy under the influence of gravity, and acts as a source for the gas
that accretes, cools, and forms stars within subgalactic fragments, and as a
sink for the metal enriched material, energy, and radiation which they eject.
The study of the gaseous and stellar content of the high-redshift Universe thus
provides invaluable insight into this era and the basic processes that govern
the collapse, cooling, and evolution of some of the earliest formed cosmological
structures. This theoretical project will study the epoch of .first light, the
astrophysics of protogalactic systems, the intergalactic medium and quasar
absorbers in the context of current theories of galaxy formation. It will focus
on a series of critical questions in each of these interrelated areas: (1)
cosmological reionization, (2) the epoch of first light, and (3) protogalaxy
halos, SN-driven winds, and the metal enrichment of the IGM. A coordinated
approach will be pursued involving theoretical studies of the controlling
physical processes, and direct numerical simulation of their effects within the
current paradigm for structure formation. The results of this program should aid
in the planning for future large observational facilities such as the California
Extremely Large Telescope, the Low Frequency Array, the Square Kilometer Array,
and the Next Generation Space Telescope. ***