* 0205820
* Fossil Mysteries at the San Diego Natural History Museum
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Paisley Cato, San Diego Society of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 07/31/2006
* USD 2,000,000.00

The San Diego Society of Natural History (SDSNH) will design, fabricate and
install a 9,000 square foot permanent exhibition exploring the fundamental
scientific concepts of paleontology, geology, biology and ecology as they
pertain to prehistoric southern California and the peninsula of Baja California.
Playing the role of paleontologist, visitors will be invited to ponder a
mystery, explore the setting, examine the evidence, and use scientific tools to
discover answers. Carefully crafted settings will support exploration that
engages learners of all ages at levels for both novice and experienced learners.
Visitors will discover how natural patterns reveal natural processes, and
examine the relationship between past, present and future. Focused activities
will enable visitors to exercise their skills of observation and critical
thinking, with exhibits that promote learning in a family context. The exhibits
and activities focus on the Museum's collections and research, and are grounded
in comprehensive visitor research supporting exhibit development. The exhibition
and related science education materials will demonstrate how these fundamental
concepts can be investigated in a regional setting. Visitors will extend their
learning experience beyond the museum through a content-rich interactive
website, a popular book on regional geology and paleontology, and related public
programs and fossil displays at regional nature centers near the actual
discovery sites. Exhibition planning, program evaluation and visitor research
will be widely disseminated as contributions to the literature on best practices
for interpretation of prehistoric life and landscapes