* 0205214
* ITR: ZebraNet: Position-aware Power-aware Wireless Computing for Wildlife Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,299,999.00

As computer systems become increasingly ubiquitous, computer systems research
and design has moved&lt;br/&gt;from being a highly performance-centric process
to being one that juggles many design goals and metrics.&lt;br/&gt;Mobile and
embedded computing systems must, in addition to providing sufficient
performance, be rugged,&lt;br/&gt;reliable, power-efficient, and lightweight.
Because of the extreme and multidimensional design constraints they face, they
must also be attentive to the specific needs of application domains, so they can
be designed to satisfy these needs while still meeting power budgets and weight
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Princeton ZebraNet Project is an inter-
disciplinary effort with thrusts in both Biology and Computer&lt;br/&gt;Systems.
On the computer systems side, ZebraNet is studying power-aware, position-
aware&lt;br/&gt;computing/communication systems. Namely, the ZebraNet project
works to develop, evaluate, implement,&lt;br/&gt;and test systems that integrate
computing, wireless communication, and non-volatile storage along
with&lt;br/&gt;global positioning systems (GPS) and other sensors. On the
biology side, the technology enables novel&lt;br/&gt;studies of animal
migrations and inter-species interactions. From a computing standpoint, key
research&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs are required in protocol and system design in
order to make the system power-efficient and&lt;br/&gt;reliable. From a biology
standpoint, the system enables fundamentally new types of
biological&lt;br/&gt;observations that allow us to: (i) understand long-range
migrations in large mammals, (ii) observe inter-species interactions between
carnivores (predators) and ungulates (prey), and (iii) track the behavior of
extremely endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a computer systems
research problem, ZebraNet is compelling because the needs of the
biological&lt;br/&gt;researchers are stringent enough to require real
breakthroughs in wireless protocols and in low-power&lt;br/&gt;computer systems
design and computer systems power management. These breakthroughs can
be&lt;br/&gt;leveraged into other (non-wildlife-oriented) fields of research;
essentially ZebraNet is a power-aware&lt;br/&gt;wireless ad hoc sensor network,
but with more serious bandwidth and computational needs than most
prior&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks research problems. As a biology research
problem, ZebraNet allows researchers to pose&lt;br/&gt;and to answer important
long-standing questions about long-range migration, inter-species interactions,
and nocturnal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major research activities span a
broad range, including:&lt;br/&gt; Modeling long-range animal
migrations&lt;br/&gt; Observing inter-species predator-prey
interactions&lt;br/&gt; Analyzing the impact of human development on animal
behavior&lt;br/&gt; Developing power-aware systems for position-aware
computing&lt;br/&gt; Incorporating error resilience and domain-specific
performance optimizations into lightweight&lt;br/&gt; wireless
protocols&lt;br/&gt; Managing logged sensor data to minimize the number of
required uploads from tracking nodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ZebraNet is engaging
in a mix of theoretical research, prototyping, and field experimentation. The
project&lt;br/&gt;is not solely about systems-building, but rather mixes theory
with practical hands-on evaluations of the&lt;br/&gt;ZebraNet designs. Research
is conducted both at Princeton University and at the Mpala Research
Centre.&lt;br/&gt;Mpala is a biology field station in central Kenya that
Princeton University administers along with the&lt;br/&gt;Kenya Wildlife
Service, the National Museums of Kenya, the Mpala Wildlife Foundation, and
the&lt;br/&gt;Smithsonian Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, ZebraNet
represents a truly interdisciplinary effort bringing together research strengths
from&lt;br/&gt;disparate fields over a challenging problem. The potential
contribution of the project includes significant&lt;br/&gt;advances in computing
technology as well as in our understanding of wildlife migrations. The three
main&lt;br/&gt;researchers bring strengths in wildlife biology, power-aware
computer systems, and wireless technology.&lt;br/&gt;The interplay between these
disciplines fosters creative to the research problems in both
arenas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;