* 0205625
* ITR/PE: Training and Resources for Assembling Interactive Learning Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2007
* Shelley Goldman, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,200,000.00

0205625&lt;br/&gt;Christopher DiGiano&lt;br/&gt;SRI International, Menlo Park,
CA&lt;br/&gt;"Training and Resources for Assembling Interactive Learning
Systems"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages research and development
outcomes from prior NSF funding that focused on interactive mathematics
education. The current project addresses three areas: 1) Research involving
undergraduate education focused on investigating the training needed to produce
practitioners capable of collaborative design of educational software, 2)
Research into the processes used by collaborative software design teams, and 3)
Research into K-12 educational impact because of the use of software produced by
collaborative design teams. The project involves pre-college teachers and
undergraduate and professional software developers in teams producing
interactive software for K-12. In addition to primary goals of studying
multidisciplinary collaborative teams and the impacts of the systems they
develop on pre-college students, the project also looks at software re-use and
collaborative tools needed for innovative applications of IT in education.
Outcomes of this project will be insights into and understanding of: the kinds
of course activities that are needed to enable effective teamwork between
students with different backgrounds; course activities that will enable teams to
discuss, share, and enact educational values in their software production
process; the packaging of curricula into modules that are adaptable by a variety
of institutions; the promotion of curricula that encourages enrollment by a
broad spectrum of students in educational software development; and, the
preparation of new teachers and developers for future work involving
collaborative design. In addition, this project involves research into optimal
design tools (the kinds of tools and resources such as design scenarios,
national standards, bug lists, feature lists, and mailing lists that help teams
achieve shared understanding), collaboration mechanisms and the design of tools
and spaces to encourage a culture of reuse where team members borrow pedagogical
ideas and technical modules from exemplary artifacts and in turn contribute
useful products of their own, and a social network of human experts and coaches
needed to produce educational software (i.e., best practices that can be
identified for the ways experienced classroom teachers and software developers
coach and support teams in developing good designs and encourage balanced
participation by technical and non-technical team members). The overarching need
that is addressed by the project is the shortage of standards-based, high-
quality educational software for K-12 classrooms. The project aims to validate
the premise that appropriate training and resources can enable a team to
transform today's designs into improved designs that elicit and support higher-
order mathematical thinking among the target K-12 students. Testing this
hypothesis requires research in classroom impact including: exploring whether
university student co-design teams can adapt and refine existing mathlet
resources to produce new mathlets that engage higher-order mathematical
thinking, identifying, refining, and disseminating to classrooms around the
country the best mathlets from all participating institutions, expanding the
adoption and utility of deployed mathlets be increased by enabling in-service
teachers to configure the tools for their particular classroom needs. This
project involves collaboration between several academic institutions, research
organizations, and businesses.&lt;br/&gt;