* 0205702
* ITR:  A Grid for Research and Education in Distributed Systems and Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2008
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,562,874.00

Over the last two years, we've built a new type of experimental environment for
research in distributed systems and networks: a highly configurable Internet
emulator, known as Emulab. This time-and spaceshared facility has been used by
numerous top institutions for research published in top venues. So successful is
the project, that others are building their own Emulabs, centered around our
software and design. While the individual power of such Emulabs in
experimentation and teaching is great, connecting these into one large Research
and Education Grid will offer unprecedented power and flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;We
now propose, with dramatically expanded software and innovative algorithms, to
establish the framework for a federated set of local Emulabs, each heterogeneous
under local control and offering a unique set of hardware. Adding sites to the
Grid will be easy and cheap, offering even small institutions a chance to
contribute while gaining access to an immensely diverse and powerful resource.
Individual sites' users will have priority for local hardware, as well as
control over local administrative, security, and resource allocation policies.
Such autonomy will encourage organic growth, while intelligent allocation,
scheduling, and swapping systems will provide abstraction. Researchers and
students can be unconcerned with local complexities, instead seeing one large
collection of a wide variety of hardware, including standard PCs, network
processors, wireless nodes, and more. Even the links between Emulabs will be a
useful resource for experiments wishing to operate on the real Internet, while
controlled-bandwidth links will shield experiments that do not. Support for
wireless, mobile nodes will open entirely new avenues for
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;Achieving this vision, however, involves daunting
challenges. Creating the software to manage this will involve a dramatic
extension of existing Emulab systems and the application of novel algorithms and
techniques. Existing database systems will be augmented with failure-resistant
peer-to-peer sharing of network information between Emulabs. Through these
mechanisms, topology data will be shared for observation and experiment
scheduling. Such scheduling on a non-static, wide-area system is a particularly
challenging NP-complete problem which will require new algorithms to be designed
and implemented. Automated systems to control experiment scheduling and
allocation will be developed all the while facing the challenge of maintaining
simple user interfaces. Emulab algorithms and software must also be extended to
handle a wider variety of hardware, including wireless nodes. Aspect-oriented
programming and component technology, developed at Utah, will manage software
interfaces for complex and numerous inter-operating hardware systems. In
addition, methods for sharing, saving, and restoring state between machines, as
well as maintaining performance isolation while multiplexing multiple virtual
nodes on a single computer, will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;The incorporation of
multiple Emulabs into a single federated entity offers a rich opportunity to
overcome a wide variety of network research and software engineering challenges,
and allows for experimentation on an unprecedented scale. Users, ranging from
individual students to large research groups, will benefit from a greatly
expanded ability to controllably and faithfully emulate large real networks,
coupled with the availability of diverse and cutting-edge network components.
Unifying resources in a standard and consistent way will simplify
experimentation, and make accurate emulation an integral part of systems and
network instruction and research.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting loosely-coupled
distributed system will enable experiments in a host of areas. As just one
example, if Emulab is successful in one of its core goals, isolation,
experiments too dangerous to conduct in the wild could be run. Realistic
Internet War Games could be staged, in which attackers and defenders engage in a
simulation of possible Internet attack scenarios, replete with destructive and
contagious worms and dangerous automated counterattacks. Only in an Emulab Petri
dish could they be safely evaluated at reasonable scale.