* 0205940
* Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Deeply Supercooled Multicomponent Metallic Glass Forming Melts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Ralf Busch, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2007
* USD 370,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to study the thermodynamics and kinetics of
supercooled bulk metallic glass forming liquids in conjunction with the glass
transition as well as the thermal stability against crystallization. It focuses
on the question why these liquids are superior glass formers compared to
previous metallic glass formers. Together with the high viscosity, the Zr-Ti-Cu-
Ni-Be alloys show small heats of fusion and a small Gibbs free energy difference
between supercooled liquid and crystalline mixture. This indicates that at least
this alloy group is a rather dense liquid with a small free volume. In the
proposed research, a selection of different alloy groups will be examined with
respect to their kinetics, thermodynamics and crystallization behavior. Three
groups of alloys will be investigated. One group consists of early transition
metal (ETM) based alloys that are free of Beryllium, in which the ETM(TM)s may
serve as a rigid backbone. The second group includes bulk metallic glass forming
metalloid containing liquids of the Pd-Cu-Ni-P type and the last group is based
on simple metals such as Mg and Al. The goals of the study are to measure the
viscosity of supercooled liquids as a function of temperature, alloy composition
and shear rate, the specific heat capacities, heats of fusion and heats of
crystallization to determine the thermodynamic functions of the alloys as well
as the kinetics of the glass transition probed by viscosity and enthalpy
relaxation experiments as well as the heating rate dependence of the glass
transition temperature. In addition, the crystallization kinetics and
microstructure for different degrees of undercooling will be investigated.
Various models will be used and developed to analyze the results on viscosities.
The thermodynamic functions are calculated as a function of temperature from the
experimental data and the functional form of the entropy curve is compared with
the viscosity via the Adam Gibbs theory. Nucleation and growth simulations will
be applied to the kinetic and microstructural data and the measured viscosities
and the thermodynamic driving forces are incorporated in these calculations. The
educational outreach involves exposing undergraduate students as well as local
high school seniors in various experimental aspects of the program.

Bulk metallic glasses represent an exciting new class of structural materials,
because of their properties like high strength, large elastic strain limit,
corrosion resistance and formability. Furthermore, the high thermal stability of
these alloys to resist crystallization allows investigation of supercooled
metallic liquids from the melting point down to the glass transition. This
region has not been experimentally accessible in the past for random closed
packed liquids. The proposed work will have significance in the area of
crystallization and glass formability of complex alloy systems, which can have
technological underpinning, specifically in regard to the processing of bulk
metallic glasses.