* 0205297
* Spectroscopic Investigations of Massive Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Douglas Gies, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2006
* USD 257,389.00

AST-0205297&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Gies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of
the most massive stars are born in close pairs that are destined to interact
over their lifetime. The influence of a companion can dramatically alter the
evolutionary paths of the stars: the mass donors can be stripped down to a
fraction of their original size while the mass gainers can become rejuvenated as
more massive and luminous stars. These altered stars will eventually explode as
peculiar supernovae, and their remnants dominate the appearance of the high
energy universe (as massive X-ray binaries containing neutron stars and black
holes). Although the starting and end-points of binary evolution are understood
the processes that forge the intermediate stages are still mysterious, and great
uncertainties surround the issues of mass and angular momentum transfer and
loss.&lt;br/&gt; This project will be an investigation of these processes at
various stages in the evolutionary drama through spectroscopic studies of a
number of key systems. The first part is a survey of two dozen targets for new
binaries with hard to detect companions. The second section is an orbital
analysis of the H a emission flux formed in the circumstellar gas in two
currently interacting systems. The third part examines the link between mass
transfer and the spin up of rapidly rotating stars, and includes a hunt for
faint post-mass transfer companions of Be stars. The final component is a joint
H a -X-ray study of mass transfer in massive X-ray binaries as documented in
extensive H a spectroscopy obtained with the KPNO Coude Feed
Telescope.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;