* 0205804
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Coercion and Reconciliation in a Socially Monogamous Species
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Robert Jaeger, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,820.00

Dissertation Research: Coercion and Reconciliation in a Socially Monogamous
Species Robert G. Jaeger, Ph. D. Ethan D. Prosen, M.S.

This research project examines the effects of aggression on socially monogamous
behavior using the red-backed salamander (Plethodon cinereus) as a model
organism. In laboratory studies, some males and females of this territorial
species have shown a preference for associating with their partner relative to
other individuals of the opposite sex (i.e., are socially monogamous). This
preference is unknown in other amphibians. Preliminary evidence implies that
both sexes direct aggressive behavior towards partners that associate with
individuals of the opposite sex (i.e., are "fickle"). This increased aggression,
or "sexual coercion", may be what drives some individuals toward social
monogamy. Primate studies have shown that reconciliation, or making-up behavior,
reduces the negative effects that result from aggression between individuals
that often interact. There has been a call for research exploring the
possibility of reconciliation in animals outside of the primates. Red-backed
salamanders exhibit two of the three minimum requirements for reconciliation:
long-term memory and individual recognition. Therefore, it is hypothesized that
partners will display reconciliation behavior after aggression following a
fickle event. These experiments look at how intimidation shapes the social
behavior of red-backed salamanders. This research tests the general hypothesis
that aggression can maintain socially monogamous partnerships. Parental
investment theory predicts social monogamy to be rare, especially when males
provide no direct resources to offspring. Because red-baked salamander males
provide no direct resources to offspring, this species provides an ideal
situation for the exploration of the maintenance of social monogamy. In
addition, finding evidence of reconciliation in a lower vertebrate such as
salamanders would open up a field dominated by primate studies.