* 0205185
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Comparative Primate and Mammalian Bone Microstructure
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Frederick Szalay, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 8,491.00

Most studies of the behavior and biology of extinct primates rely upon the
examination of the size and external features of fossil material. Often
overlooked is the information that can be derived from the analysis of the
microscopic structure of bone. The benefits of the latter approach, evidenced
for example in the recent dinosaur literature, are particularly great where
fossil materials are incomplete, as is usually the case. Despite this tremendous
potential, studies of mammalian bone microstructure are rare.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a much needed foundation regarding
microstructural variability among the living primates. Four bone microstructural
features are examined in the long bones from 10 living primate species, and
several other relevant mammals. Each of these features - visible when thin
cross-sections of bone are observed under a microscope - has been linked to bone
strength in locomotion and/or aspects of life-history (the schedule by which
animals grow, reproduce, and die). The intent is first to observe and describe
existing variation. But, more importantly, the study is designed to identify the
factors that may be driving this microstructural variability (body size,
locomotory patterns, etc.). Once the relationship between these factors and the
microstructural features is elucidated, several fossil primates, selected for
their relevance to the understanding of early primate evolution, will be
examined. It is expect that the microstructural investigation will illuminate
previously obscure aspects of the biology and behavior of these extinct
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research constitutes one of several ongoing
projects in the Hard Tissue Research Unit at Hunter College, City University of
New York. As a whole, the laboratory is generating a database of information
with applications to anthropology and to the study of vertebrate skeletons in
general. These data are additionally relevant to the clinically-oriented bone
biology field; all bone is not like human bone, and an appreciation of the
variability that exists provides the context within which human bone structure
and function is understood. Finally, new methods developed in the course of the
study will become available to the community of bone biologists and comparative
morphologists at &lt;br/&gt;