* 0205584
* Collaborative Research ITR/AP:    Enabling Microscopic Simulators to Perform System-Level Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Linda Petzold, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2006
* USD 665,000.00

Research:

An interdisciplinary research team, at four universities, is collaborating on
this medium-size Information Technology Research (ITR) project aimed at
systematically bridging the gap between microscopic descriptions of complex
material systems and systems-level analysis of direct engineering importance. A
mathematics-assisted computational methodology will be developed that will
enable microscopic-level simulators to perform systems-level analysis directly,
without the need to pass through an intermediate level description of the
material system through macroscopic (partial differential or integro-
differential) evolution equations. Specifically, an ensemble-averaged "coarse"
time-stepper-based computational superstructure will be "wrapped around" state-
of-the-art microscopic dynamic simulators, such as molecular dynamics, kinetic
Monte Carlo, Lattice-Boltzmann or hybrid codes. This methodology will enable
microscopic simulators to perform advanced systems-level analysis: stability,
bifurcation, "coarse" integration, sensitivity, and control tasks, of complex,
nonlinear distributed processes. The planned algorithms will run on massively
parallel machines.

The computational framework will consist of the following basic elements: (i)
choice of statistics of interest (e.g. distribution moments) for describing the
coarse behavior; (ii) "lifting" of a macroscopic initial condition to an
ensemble of consistent microscopic configurations; (iii) evolution over the same
(short) time period of each initial microscopic configuration in the ensemble
according to a microscopic simulator that embodies the best current description
of the physical system; (iv) averaging ("restriction") over the ensemble of the
evolved microscopic configurations to provide a macroscopic evolved system
state; and (v) execution of the previous three steps over a finite set of
macroscopic initial conditions. This new approach is robust in its
implementation and portable in its range of scientific and engineering
applications. It has general applicability to all systems for which a
macroscopic description is conceptually possible, yet unavailable in closed
form. It circumvents the difficulty in obtaining and closing such macroscopic
models, while computationally extracting precisely the information that would be
obtained by a macroscopic model, had the model been available in closed form.
This provides the link between ITR and a spectrum of application areas.

Impact:

The impact of the research will be on establishing a powerful and general link
between state-of-the-art microscopic-level simulations and fast systems level
analysis capabilities. Although the research focuses on specific problems in
heterogeneous hard materials and complex fluids, the computational framework is
applicable to a broad range of complex systems, including biological systems,
their processing and function. Since it has the potential to revolutionize
engineering systems-level analysis, it could have educational impact as well as
furthering advances in microelectronics, bioinformatics and nanotechnology.