* 0205682
* ITR: Reconfigurable Fabric
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Glenn Reinman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,600,001.00

Because of the relentless march of the silicon-based electronics technology as
predicted by Moore's Law, computation, storage, and communication are now woven
into the fabrics of our lives. The emerging technology of flexible electronics,
where electronics components such as transistors and wires are built on a thin
flexible material, offers a similar opportunity to weave computation, storage,
and communication into the fabric of the very clothing that we wear. The
implications of seamlessly integrating a large number of communicating
computation and storage resources, mated with sensors and actuators, in close
proximity to the human body will transform many aspects of biomedical research
and practice. For example, one can imagine biomedical applications where
biometric and ambient sensors are woven into the garment of a patient or a
person in a medically-critical or hazardous environment to trigger or modulate
the delivery of a drug.&lt;br/&gt;To realize this vision outside the laboratory,
radical innovation is required in the area of system-level information
technology. These systems will not scale to widespread use if they are viewed
simply as traditional chips or motherboards based on a different, flexible form
factor. Rather, a rethinking of the architecture and the design methodology for
all layers of these systems is needed. The reasons are two-fold. First, the
underlying technology of electronics in flexible materials has characteristics
and computation-communication cost trade-offs that are very different from that
of silicon and PCB-based electronics. Second, the natural applications of these
systems have environmental dynamics, physical coupling, resource constraints,
infrastructure support, and robustness requirements that are very different from
those faced by traditional systems. &lt;br/&gt;One of the challenges in
developing the needed information technology architecture and design methodology
for these systems is that one needs to both conduct experimental work and
develop a conceptual understanding of the problem domain. This research studies:
&lt;br/&gt; Application: Use as a driver application capability, reconfigurable
fabric (R-Fabric) based on a combination of (i) the technology of flexible
electronics using organic materials, and (ii) computing, communication, and
sensing elements implemented as E-Buttons.&lt;br/&gt; Architecture: Develop the
general architecture concepts and cost/performance optimization techniques. The
issues that we will focus on will include (i) appropriate primitives for
composing the architecture, (ii) system interconnect network optimized for the
electrical characteristics of the organic electronics, (iii) techniques to cope
with the high ration of communication to computation cost, and (iv) architecture
level self-configuration and re-configuration for robust operation.&lt;br/&gt;
Programming: Develop techniques and primitives for programming a system composed
of hundreds of computation, storage, sensing, and actuation elements that are
individually resource constrained and are connected by a structured but fault-
prone high-cost interconnect network.&lt;br/&gt; Processors: Develop domain-
specific processor architecture optimized for these power-constrained,
physically coupled applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design Methodology:
Develop techniques and hybrid emulation platform for systematic architecture
exploration, simulation, optimization, and reconfiguration of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;