* 0205949
* Collaborative:  Reliability of Ferroelectric Thin Films: A Systematic Study of Point Defect Phenomena and Local Electronic Structure Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2006
* Paul McIntyre, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 675,000.00

This proposal describes a coherent, collaborative research project on the
connections between the point defect chemistry and electronic structure of
ferroelectric thin films and the fatigue and imprint processes that limit their
reliability in non-volatile memory (FeRAM) devices. A key objective of the
research program is to understand the relative contributions of field-induced
electronic charge injection/trapping and charged oxygen vacancy redistribution
during fatigue and imprint of state-of-the-art Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) films. Fatigue
and imprint testing under optical illumination and DLTS measurements will be
pursued in order to characterize both optically- and electrically-active carrier
traps in the films. Atomic resolution STEM/EELS studies will be performed on
both undegraded and fatigued/imprinted specimens in order to look for
degradation-induced changes in bonding arrangements and local electronic
structure at the electrode interfaces with PZT. Oxygen isotope depth profiling
through ferroelectric capacitors subjected to various electrical biasing
conditions will be used to characterize oxygen vacancy motion. Ab initio
calculations of the local electronic structure at ferroelectric/metal
interfaces, the energies of carrier trap states associated with point defects,
and defect formation and migration energies will be performed to properly
interpret the experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric materials
exhibit a spontaneous polarization, which can be used in a variety of different
applications in microelectronics and communications. For example, thin film
ferroelectric materials are the key enabler for a new generation of non-volatile
semiconductor memories which are currently being developed (and, increasingly,
brought to market) by major microelectronics firms worldwide. The physics of
switching the ferroelectric polarization state in small-dimension, thin film
structures is also an important topic of fundamental scientific interest. Both
the science and the technology of ferroelectric thin films provide motivation
for better-understanding phenomena that interfere with reliable polarization
switching in these materials. Such phenomena include ferroelectric fatigue, the
loss of switchable polarization after repeated switching by applied voltage
pulses, and imprint, a shift in coercive voltage resulting from repeated voltage
pulses of one polarity. A host of experimental observations and theoretical
models for ferroelectric fatigue and imprint have been reported over the years.
However, the detailed mechanisms responsible for these reliability-limiting
processes remain uncertain. This research program will investigate the
underlying mechanisms of ferroelectric fatigue and imprint in state-of-the art
ferroelectric films provided by our collaborators in the semiconductor industry.
The research will be directed by three co-principal investigators based at
Stanford University and the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). The program
builds on our complimentary expertise in measurements of charged defect
migration and polarization switching characteristics of ferroelectric thin
films, atomic resolution imaging and spectroscopy using the electron microscope,
and simulations of the electronic properties of solids. It will strengthen
existing educational outreach activities to Chicago-area high school students,
and will include summer research projects for UIC undergraduates at Stanford.
These summer projects will be well-integrated with the research program
objectives and will strengthen the collaboration between our two
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;