* 0205653
* ITR/AP: Simulation of Multi-Scale Deformation in Solid Earth Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2006
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 2,000,000.00

0205653&lt;br/&gt;Gurnis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to develop a
suite of tools to model multi-scale deformation for Earth Science problems. This
effort is motivated by the need to understand interctions between the long-term
evolution of plate tectonics and shorter term processes such as the evolution of
faults during and between earthquakes. Several major data acquisition efforts
within the Earth Sciences community are underway or at an advanced planning
stage (EarthScope including PBO - Plate Boundary Observatory, InSAR - Satellite
based Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar, USArray - a 400 element moveable
seismic array, GPS - continuous Global Positioning System measurements). These
observational programs will rapidly produce vast, high-quality data sets which
record deformation of the Earth's surface on multiple time scales, from co-
seismic and post-seismic to long term tectonic time scales, and on multiple
spatial scales, from centimeters to thousands of
kilometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will produce a
modeling package, usable by the entire Earth sciences community, that addresses
the limitations of what is currently feasible and that is engineered with
software evolution and growth as design requirements. Their efforts will extend
the capabilities of the PYRE framework, an object-oriented environment capable
of specifying and launching numerical simulations on multiple platforms,
including Beowulf class parallel computers, that can function with grid-
computing systems. Specifically, the community needs fexible modeling tools that
incorporate complex rheologies, e.g., temperature-dependent, non-Newtonian,
visco-elasto-plasticity with discrete failure planes and dynamic re-gridding to
resolve evolving regions of high strain. From a computational perspective, this
is an excellent time to pursue these objectives. Major advances in the PC
industry enable scientists to build massively parallel PC cluster computers that
facilitate realistic 3-D simulations at reasonable computational and monetary
costs. Complimenting these hardware advances are major architectural solutions
allowing more traditional codes to be bound together to solve complex, multi-
scale, multi-physics problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be a collaborative
project between two Caltech units; The Center for Advanced Computer Research
(CACR) and the Seismological Laboratory. After about eighteen months into the
project, beta versions of the software will be made available to the community
and final versions will be available without restrictions, installed on NSF PACI
computing facilities, for example. The new geodynamics modeling framework will
easily allow one to launch 2-D AND 3-D simulations on platforms ranging in scale
from uniprocessors to the TerraGrid, making the code useful to a wide range of
users from individual scientists and educators to inter disciplinary teams
working on state of the art calculations posed within EarthScope.&lt;br/&gt;***