* 0205699
* Stochastic Variational Problems: Optimization and Equilibrium
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Roger Wets, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 179,713.00

0205699 Wets

This research proposal is centered around approximation issues in stochastic
programming, in particular as they arise in two quite challenging problems:
equilibria problems in a stochastic environment and recourse problems involving
partial differential equations. The "stochastic" equilibrium problem adds a new
level of difficulty; rather than just optimizing one must find a mechanism to
determine a price system under which the optimization takes place. Such
equilibria have been derived by relying on fixed point theorems. Thirdly,
because it is only possible to solve discretized versions of stochastic
optimization problems, it is of paramount importance to investigate thoroughly
approximation issues. Not only the question of approximating the stochastic
process that describes the uncertainty but also how to improve the construction
of this process from the available data and to analyze the effect this will have
on the solution of the stochastic program.

The field of stochastic programming provides mathematical tools for solving and
analyzing models for decision making under uncertainty. This project will be
concerned with two significant and difficult applications and with approximation
issues: -- A problem in groundwater remediation which was selected because it
requires both theoretical and computational developments. It is a stochastic
optimization problem where the state of the system is obtained by solving a
partial differential equation whose coefficients are rapidly oscillating
(heterogeneous media) and stochastic (uncertainty about the media composition).
The possibility of deriving a homogenized version of this problem will also be
investigated. -- Walras equilibrium problem in an uncertain environment. This
problem is selected because it adds a dimension to stochastic optimization in
that one must also find price systems (setting up an "equilibrium") under which
this stochastic optimization must take place. -- Approximation issues in
stochastic programming. The question of having a reliable estimate for the
parameters of a dynamic stochastic programming problem is raised. It is expected
that a more comprehensive, approach which makes use of all the information
available, rather than just the collected data will result in more reliable
solutions for stochastic programming problems.