* 0205968
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Evolutionary Success in Marine Invertebrates: Testing Relationships Between Eurytopy, Longevity, and Geographic Range in Carboniferous Crinoids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2002,12/31/2007
* William Ausich, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2007
* USD 99,999.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolutionary Success in Marine Invertebrates: Testing
the Relationships between Eurytopy, Longevity, and Geographic Range in
Carboniferous Crinoids

This study will focus on the role of environmental and biogeographic factors in
the evolutionary success of crinoids (echinoderms), one the most diverse and
abundant groups of marine invertebrates during the Paleozoic. Lower
Carboniferous (354 to 314 m.y. ago) rocks record the peak of crinoid generic
diversity during their evolutionary history. Evolutionary success is measured by
taxonomic longevity in the fossil record. Current understanding of reasons for
evolutionary success is incomplete, but available evidence indicates a positive
correlation with environmental breadth (eurytopy) and geographic range. Data
supporting this correlation are limited for Paleozoic marine invertebrates.
Thus, analysis of Early Carboniferous crinoids, where preliminary work supports
such a correlation, will more rigorously test the correlation and broaden our
understanding of the relationships between eurytopy, longevity, and geographic
range in marine invertebrates. The research will compare the average
stratigraphic (longevity), environmental (eurytopy), and geographic ranges of
genera within crinoid groups (suborders) between North America and Europe, the
two regions with the best fossil record. The study will include the
Kinderhookian to early Meramecian epochs of the Mississippian Period (Early
Carboniferous) of North America and the equivalent Tournaisian to middle Visean
epochs of the Early Carboniferous of western Europe. Stratigraphic and
geographic ranges of genera will be determined by evaluating all known species
for correct generic assignment. Simultaneously, data on environmental
distribution will be tabulated for genera on both continents to calculate a
eurytopy index value for each genus, both intracontinental and intercontinental.
Results of this investigation will bear directly on evolutionary theory as it
endeavors to explain the history of life on Earth. The extensive data set
derived from this study will help elucidate the roles of environment and
geography in determining generic longevity and, ultimately, group longevity in
defining evolutionary success.

