* 0205286
* ITR: SafetyNet: Synergistic Support for Availability, Designability, Programmability, & Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2002,08/31/2008
* David Wood, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,450,000.00

EIA-0205286 David A. Wood University of Tennessee ITR: SafetyNet: Synergist
Support for Availability, Designability, Programmability, & Performance

Information services, supported by remote server computers, are becoming part of
society's essential infrastructure for commerce, science, education, and
government. Many servers are shared-memory multiprocessors that multiply the
60-fold single-processor performance improvements of the last decade by an
additional factor of two to 64. These incredible performance improvements are
putting increasing pressure on sever designs to improve complementary computer
properties, such as:

Availability. Society needs information services that are as dependable as our
electricity and fresh water supplies. Unless new architectural techniques are
developed and applied, however, server availability will go down with time,
since deep submicron transistors are less reliable (and more susceptible to
radiation) and future servers will employ more transistors, offering more
failure opportunities.

Designability. Designability is the challenge of deploying a completely correct
computer. Getting the bugs out of today's computer systems is expensive, in both
manpower and time, and getting worse as the transistor bonanza enables more
complex designs. Furthermore, unpredictable delays leave expensive manufacturing
facilities underutilized and cost 5% performance per month (due to Moore's Law).

Programability. Servers typically run multi-threaded software to turn their raw
computing power into high-throughput information services. Unfortunately, hard-
to-test races make writing such software a challenge that stresses current
programming practices and leads to bugs in deployed software. Hardware that
facilitates rapid development of robust software should be prized.

Performance. Solutions that improve availability, designability, and
programmability will more likely flourish if they have, at most, a modest impact
on cost-performance. Better yet would be hardware that actually improves
performance, in addition to the other properties.