* 0205545
* Elliptic and Parabolic Problems in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Gilbert Weinstein, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 79,541.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0205545.

A number of problems of elliptic and parabolic type in general relativity will
be studied. The investigator will model rotating stars by a self-gravitating
perfect fluid rigidly rotating on its own axis using a perturbation method. The
perturbation parameter is the ratio of the angular velocity to the central
density, allowing rapidly rotating solutions when the density is sufficiently
high. The investigator will work on the uniqueness of the Kerr black holes, to
rule out multiple black hole configurations, as conjectured by Roger Penrose. A
new approach is proposed consisting of the investigation of the relation between
uniqueness theorems for black holes in equilibrium and Penrose-type
inequalities. The investigator will continue his work on the connectedness of
the space of initial data for the Einstein vacuum equations, extending results
obtained in the context of quasi-convex foliations, foliations with leaves of
positive Gauss and mean curvature. The investigator will work, in collaboration
with Y. Li and A. S. Tahvildar-Zadeh, on blow-up of wave maps, the dynamical
counterparts of harmonic maps. These maps have attracted considerable attention
by researchers in nonlinear hyperbolic equations mainly due to their similarity
to the Einstein equations. The investigator will also work on the asymptotic
behavior of harmonic maps with prescribed singularities into Hadamard manifolds.

Mathematical general relativity overlaps three disciplines: physics, geometry,
and nonlinear partial differential equations. As such, it is an ideal source of
problems whose solutions have the potential to influence all three of these
fields. The problems in this project fall in this category. For example, the
study of Penrose-type inequalities is of interest both to mathematical
relativists and to geometers studying spaces of dimension three. Developing a
good mathematical model for dense rapidly rotating stars is an important goal in
astrophysics, for example when trying to understand pulsars, and would also
contribute new results in perturbation theory. Understanding wave maps should
help the study of other nonlinear evolution equations governing various physical
phenomena.

