* 0205761
* RUI:  Star Formation and Interstellar Gas in Extragalactic Tails and Bridges
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2006
* Beverly Smith, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 09/30/2006
* USD 122,088.00

AST-0205761 Smith

Collisions and close encounters between galaxies can cause major changes in the
galaxies, dramatically altering both the morphology and star formation rate. A
frequent consequence of such an interaction is the production of extended tails
and bridges, which often contain massive young stars. These structures may
fragment and/or disperse, forming new dwarf galaxies and/or enriching the
intergalactic medium. At present, there are still many outstanding questions
about the properties of the interstellar gas and star formation in these
features. What are the rates and efficiencies of star formation in these
features, and how do these depend on the interaction parameters and timescales?
What are the properties of the interstellar gas in these structures? Are the
properties of these features consistent with them being the precursors of dwarf
galaxies? Is star formation in these features subject to a `threshold' effect,
only occurring above a `critical' gas surface density?

To address these questions, Dr. Beverly Smith, at East Tennessee State
University, will carry out a comprehensive multi-wavelength study of a sample of
two dozen tails and bridges and a similar size comparison sample of dwarf
galaxies. Using multi-wavelength data, Dr. Smith will measure the atomic to
molecular hydrogen ratios, metallicities, star formation rates, and efficiencies
in these tails and bridges, and will determine how these depend upon the
parameters of the interaction. She will determine how the properties of these
tails and bridges compare with those of dwarf galaxies. These observations will
be done in conjunction with hydrodynamical modeling of the systems in the
sample, which will better define the interaction parameters and help determine
the conditions needed to trigger star formation in tails and bridges. Using
these results, Dr. Smith will search for a star formation `threshold' in tails
and bridges analogous to that found for galactic disks, and will investigate
whether the efficiency of star formation is higher in tidal features than in
features caused by ram pressure stripping, as predicted by theoretical models.
This award is made under the auspices of the Research in Undergraduate
Institutions program at NSF. ***

