* 0205779
* Exploring Dynamical Systems: Exposing Students to Contemporary Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2007
* Robert Devaney, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2007
* USD 304,314.00

One of the major difficulties facing mathematics today is the fact that most
people have no idea about what is happening in contemporary mathematics or why
this field is important. Unfortunately, most contemporary research in this field
is difficult, if not impossible, to explain to students. The problem is that
much of today's mathematics builds upon years or even centuries of prior
mathematical research. As a consequence, undergraduate students rarely have the
background to experience what is new and exciting in this field.

In this project, the PI and his collaborators are attempting to change this
culture by creating a series on on-line activities that provide students with
the background and the tools necessary to experience and investigate certain
contemporary topics in mathematics. The activities are drawn from the areas of
mathematics known as dynamical systems theory and fractal geometry. These are
two relatively new areas of mathematics that have widespread applicability in
all areas of science and engineering. In addition, much of the current research
in this field involves a significant experimental component involving computer
graphics. Most importantly, much of the PI's current research in these areas
involves iteration of simple expressions (such as quadratic functions), and so
many of the ideas in this field can be readily explained to students with only a
high school background in mathematics.

In this project, the PI is developing a series of ten stand-alone modules, each
of which is designed to acquaint the user with a particular topic of interest in
these fields. Each module includes streaming video introductions, online
software (java applets), computer generated animations, and suggested areas for
student investigation. The materials being developed can be woven into courses
throughout the curriculum, ranging from introductory math courses for liberal
arts students and precalculus to calculus and linear algebra courses, to give
students an ongoing glimpse of the excitement of modern mathematics.
Alternatively, the modules can be concatenated in a string of activities
designed to bring the student to the forefront of active research in this area.