* 0205712
* ITR: Virtual Power for a Wireless Campus - A Vision of Ubiquitous Computing On Low-Cost Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,016,798.00

While handheld, battery-powered devices such as personal
digital&lt;br/&gt;assistants (PDA's) and web-enabled mobile phones are emerging
as new&lt;br/&gt;access points to the world's digital infrastructure, their cost
and&lt;br/&gt;short battery life are factors that are holding back their
enormous&lt;br/&gt;potential. Worse yet, the cost of such devices might even
widen the&lt;br/&gt;"digital divide". This research addresses these cost and
battery-life issues&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously, thereby getting one step closer to
a vision of ubiquitous&lt;br/&gt;computing embracing all of society. The
specific focus is the digital university&lt;br/&gt;campus with wireless Internet
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this setting, the aim is to increase the
utility and battery-life&lt;br/&gt;and decrease the cost of handheld wireless
computers by enabling the&lt;br/&gt;use of relatively simple hardware for the
mobile devices. This research aims&lt;br/&gt;both at designing embedded hardware
that better conserves resources, as well as&lt;br/&gt;creating a software layer
that masks the limited computational prowess&lt;br/&gt;of a handheld device by
seamlessly coupling it to a relatively high-powered&lt;br/&gt;stationary
computational infrastructure via an "always on" wireless
connection.&lt;br/&gt;By off-loading power-intensive operations to the
stationary infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;the battery-powered mobile device is
provided with "virtual power".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive just-in-time
compiler technology will be developed for minimizing&lt;br/&gt;power use on
mobile devices running mobile&lt;br/&gt;code, and adaptive scheduling methods
using results from the&lt;br/&gt;Computational Grid research community.
Depending on the algorithm to&lt;br/&gt;be run on the mobile device and its
current distance from the nearest&lt;br/&gt;base station, the computation to be
performed is to be automatically&lt;br/&gt;partitioned between a part to be
executed in the stationary&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure and another to be run on the
mobile device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the hardware level, orchestrated
resource-management strategies will be&lt;br/&gt;developed to enable designers
to correctly design and implement highly&lt;br/&gt;resource-constrained embedded
systems while helping them to meet system-level&lt;br/&gt;constraints. This
requires augmenting today's functional design flows with a&lt;br/&gt;resource-
centric view. Here, the goal is not to replace existing design
methodologies&lt;br/&gt;with yet another all-encompassing methodology, but
rather making a cross-cutting&lt;br/&gt;impact by demonstrating the
applicability of results to several driving examples&lt;br/&gt;at different
levels of abstraction, including System-on-Chip (SoC)
platforms,&lt;br/&gt;memory architecture level, and operating system
level.&lt;br/&gt;