* 0205899
* Simple Molecular Solids at Ultrahigh Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2005
* USD 395,000.00

This research concerns experimental studies of pressure-induced transformations
and novel behavior of simple molecular systems to ultrahigh static pressures
above 300 GPa (3 megabars) over a broad temperature range. The experiments will
focus on transformations in representative solids formed from low-Z diatomic and
triatomic systems, rare gases, and dense compounds and alloys containing these
species. The project takes advantage of recent developments in diamond-anvil
cell techniques, and a variety of theoretical predictions based on first-
principles calculations. New synchrotron x-ray and neutron diffraction
techniques will be used for crystal structure determination, including low
temperature phases of oxygen and hydrogen isotopes. Recently developed high-
pressure x-ray inelastic scattering techniques will be used to measure pressure
effects and to understand the density dependence of electronic excitations,
their bandwidths, and dispersion. Transport methods will be used to study
superconductivity and possible transformations to novel states of in a range of
materials, including oxygen and hydrogen-rich solids. There will be a systematic
effort to extend the pressure range, accuracy, and sensitivity of static high-
pressure techniques important for the high-pressure community, including those
used at national user facilities. Numerous other fields, including chemistry,
materials science, and planetary science should also benefit. A major goal of
this project is the training of young scientists in physics and materials
science. A graduate student and a post-doctoral fellow will be supported
directly under this grant. Undergraduates and exceptional high-school students
also participate. All are prepared for future positions in academia, national
laboratories, and high-technology industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of
ultrahigh pressures on simple molecules is a classic problem in physics and
chemistry. Under the very high-pressures that can now be reached in the
laboratory, molecules such as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, water, and related
substances transform to novel materials, including dense metals, unique
superconductors, and unusual compounds. Many of these were unanticipated
theoretically, and their discovery has greatly enhanced understanding of matter
as a whole. In this project, new experiments on the novel behavior of simple
molecules at ultrahigh static compressed to above 300 GPa (3 megabars) over a
broad temperature range will be carried out using a powerful device known as the
diamond anvil cell. The project takes advantage of recent developments in
techniques that couple the diamond-anvil cell with sensitive analytical methods,
and new theoretical predictions for these materials. A large portion of the
experiments will take place at major national facilities such as synchrotron
radiation and neutron sources, where new techniques will be developed and
scientists trained. A variety of laser techniques as well as highly sensitive
electrical and magnetic methods will be used, for example to study
superconductivity from greatly compressing molecular materials. There will be a
systematic effort to extend the pressure range, accuracy, and sensitivity of
high-pressure techniques important for the high-pressure community, including
major programs at national facilities. Numerous other fields, including
chemistry, materials science, and planetary science should benefit. Finally,
this project will train a number of young scientists, including graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows as well as undergraduate interns and even
exceptional high-school students. The research will prepare these students for
positions in academia, national laboratories, and high-technology industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;