* 0205447
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:   Natural Language in the Development of High Confidence Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Mark Elson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

Proposal Numbers: 0205447 and 0205588&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: ITR: Collaborative
Research: Natural Language in the Development of High-Confidence
Software&lt;br/&gt;PI: John Knight and Robyn
Lutz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inadequate communication of domain knowledge in
natural language (such as English textual descriptions) is a major source of
requirements defects in high-confidence software. Such defects can threaten
lives, property, and the dependability of critical infrastructures. This
research develops innovative, multi-disciplinary techniques designed expressly
to identify and cope with the properties of natural language that lead to these
problems. It analyses the domain-knowledge communication problem from the
perspective of current linguistic theory in order to generate models and
techniques that reduce communication breakdowns between domain experts and
software developers. On the basis of this analysis, techniques for the
elicitation, recording, and propagation of domain knowledge in requirements
activities will be designed. A set of tools will also be developed to support
the practical use of these engineering techniques. Several case studies will be
used to assess and refine the techniques and tools on actual, high-confidence
software systems in the aviation and spacecraft application domains. The
research effort is directed at the reduction of requirements defects through the
application of techniques that take into account the linguistic difficulties
particular to domain knowledge communication..&lt;br/&gt;