* 0206750
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Outcrossing and Sex Ratio in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Leticia Aviles, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 9,220.00

&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to impart an evolutionary and ecological
perspective on&lt;br/&gt;the study of a model organism, the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. In this&lt;br/&gt;nematode, hermaphrodites--individuals
with male/female reproductive organs--may&lt;br/&gt;reproduce alone or via
fertilization from males. This research seeks to elucidate&lt;br/&gt;the role of
males in this species and to explore general features involved&lt;br/&gt;in the
evolution of outcrossing. In particular: what proximate and
ultimate&lt;br/&gt;forces influence the ability of males to persist, and at what
frequencies?&lt;br/&gt; These issues will be addressed by (1) using molecular
methods to determine&lt;br/&gt;the frequency of males in large lab and natural
populations, and (2) performing&lt;br/&gt;lab selection experiments to test
hypotheses for the maintenance of outcrossing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will provide one of the first evolutionary ecological perspectives&lt;br/&gt;for
C. elegans. This species has been subject to intensive study from
genetics&lt;br/&gt;(the first animal genome sequenced) and developmental biology
(all cell fates&lt;br/&gt;are mapped between zygote and adult), but
disproportionately little information&lt;br/&gt;is available regarding its
ecology and the processes underlying the evolution&lt;br/&gt;of its unusual
breeding system. This research will integrate multiple
complementary&lt;br/&gt;approaches to characterize a more resonant description
of ecology and evolution&lt;br/&gt;in this model organism, and bear on general
issues in the study of evolution&lt;br/&gt;relating to the evolution and
maintenance of outcrossing.&lt;br/&gt;