* 0206259
* Research on Environmental Sustainability of Semi-Arid Coastal Areas (RESSACA)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Venkatesh Uddameri, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Cooperative Agreement
* Patrick F. Mensah
* 08/31/2007
* USD 5,246,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Andrew Ernest, PI, Texas A&amp;M University-
Kingsville&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville (TAMUK) seeks NSF
support for a CREST for Research on Environmental Sustainability of Semi-Arid
Coastal Areas (RESSACA). The center will be organized around three core research
subprojects thematically integrated: Environmental Systems Modeling (ESM),
Environmental Informatics (EI), and Living Laboratories for Academics and
Research (LLAR). LLAR will serve as the principal mechanism for transferring
environmental sustainability research into other educational domains, both
formal and informal, along the K-PhD continuum and to the public. The center
will be located in Environmental Engineering, College of Engineering at TAMUK,
for over a decade one of the top ten universities nationally in the production
of Hispanic engineers at the baccalaureate level, graduating 72 in 2000. The
department offers the only Ph.D. program in environmental engineering in South
Texas and one of the few serving the 2,000 mile U.S./Mexico border. Dr. Andrew
Ernest, Chair, Department of Environmental Engineering, and Director, South
Texas Environmental Institute, will serve as PI. Serving predominately Hispanic
South Texas and the border region for environmental sustainability research,
RESSACA will provide, access for Hispanics to MS and PhD programs in
environmental engineering, research/education integration, and research transfer
to the public policy decision makers and stakeholders engaged in development of
economic, social, and physical infrastructures necessitated by the dramatic
growth related to NAFTA. Partners include Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus
Christi, Texas A&amp;M International University (Laredo), University of Texas-El
Paso, University of Texas (UT)-Pan American, and UT-Brownsville. RESSACA will be
a major research partner with institutions along both sides of the U.S./Mexico
border on sustainability research to establish a more integrative and connected
research enterprise in semi-arid coastal zones along the entire U.S./Mexico
border, from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific. Partnerships have been
established with three major NSF funded initiatives with research capacities
aligned with this objective: Science and Technology Center for Sustainable Semi-
Arid Hydrology and Riparian Areas at the University of Arizona (Dr. Soroosh
Sorooshian, Director); Center for Environmental Analysis of the California State
University, Los Angeles (Dr. Carlos Robles, Director); and San Diego
Supercomputer Center, Dr. David Stockwell, Head of The Bioinformatics And
Biodiversity Program. Dr. Felipe Rubio Castillo, Deputy Director, Consejo
Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACyT), National Council of Science and
Technology Research of Mexico, has agreed to serve on the centers External
Advisory Group to advance binational research partnerships. The research
subprojects and strategically aligned research partnerships will enable TAMUK to
achieve national competitiveness in sustainability research and become a top
producer nationally of Hispanics earning the PhD in environmental engineering.
NSF support will allow the development of a critical core infrastructure at
TAMUK and in South Texas that will foster fundamental research and development
for promoting the concepts of sustainability of ecological and environmental
systems in the semi-arid coastal areas of South Texas. These border research
issues of sustainability of systems and the related technology development and
transfer and knowledge transfer into the intersections of technical, economic,
and social systems are of national importance. They provide a critical context
in which NSF funding under CREST can serve as a dynamic catalyst to advance both
our national research capacity and capacity to address the significant
underrepresentation of Hispanics at the PhD level in these nationally important
sustainability disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;