* 0206092
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of Cupressus and Chamaecyparis (Cupressaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Kevin Nixon, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kevin Nixon and Mr. Damon Little at Cornell
University to study the evolutionary relationships of the genus Cupressus
(cypress) and closely related species such as arborvitae (Thuja) and junipers
(Juniperus). These species are widely cultivated for their attractive evergreen
foliage and pleasant "cedar" scent. Their wood is of some economic importance
due to its durability and resistance to rot (used in e.g., pencils, cedar
chests, siding, decks, and roofing shingles). Due to their narrow geographic
distributions, one species of cypress is classified by the United States
government as endangered and another is listed as threatened. DNA sequences and
morphological characteristics of these species will be used to infer the
evolutionary history and delimit the species of cypress (there is great
controversy concerning the number of species). Other questions that will be
investigated include the evolution specialized adaptations to extreme habitat
types, evolution of seed dispersal mechanisms, and hybridization between cypress
species.

The result of this research will highlight diagnostic characteristics of these
species and provide identification keys and other information so specialists and
non-specialists (e.g., foresters, plant breeders, horticulturists, ecologists,
etc.) can easily identify specimens. In addition a complete description of all
cypress species will be provided. Other specialists will be able to the tools
developed during the course of this research to study evolution in other
conifers.