* 0206857
* Spectroscopically Determined Excited State Properties and Photochemical Reactivities of Inorganic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 358,400.00



In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Zink will conduct research on the excited electronic states
and reactivities of inorganic molecular precursors for photodeposition of metals
and semiconductors. Absorption, emission and resonance Raman spectroscopies as
well as gas phase action spectra and resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization
experiments will be performed on a series of metal organic molecules. The basic
spectroscopic and photochemical properties of these compounds will be used to
establish optimum parameters for deposition processes and formation of nano-
strutures.

Thin film deposition and formation of nano-structures from gaseous metal organic
compounds depend on the knowledge of the spectroscopic and photochemical
properties of the molecules. This research is directed to bring about a better
understanding of these properties in order to facilitate efficient fabrication
of thin films, lithography and direct writing units, the production of three
dimensional structures with potential use in making three-dimensional circuits
and photonic crystals, and the production of nanoparticles in porous and
templated materials. The research will be done with students who thereby will
receive training in preparation for entering the scientific/technological
workforce.