* 0206103
* RUI:   HII Region Evolution in Extreme Environments
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Christopher De Pree, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 07/31/2006
* USD 184,301.00

AST-0206103&lt;br/&gt;De Pree&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HII regions have revealed
their nature slowly as observational techniques have improved and as
subarcsecond radio frequency observations have become possible. Yet, these
volumes of ionized gas that exist around the most massive young stars, at least
in the early stages of their formation and evolution, are some of the least
understood objects in the Galaxy. The diminutive cousins of HII regions called
ultracompact (UC) HII regions are very different from the parsec-scale,
optically-thin HII regions described in classic textbooks. The evidence is
clear: UC HII regions are not simply small HII regions, they represent a unique
class of object. The goal of Dr. Christopher De Pree's research project is to
compare recent and proposed observations with hydrodynamic simulations to move
toward a more complete understanding of the nature of UC HII regions and what
their morphologies, temperatures, kinematics and evolution tell us about the
earliest stages of massive star formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC HII regions
have never been imaged and mapped spectroscopically on these small spatial
&lt;br/&gt;scales. The sources to be studied are optically unobservable, and
these will be the best data available until the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
(ALMA) is dedicated in the coming decade. These new data provide the best
comparison data to constrain hydrodynamic simulations of UC HII region
evolution. The Agnes Scott College program has a proven record of success in
involving undergraduate women in astronomical research and preparing them for
graduate work, and this project would continue and strengthen that effort by
providing research involvement and exposure to scientists at two premiere
national graduate programs (North Carolina State University and Harvard
University). Early data from related projects have been shared informally with a
number of investigators, and this project would make existing data and new data
freely available. This award is made under the auspices of the Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;