* 0206201
* Year of Algebra at the University of Florida
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Helmut Voelklein, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 06/30/2003
* USD 35,000.00

The Year of Algebra 2002- 2003 at the University of Florida is highlighted by
the celebration of the 70th birthday of John G. Thompson. The general theme of
the Year of Algebra is provided by the wider context of Thompson's monumental
contributions: the beauty and power of group theory, and how it applies to
problems of arithmetic via the basic principle of Galois. The Year of Algebra
features a conference in Galois Theory (Nov. 3--9, 2002), a conference in Group
Theory (March 9--16, 2003) and a workshop on Computational Aspects of Algebraic
Curves, and Cryptography (March 9--15, 2003). The Galois conference centers
around the Inverse Problem of Galois Theory, one of the major open problems of
mathematics. The conference on Finite Group Theory has speakers involved in the
completion/ revision of the Classification, as well as speakers in
Representation Theory, and applications of Finite Groups to Finite Geometries
and other areas. The workshop deals with interactions between modern
computational tools/questions and the theory of algebraic curves, emphasizing
the application to public key cryptography. It has a strong instructional
component (mini-courses).

Group Theory is the abstract study of symmetry patterns (of any object), and
Galois Theory provides tools for applying Group Theory to algebra and
arithmetic. Recent applications to data security (public key cryptography) are
the topic of the workshop. Galois Theory and Group Theory have further
applications to physics, chemistry and coding theory. The Year of Algebra
provides an opportunity for young mathematicians, women and minorities to learn
the latest advances. It was John G. Thompson who shaped finite group theory like
no-one else, leading the way towards a major milestone of 20th century
mathematics, the classification of finite simple groups. After the
classification, it was again J. Thompson who led the way in exploring its
implications for Galois Theory. For these contributions, Thompson has recently
been awarded the National Medal of Science. He also won the Fields Medal, the
highest honor in mathematics. For the Year of Algebra, University of Florida
Graduate Research Professor John G. Thompson acts as an advisor. His powerful
ideas continue to inspire the young. We want to use this opportunity in a
special effort to integrate research and education during the Year of Algebra.
While the two conferences emphasize latest advances in research, the workshop
has a strong instructional component.