* 0206613
* Dissertation Research: The Role of Hybridization in the Evolution and Diversification of Heliconius Butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Lawrence Gilbert, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

One of the primary goals of evolutionary research is to explain the mechanisms
by which new species originate. One such mechanism that has received relatively
little attention is the formation of new species due to interbreeding between
previously established species (or, speciation via interspecific hybridization).
In an effort to understand how new species originate due to hybridization, this
project will trace the history of divergence between Heliconius pachinus, a
tropical butterfly species that recently originated via hybridization, and one
of its parental species, H. cydno. It is hypothesized that since the origin of
the H. pachinus form, natural selection has led to the evolution of mechanisms
by which species integrity is maintained. This project will determine how much
overall genetic exchange is occurring between these two species by examining
these mechanisms and by comparing the genetic makeup of both species throughout
their range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the role of hybridization in animal
evolution is receiving more attention than ever, there are few clear examples of
speciation via hybridization in animals. Once finished, this study will provide
one of the most complete explanations of speciation via hybridization.
Furthermore, the mechanism of divergence proposed here is a novel and exciting
process by which speciation may have occurred many times in this genus and
others. The incredible correspondence of mimetic Heliconius species pairs has
long amazed biologists and still lacks a mechanistic explanation. The hypothesis
put forward here could well be the explanation for this entire phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;