* 0206495
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics, Floral Evolution, and Developmental Genetics in Basal Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Lipscomb
* 05/31/2003
* USD 4,413.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Douglas Soltis of University of Florida and
Mr.&lt;br/&gt;Michael Zanis of Washington State University to investigate the
genes governing flower&lt;br/&gt;development in "primitive" flowering plants.
Much is known about the genetics of&lt;br/&gt;flower development in the higher
flowering plants, Arabidopsis (thale cress) and&lt;br/&gt;Antirrhinum
(snapdragon). In contrast, little is known about the genetics of
flower&lt;br/&gt;development in primitive flowering plants. Dr. Soltis and Mr.
Zanis are focusing on&lt;br/&gt;isolating and characterizing MADS-box genes, a
family of development regulatory genes,&lt;br/&gt;from two primitive flowering
plants, Nuphar (a member of the waterlily family) and&lt;br/&gt;Illicium (a
member of the star anise family). They have developed a method
for&lt;br/&gt;extracting RNA from Nuphar and Illicium flowers, and are using
degenerate polymerase&lt;br/&gt;chain raction (PCR) to amplify and obtain DNA
sequences of MADS-box genes. The&lt;br/&gt;relationships of the MADS-box genes
isolated from Nuphar and Illicium are compared to&lt;br/&gt;MADS-box genes
isolated from other flowering plants. Lastly, using RT-PCR Dr.
Soltis&lt;br/&gt;and Mr. Zanis are characterizing the floral tissues in which
the MADS-box genes are&lt;br/&gt;expressed.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genes
involved in flower development in primitive flowering&lt;br/&gt;plants, such as
Nuphar and Illicium, is critical because of the insights they may
provide&lt;br/&gt;into the early angiosperm flower. Moreover, elucidating the
genetics of floral&lt;br/&gt;development in these key flowering plants not only
will help to answer questions&lt;br/&gt;regarding the origin and diversification
of the flower, but will also provide the&lt;br/&gt;opportunity to link what is
known about model flowering plant systems, such as&lt;br/&gt;Antirrhinum and
Arabidopsis, with other flowering plants, providing a
more&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive picture of floral development.