* 0206026
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biomechanical and Life Historical Challenges to Performance in Early Juvenile Ascidians
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Michael LaBarbera, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,045.00

Michael LaBarbara and Kristin Sherrard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Unlike land
animals, many marine animals are fully independent from the earliest juvenile
stages, a tenth of a millimeter long. At this size there are unique challenges
to feeding, growth, and survival. Water behaves like honey and is costly to move
through, being stepped on by a shrimp is fatal, and the food itself, such as
algal cells, is much larger in relation to your mouth. Little is known about how
marine invertebrate juveniles face these challenges, although mortality rates
are higher than at any subsequent stage, which suggests that early juvenile
performance may be a crucial determinant of reproductive success.&lt;br/&gt; The
researchers are investigating feeding performance, growth rates, and mortality
in early juvenile ascidian, or sea squirts. Sea squirts function much like
clams, filtering water to feed on microscopic particles. They have a variety of
growth forms, and may be colonial, budding off small feeding units, or solitary,
increasing greatly in size. Initial juvenile length varies tenfold, and some
species have adults of up to 10 cm in length, with a thousand-fold length change
in the course of growth. &lt;br/&gt; The researchers will compare suspension
feeding performance between juvenile and adult sea squirts of the same species,
and between juveniles of species with different growth patterns. They will
determine whether filter feeding at small size is mechanically less efficient
than at larger size, and evaluate the extent to which performance is optimized
at different stages in the life cycle. Comparing feeding performance in six
distantly related species of sea squirts will reveal whether there are multiple
strategies to minimize the difficulties of feeding efficiencies and growth at
small size stages.&lt;br/&gt;