* 0206569
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Anatomy and Morphogenesis in the Cephalobinae (Nematoda:Rhabditida)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* James Baldwin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,925.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Baldwin and Mr. Daniel Bumbarger at
University of California, Riverside to study the structure and evolution of
extracellular feeding appendages in the Cephalobinae, a group of microbial
feeding nematodes. The project will describe the ultrastructural anatomy of
these structures, classify processes responsible for their assembly and explore
patterns in developmental character evolution that are relevant to understanding
heterochrony and the evolution of novelty. As these structures are extremely
complex on a sub-micrometer spatial scale, a unique application of electron
tomography, a three dimensional electron microscopy method, will be utilized to
describe the anatomy. Morphogenesis of these structures will be studied with
more traditional light microscopy. Comparative work, based primarily on scanning
electron micrographs of adult and juvenile morphologies, will be done in
collaboration with a molecular phylogenetic lab.&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
this project will provide a foundation upon which to ask taxonomic,
developmental and evolutionary questions of broad interest. This project will
contribute to monographic work already in progress by providing strong
hypotheses of character homology with which to re-define taxonomic groupings in
a manner that reflects phylogenetic relationships. The proposed research
represents novel application of electron tomography that may prove useful for
assessing homology in other groups of small invertebrates. Nematodes make
excellent models for understanding the evolution of development, particularly
where a link between genotypic and phenotypic changes must be understood.
Patterns in the complexity and diversity of anterior morphology suggest the
presence of developmental modules that could evolve relatively independently
from one another. Many mutations in these feeding appendages will likely be
viable, which will facilitate identification of developmental regulatory genes
responsible for evolutionary changes.&lt;br/&gt;