* 0206376
* Dissertation Research: Behavioral Responses of the Ant Pheidole Dentata to Parasitism by the Phorid Fly Apocephalus Feeneri
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Donald Feener, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,040.00

Parasites draw nutrition directly from their hosts and adversely affect them
in&lt;br/&gt;many ways. Major workers in the ant species Pheidole dentata are
susceptible to&lt;br/&gt;parasitism by the phorid fly Apocephalus feeneri.
Parasitism by the phorid is fatal for&lt;br/&gt;the parasitized ant and previous
work has shown that foraging majors will try to&lt;br/&gt;conceal themselves
when phorids are detected. In spite of this attempt to
avoid&lt;br/&gt;parasitism, a small percentage of majors are successfully
parasitized by phorids. The&lt;br/&gt;goal of this study is to examine changes
of those parasitized majors by comparing&lt;br/&gt;their behavior to that of
non-parasitized nestmates. Equal numbers of parasitized and&lt;br/&gt;non-
parasitized majors will be marked in a colony and their behaviors observed
using&lt;br/&gt;standard ethogram techniques for the duration of the phorid's
larval development.&lt;br/&gt;Frequencies and sequences of behaviors in
parasitized and non-parasitized majors&lt;br/&gt;will be compared. To highlight
the effect of parasitism on the specialized defensive&lt;br/&gt;response of P.
dentata, parasitized majors will be exposed to fire ants in the
genus&lt;br/&gt;Solenopsis. The outcome of these experiments will affect future
ecological studies&lt;br/&gt;with P. dentata and potentially bio-control efforts
in other ant-phorid systems.