* 0206773
* A Microbial Inventory of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem Thermal Features
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 389,285.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Cristina Takacs-Vesbach (University of New
Mexico) and Anna-Louise Reysenbach (Portland State University) to inventory the
microbial diversity and geochemistry associated with the major geothermal
features of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE: Wyoming, Montana, and
Idaho). The GYE comprises the largest and most varied geothermal basin in the
world, yet diversity assessments have been limited to only a handful of these
thermal springs. The phylogenetic and physiological diversity of 100 thermal
sites will be determined using molecular genetic techniques that identify DNA
sequences of genes that are molecular signatures for microbial species and
metabolic processes. These data, along with geochemical measurements, will be
compiled into an Internet accessible database and will be used to develop DNA
microarrays, a tool that will enable researchers and managers to rapidly assess
the diversity of other thermal sites. The research community will have access to
the DNA isolated by this study through the University of New Mexico Museum. The
investigators will work with National Park Service personnel to develop on-site
educational displays for the general public, in addition to training students,
managers, and National Park Service interpretive rangers in microbial ecology
through a field course and workshop. As the thermal microbiota of the GYE
represents a wealth of untapped genetic potential, developing an inventory
linked to an environmental database offers a means of accessing this diversity
and will aid in the identification of organisms of potential technological and
industrial importance. Furthermore, although the thermal sites occur within
Yellowstone National Park and are thus protected, geological (earthquakes),
climatological (low aquifer recharge), and anthropomorphic (intensive sampling
or regional mining) perturbations have the potential to alter these ecosystems.
Until an inventory of these resources is taken, some novel organisms will have
incomplete protection simply because their existence is not known; the project
will provide a baseline of microbial diversity in the GYE essential to
monitoring and managing microbial resources.