* 0206088
* Dissertation Research:  Microevolutionary Dynamics and Conservation Genetics of the Rare Vernal Pool Sunflower Lasthenia Conjugens (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Sharon Collinge, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,991.00

Vernal pools are ephemeral wetlands that are home to many endemic plants and
animals.&lt;br/&gt;At Travis Air Force Base in California, a restoration project
is in progress to create new vernal&lt;br/&gt;pools that will have similar
levels of biological diversity as natural pools. The proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;focuses on the federally endangered vernal pool endemic
annual plant called "Contra Costa&lt;br/&gt;goldfields" (Lasthenia conjugens;
Asteraceae). The primary goals of the proposed study are to&lt;br/&gt;compare
changes in levels and patterns of genetic variation over time in natural vs.
artificial&lt;br/&gt;pools and to assess the relationship between insect-
pollinator activity and genetic variation. To&lt;br/&gt;achieve those goals, a
kind of genetic fingerprinting technique will be used to measure
genetic&lt;br/&gt;variation and that information will be compared to information
obtained by making detailed&lt;br/&gt;observations of pollinator
activity.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will have broad scientific
implications and will help guide&lt;br/&gt;applied, conservation management
decisions. More broadly, this study will contribute to
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the genetics and evolution of species endemic to
the unique and rapidly&lt;br/&gt;disappearing vernal pools. Few detailed studies
of any vernal pool species have ever been&lt;br/&gt;conducted. From a
conservation management perspective, this study will assess
the&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of an ecological approach to habitat restoration in
preserving the genetic integrity&lt;br/&gt;of a species and in preserving
important plant-pollinator relationships.