* 0206269
* Jets on the Giant Planets
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Adam Showman, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 229,869.00

AST-0206269&lt;br/&gt;Showman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations from the
Pioneer, Voyager, and Galileo spacecraft as well as ground-
based&lt;br/&gt;measurements beginning in the 1800's indicate that the four
giant planets in our solar&lt;br/&gt;system, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune, have strong east-west jets in their&lt;br/&gt;atmospheres. The jets
take different forms on each planet; Jupiter and Saturn have
about&lt;br/&gt;twenty jets each (ten eastward and ten westward), whereas Uranus
and Neptune have only&lt;br/&gt;about three jets each. The jets are correlated
with spatial variations in the temperature&lt;br/&gt;and cloud abundance,
suggesting that the full problem is a coupled one involving all
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamical variables. The question of what causes these jets is one
of the most important&lt;br/&gt;unsolved problems in planetary
atmospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Adam Showman of the University of Arizona
will investigate the dynamics and formation processes of the giant-planet jets
using a fully nonlinear numerical model of atmospheric motion. Two distinct, yet
related, numerical investigations will be conducted. Both are aimed
at&lt;br/&gt;elucidating the role of small-scale convection in pumping the jets.
The first problem&lt;br/&gt;uses a realistic parameterization of the convection
and will focus predominantly on&lt;br/&gt;elucidating the dynamics near the
cloud level. The second problem adopts a simpler&lt;br/&gt;representation of the
convective forcing and investigates whether extremely deep jets can&lt;br/&gt;be
driven from the upper regions where the moist convection is expected to occur.
These&lt;br/&gt;studies are the first fully-nonlinear numerical simulations of
Jupiter's cloud layer that&lt;br/&gt;address the problem of Jovian jet formation
using a model with many vertical grid points.&lt;br/&gt;As a result, they will
be groundbreaking in their ability to address the vertical&lt;br/&gt;structure
that results from plausible jet-formation processes. The research will
use&lt;br/&gt;established numerical codes that Dr. Showman is experienced in
using.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;