* 0206792
* Microscopic Mechanism of Cation Exchange Process
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2005
* USD 288,410.00

This project addresses the microscopic mechanism of a cation-exchange process
for synthesis of highly volatile compounds, such as Hg-based high-Tc
superconductors. These materials have desirable features for superconducting
device technologies: Tc~130K and large current-carrying capability at
temperatures above 77 K. Their highly volatile nature, however, limits the
conven-tional thermal-reaction process since a delicate control of phase
equilibrium required for synthesis of high-purity samples is difficult to
achieve. The approach employs a cation-exchange proc-ess in an unconventional
growth mechanism. A less-volatile precursor matrix is selected with a related
crystalline structure and chemical composition to a desired volatile compound.
Volatile compounds can then be formed by perturbing one or more cations on the
precursor matrix and replacing them with volatile cations. Although the cation
exchange process has been applied suc-cessfully to synthesis of high- quality
Hg-HTS films and bulks, the mechanism of cation exchange is barely understood at
the microscopic level. Understanding this mechanism is a central goal of this
research as it is crucial not only to the ability to develop Hg-HTS
electronic/electrical devices, but also to generalization of the process for
synthesizing other technological important materials that may not be achievable
in conventional processes. The effect of growth defects, grain boundaries, and
chemical doping on the cation exchange behavior at the microscopic level will be
studied so as to achieve a thorough understanding of the macroscopic behavior of
the ca-tion exchange as a function of processing parameters. Theoretical
modeling of the cation ex-change process will also be carried out to gain a more
thorough understanding of the fundamental physics involved. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental synthesis and processing research
issues in a topical area of materials science having technological relevance.
The project is collaborative with interactions among researchers at U. Kansas,
U. WI, Stanford U., U. IL at Chicago, several government labo-ratories (AFRL,
ORNL, Sandia, LANL, and ANL), and an industrial organization, Supercon-ducting
Technologies, Inc. Graduate and undergraduate students play a primary role in
the project and are exposed to research opportunities across several disciplines
with access to a broad range of research equipment and facilities.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;