* 0206336
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Historical Biogeography of the Antilles:  Earth History and Phylogenetics of Endemic Chiropteran Taxa
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Nancy Simmons, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,470.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Nancy Simmons, Rob DeSalle, and Liliana Davalos
at the American Museum of Natural History to investigate the relationship
between earth and faunal history in the Caribbean region, focusing on bats. The
project will generate hypotheses about the evolutionary relationships of 5
different groups of bats, each containing at least one exclusively Antillean
species. These evolutionary relationships will then be used to establish the
timing and pattern of separation among bat species in the Antilles and their
South and Central American relatives, and will also be compared with similar
hypotheses about other terrestrial organisms. Drs. Nancy Simmons, Rob DeSalle,
and Liliana Davalos will use standard methods for obtaining and analyzing
morphological and molecular data from the study groups. Patterns of evolutionary
relationships resulting from these data will be compared applying at least 5
different approaches.

This project will be the first to explictly test longstanding assumptions about
the evolution of the Caribbean land fauna. The knowledge generated by this
project will be essential for future biological studies in ecology, morphology,
behavior, and conservation of Caribbean bats. By characterizing patterns of
species diversification, this study constitutes an essential step towards
understanding the origin and evolution of the fauna of the Caribbean, and
ensuring its conservation in unique and increasingly threatened Caribbean
ecosystems.