* 0206238
* Dissertation Research:  Host Race Formation and Phylogeography of a Plant Parasite
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Jeffry Mitton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,906.00

The dwarf mistletoe, Arceuthobium divaricatum, is a parasitic plant that
parastizes six species of pinon pines in the southwest. This project will
examine the effects of host selection, historic geographic isolation and
subsequent host migration on the patterns of genetic differences among
populations of A. divaricatum. The goal of this study is to determine how these
factors together have fostered the evolution of A. divaricatum. Chloroplast DNA
sequences will be used to determine if host selection has played a role in the
evolution of A. divaricatum. In addition, sequence variation will be analyzed to
determine whether population differentiation due to historic geographic
isolation can be detected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few studies have simultaneously
examined the influence of host selection and historic geographic isolation on
the differentiation of populations within a species. Often, evolutionary
biologists credit either one or the other of these factors in shaping these
population differences. This study in A. divaricatum will enhance the
understanding of how various factors influence the evolution of a species.
Additionally, because very little is known about population structures of
parasitic plants, this study will enhance the understanding of migration, gene
flow and population differentiation in a parasitic plant species.&lt;br/&gt;