* 0206980
* Communicating About Science: A Project to Improve Scientists' and Engineers' Communication Abilities
* EHR,DGE
* 05/15/2002,04/30/2003
* Sherwyn Morreale, National Communnication Association
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 04/30/2003
* USD 42,570.00

This project addresses the challenge of educating scientists and engineers in
the professional and personal communication skills they need to meet career
demands of the 21st century. The intention of the project is to address one of
the nation's central concerns; the ability of scientists to engage in policy-
critical communication about their work; work that is critical to the health and
well being of U.S. society. Experts in communication, the rhetoric of science,
instructional development, and training will work collaboratively with
scientists and engineers in two areas of concern previously identified by the
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy as well as others in the
science community (1995);

1. Scientists and engineers; ability to communicate among themselves
interpersonally and in teams, and their ability to solve problems and work
across scientific and other disciplines. 2. Scientists and engineers; ability to
communicate about science to larger audiences with an emphasis on lay and public
constituencies and non-scientists.

The two challenges will be addressed by the accomplishment of two short term
objectives and one long term goal: A first short term objective is producing
curriculum recommendations for the communication training of scientists and
engineers; A second short term objective is developing a proposal for the
National Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Graduate Education to: 1.
articulate a new set of priorities and approaches to address the most effective
and appropriate ways of communicating about science; and, 2. produce and
disseminate communication training resources for aspiring (graduate and post-
doctoral) scientists and engineers.

A long term and perhaps some intrinsic goal is forming critical partnerships and
building a foundation for future relationships between the communication
discipline and scientists and engineers to work collaboratively on challenges in
communicating about science

These activities will begin with a briefing meeting to be held in November 2001
at the NCA national convention. A facilitated workshop will follow in
Winter/Spring 2002 that will produce curriculum recommendations and a plan for a
full grant proposal to explore possibilities for creating new communities of
communication colleagues and scientists. Following the spring workshop and
within the 2002 calendar year, the full grant proposal will be submitted to NSF.
The proposal will focus on furthering the development of collaborative
relationships between communication and science and developing training
resources of various sorts to implement the curriculum recommendations. The
proposal will also address the dissemination of the curriculum recommendations
and training resources.