* 0206457
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effect of Hydrodynamics on the Evolution of Bryozoan Colony Form
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Steven Vogel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 7,500.00

Dr. Steven Vogel &amp; Marney C. Pratt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colonies of
bryozoans, widespread and abundant filter-feeding animals, encompass a great
variety of shapes and sizes. But, since colonies of most bryozoans can grow in
any direction, still more diverse colony shapes should be possible. That only a
relatively small subset of the theoretically possible shapes occur suggests that
certain shapes have significant advantages over others. Since bryozoans are
filter feeders, hydrodynamic factors (particularly water velocity) could
determine bryozoan colony form by affecting their ability to capture food. This
study addresses the role of hydrodynamics by assessing how water velocity
affects particle capture in the major colonial growth forms. It has four
principal elements: (1) measurement of particle capture success for bryozoans
with different colony growth forms over a range of flow velocities, (2)
measurement of the effect of feeding structure location on feeding success, and
the assessment of how that might influence colony shape, (3) the use of flow
visualization to determine the effect of colony form on the water flow around
and through colonies, and (4) measurement in the field of the abundance, growth,
and survival of bryozoans living at different water velocities. By delineating
the web of relationships linking colony form, habitat hydrodynamics, and feeding
success, this study should contribute to our understanding of how an abiotic
factor such as hydrodynamics can influence the evolution of colony form. Its
findings should be applicable to many other kinds of colonial filter feeders,
systems whose greater aggregate taxonomic differences cloud comparisons of
analogous morphological diversity.