* 0206730
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics and Phylogeography of Salamanders of the Eurycea multiplicata / Typhlotriton spelaeus Complex, using Large and Diverse Data Sets
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Paul Chippindale, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,400.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Chippindale and Mr. Ronald Bonett of the
University of Texas at Arlington to examine phylogenetic relationships, genetic
variation, and biogeographic and phylogeographic history of aquatic plethodontid
salamanders of the Eurycea multiplicata/Typhlotriton spelaeus complex. This
group occurs only in the Interior Highlands of the south-central U.S. (Ouachita
Mountains and Ozark Plateau), an area with high faunal diversity and many
endemic species. Preliminary data indicate that the transforming surface-
dwellers Eurycea m. multiplicata and E. m. griseogaster, the nontransforming
species E. tynerensis, and the enigmatic cave-dweller Typhlotriton spelaeus
share a recent common ancestor and have undergone a major radiation in the
region. Numerous undescribed species appear to be present. Mitochondrial and
nuclear DNA sequences, allozymes, and morphology will be used to reconstruct
relationships, and the diverse life history strategies and morphologies in the
group will be examined in a phylogenetic context. In collaboration with the
Joint Genome Institute, entire mitochondrial genomes will be sequenced for 19
members of the complex plus outgroups to further assess relationships and
species diversity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will provide an understanding
of the factors that have shaped biodiversity and species distributions in the
Interior Highlands, and likely will result in recognition of several new
species. Such an approach is fundamental for conservation of these salamanders
and the sensitive stream and cave habitats in which they occur. This research
will involve tests of biogeographic hypotheses regarding geological and climatic
events that have structured the complex, and will provide a framework within
which to trace life-history and morphological change. This represents one of the
first applications of entire mitochondrial genome sequences to such problems,
will have wide-ranging implications for studies of phylogeny and biodiversity,
and will identify portions of the mitochondrial genome that are most informative
at a variety of phylogenetic scales.&lt;br/&gt;