* 0206196
* Dissertation Research:   Herbivory and the Evolution of Habitat Specialization in Amazonian White Sand and Clay Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,620.00

&lt;br/&gt;Tropical forests include a diversity of habitats, which has lead to
specialization in&lt;br/&gt;plants. Near Iquitos, in the Peruvian Amazon,
nutrient-poor white sand forests are found&lt;br/&gt;immediately adjacent to
nutrient-rich clay forests, each harboring a unique composition&lt;br/&gt;of
habitat specialist trees. Why does habitat specialization occur? Our hypothesis
is that&lt;br/&gt;the combination of impoverished soils and herbivory creates
strong selective pressure for&lt;br/&gt;plant defenses in white sand forest.
Species that have not evolved high levels of&lt;br/&gt;antiherbivore defense are
therefore at a disadvantage in white sand forests and excluded&lt;br/&gt;by
herbivores.&lt;br/&gt;To test whether herbivores select for higher optimal
antiherbivore defense in&lt;br/&gt;white sand plants, we are comparing defense
investment in 33 species from 6 genera that&lt;br/&gt;include several
phylogenetically independent pairs of closely-related white sand and
clay&lt;br/&gt;specialists. In addition, we have established a reciprocal
transplant experiment to&lt;br/&gt;manipulate the presence of herbivores and
directly test to what degree herbivores&lt;br/&gt;maintain the low overlap in
species composition between the two forest types. If&lt;br/&gt;herbivory has a
significant effect on habitat specialization, it will suggest a new way
that&lt;br/&gt;herbivores may influence plant evolution: by sharpening habitat
boundaries due to abiotic&lt;br/&gt;factors and thereby increasing the potential
for habitat specialization.