* 0206581
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Kin Favoritism and Communal Nesting
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,11/30/2003
* Warren Holmes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Greenfield
* 11/30/2003
* USD 10,048.00

Kin Favoritism and Communal Nesting&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Warren
Holmes&lt;br/&gt;Stephanie Jesseau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This combined
laboratory- and field-research project will investigate kin recognition and
nepotism in a communally-nesting, South American rodent, the degu (Octodon
degus). Field evidence suggests that female degus nest communally, which means
that two or more females share a burrow in which both females rear their
litters. Due to communal nesting and birth synchrony, degu mothers encounter and
become familiar with pups that are not their own offspring. Similarly, pups
interact with both their siblings and non-siblings from the time they are born.
In general, if a mother and her offspring share an early rearing environment
with others, thus contaminating the correlation between rearing association and
kinship, simple "familiarity" is unlikely to explain discriminative maternal
care or sibling nepotism. In prior work, captive degu mothers discriminated
between the odors of their own young and those produced by their co-nesting
partner despite having lived with both kinds of pups. Three follow-up
laboratories studies are proposed to investigate how kinship and being reared
together affect maternal care and sibling relationships. First, it will be
determined whether co-nesting mothers preferentially nurse their own young.
Observations will be made of mothers' behavior toward their own vs other
offspring. Differential milk transfer will also be determined by injecting
mothers with small amounts of radiation (thus labeling their milk) and measuring
the amount of radiation in the pups' feces. Second, food quality will be
manipulated to evaluate how nutrition affects nursing preferences. The same
behavioral observations and milk-labeling techniques as the previous experiment
will be used. Third, I will examine juveniles' social preferences, specifically
play-partner preferences, to determine how growing up together and kinship
affect social development. Several field studies will also be conducted at
Quebrada de la Plata, the field station of Universidad de Chile. It is not known
whether degu mothers in the wild share the same natal chamber even though they
occupy the same burrow system. Therefore, the first portion of the proposed
field work will consist of monitoring co-nesting mothers using radio telemetry
to determine if they share underground burrows before and/or after they give
birth. The genetic relationship of co-nesting females in the wild is also not
known. Therefore, small tissue samples will be taken from free-living degus to
perform genetic analyses of DNA to determine the kinship of females sharing the
same burrow. Behavioral observations will also be made to examine how agonistic
and amicable behaviors vary with relatedness in degus. This study will reveal
how kin recognition and nepotism are mediated in a group-living species in which
"simple" familiarity is an inadequate proxy for kinship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;