* 0206636
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Modulation of Active Learning Behavior in the Context of Foraging
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Fred Dyer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 6,520.00

&lt;br/&gt;Modulation of active learning behavior in the context of
foraging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fred C. Dyer, Principal Investigator, Professor of
Zoology&lt;br/&gt;Cynthia A. Wei, Doctoral Candidate in
Zoology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Honeybees possess
the remarkable ability to repeatedly return to specific flower patches that they
have discovered. Essential to this ability is a behavior known as a learning
flight. These flights, which are performed upon departure from a food source,
allow a bee to collect visual information about landmarks nearby the food, which
then help the bee find her way back. The performance of these flights is a
modulated behavior; bees typically perform longer flights during the first few
visits, and in subsequent visits, the durations of the flights decline. This
raises a fundamental question: How do bees determine when and for how long to
perform these flights? Answers to this question will provide greater
understanding of learning as an active decision making process. The dissertation
work of Cynthia Wei, under the guidance of Fred Dyer, has so far documented
precise ways in which various factors influence the modulation of learning
flight duration. The work supported by this award will expand upon these prior
findings by studying the modulation of learning flight duration in a more
natural foraging context. The specific goals are 1) to characterize the
occurrence of learning flights in response to a change in nectar quality
availability in a natural flower patch, 2) to determine the influence of nectar
volume and concentration on the induction of learning flights, and 3) to
determine the effect of observed occurrences of learning flights on subsequent
spatial patterns of foraging. This research will further illuminate the
processes by which animals make decisions to learn in response to changing needs
for spatial information. It will also lead to a better understanding of how
learning affects changes in spatial foraging patterns and the resulting
implications for foraging success. Collectively, this work will help develop a
clearer picture of how mechanisms of learning have been shaped by an animal's
foraging ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;