* 0206270
* A Laboratory Study Relevant to the Isotopic Fractionation of Ammonia on Jupiter
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 04/30/2006
* USD 243,414.00

AST 0206270 Kalogerakis

Isotopic ratios play an important role in the study of the origins and evolution
of planetary atmospheres. Recent observations of the atmosphere of Jupiter
indicate a significant depletion of 15NH3 at a pressure of approximately 400
mbar. Condensation of the ammonia and ammonium hydrosulfide clouds has been
suggested as a possible origin for the observed isotopic depletion. Currently,
no experimental results are available on the vapor pressure of solid NH3 / NH4SH
/ H2O mixtures and its temperature and isotopic composition dependence. The
relevant isotopic fractionation coefficients during condensation are not known,
and an interpretation of the observed 15NH3 depletion cannot be made with the
current laboratory information.

Dr. Konstantinos Kalogerakis at SRI International will conduct laboratory
experiments to investigate the solid-gas equilibrium of solid NH3 / NH4SH / H2O
mixtures and determine the relevant isotopic fractionation coefficients. The
differential vapor pressures will be measured for a range of temperatures
relevant to the Jovian troposphere. These results will elucidate whether the
observed 15NH3 depletion is a local phenomenon or whether it could represent the
global atmosphere of Jupiter. The fact that the Jovian nitrogen isotopic ratio
is believed to reflect that of the presolar nebula makes the results of the
proposed study significant for modeling not only the formation and evolution of
the Jovian atmosphere, but potentially the evolution of the Solar System as
well. ***

