* 0206416
* Polarization Observations of the Microwave Background Radiation with the Cosmic Background Imager
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2004
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2004
* USD 1,159,049.00

AST-0206416&lt;br/&gt;Readhead, Anthony&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cosmic
microwave background radiation (CMBR) is expected to be polarized at a level of
about 10%, owing to Thomson scattering, but as yet this polarization has not
been detected. The Cosmic Background Interferometer (CBI) has been measuring the
total intensity of the CMBR for the past two years, and with minor modifications
to the receivers and the observing strategy, the CBI should be able to detect
the polarization within a year. It should also measure the angular power
spectrum of polarized fluctuations, if the predictions of currently favored
cosmological models are&lt;br/&gt;correct. Polarization observations of the
microwave background radiation will provide a number of important tests of
cosmological models. For example many cosmological models with non-standard
primordial power spectra are degenerate with standard models having different
values of key cosmological parameters. It is possible to further test the
predictions of the models and to break these degeneracies by measuring the
polarization power spectrum and the cross-correlation between polarization and
total intensity. Polarization observations should also help to reduce the
uncertainties in key cosmological parameters, such as the baryon density, the
matter density and the cosmological constant, and to place stringent limits on
the epoch of reionization. This award will allow use of the CBI to make high
sensitivity (&lt;1 MK) polarization observations of the cosmic microwave
background radiation over the angular multipole range l =
300-1700.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;