* 0206630
* The Student Developer: Using 360-Degree Multisource Assessment for Student Learning and Professional Development
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Larry Shuman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 09/30/2005
* USD 494,178.00

A team of multidisciplinary assessment researchers from several universities is
adapting and enhancing a proven, validated methodology for assessing and
developing student learning outcomes via feedback solicited from multiple
sources. The project team is enhancing the Team Developer system to allow
students the opportunity to select any number of feedback providers in support
of their own learning and development. This newly enhanced system supports the
assessment of a broader set of learning outcomes based on the full EC-2000
criteria (A-K). The resultant system, designated as the Student Developer,
allows students to build a more comprehensive set of competencies by soliciting
feedback from multiple sources including peers, faculty, co-op and intern
supervisors, family members, and others. It allows students to receive periodic
assessments of their learning and professional development from various
perspectives -- providing a 360-degree view of how their learning and
development is being perceived by others within the educational environment . In
addition, the Student Developer is web-based to facilitate its use. A
comprehensive evaluation is a major activity throughout the project's life
cycle. A series of project metrics helps monitor performance and overall impact
on student learning, faculty, and academic programs. Defined metrics include
student usage and satisfaction, student improvement actions taken based on
collected data, and input from various feedback sources. Dissemination is an
integral activity in this project and these efforts include workshops,
presentations, and publications in major engineering education forums.
Additionally, John Wiley Publishers is supportive of publishing the Student
Developer, using the same model that has been successfully applied to the Team
Developer. For the Student Developer, the PIs are writing a similar student
workbook to complement the system being developed through this project. The team
plans to distribute the Student Developer application to faculty for free and
students would have the opportunity to learn more about EC2000 related skills
through an associated workbook published by Wiley.