* 0206258
* Dissertation Research: The Maintenance of Genetic Variation for Phenotypic Plasticity: The Roles of Cost and Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 8,676.00

Phenotypic plasticity, the ability to adjust morphological traits in response to
the environment, may enhance survival and reproduction in changing environments.
Given this adaptive value of phenotypic plasticity, it is important to
understand the mechanisms that may maintain genetic variation for plasticity.
Despite the important theoretical role the cost of plasticity plays in
maintaining this variation, relatively few empirical studies have focused on the
role of cost of plasticity under natural conditions. This dissertation research
will address this issue by examining the balance between the cost of plasticity
and the benefit of plasticity under a variety of environmental conditions.
Populations of the herbaceous plant Geranium carolinianum from both
environmentally variable and uniform light environments are compared for the
patterns of plasticity to natural variation in light availability. The genetic
basis of plasticity will be assessed because the potential of phenotypic
plasticity to evolve in response to future environmental change depends in part
on its genetic basis. Finally, a field study will examine how selection may
favor plasticity under environmentally variable conditions but favor non-plastic
responses under uniform conditions.&lt;br/&gt; An increase in environmental
variation is expected with global climate change. Understanding how plasticity
is maintained is central to predicting population response to diverse
environments.&lt;br/&gt;