* 0206360
* RUI: Polyphasic Characterization and Phylogenetic Classification of the Problematic Form-Genus Leptolyngbya (Cyanobacteria)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2005
* Jeffrey Johansen, John Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jeffrey R. Johansen of John Carroll University
to study a problematic genus of blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) called
Leptolyngbya. This genus is difficult to understand because it has very few
morphological characters, but occurs in a wide variety of habitat types.
Morphologically similar forms have been found to be actually very different in
terms of their 16S rRNA gene sequence. Dr. Johansen will use a polyphasic
approach to characterize over 60 strains of this microbe from collections all
over the world, including an extensive collection of desert soil forms isolated
as part of a past NSF-supported project. Polyphasic characterization means that
morphological, genetic, ecological, and physiological data will be collected on
these strains, so that the genus can be revised. Preliminary evidence indicates
that there are many new species in the genus, and probably even groups of
species that merit creation of new genera. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike all
other cyanobacterial taxonomic studies and most bacteriological systematic
studies, this project will test the applicability of three modern species
concepts for asexual species. Further precedents will be set in designating a
suite of new kinds of type materials for new taxa. Phylogenetic analyses, which
determine evolutionary relationships of taxa, will be run in ways unique to
bacteria and uncommon in other groups. This work will help us to characterize
biodiversity in the world. It may serve as an example for others wishing to use
modern systematic approaches to describe new cyanobacterial species. Excellent
systematics and taxonomy are necessary for development of the cyanobacteria for
biotechnological, pharmacological, and reclamation purposes.&lt;br/&gt;