* 0206681
* RUI:   Broken-Symmetry States of Confined Interacting Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Charles Hanna, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 140,000.00

This grant supports research and education at an undergraduate institution (RUI)
and focuses on the novel aspects of the physics of strongly interacting
electrons that are confined to bilayers or superlattices. A major emphasis is
placed on mentoring undergraduate students by involving them directly in
carrying out original research and publishing their work. The research is
organized around three well-defined projects that have been chosen according to
two criteria: (1) a project should address problems in the physics of confined
electrons that are intrinsically interesting and novel, and (2) a project should
make extensive use of undergraduate contributions to the research, primarily in
carrying out computer-based physics calculations. Two of the projects involve
calculating properties of interacting electrons in double quantum wells. The
third project involves calculating the properties of broken-symmetry states in
superlattices. The work proposed here includes the study: of partial pseudospin
polarization in quantum Hall bilayers and an effective theory of the nT =1/3
bilayer quantum Hall state, of charge-order of broken-symmetry states of
superlattices, and of the effects of interlayer correlation in bilayer hole
systems. Parts of this research will be carried out in collaboration with
experimentalists. Each project has computational aspects that are suitable for
mentored undergraduates working with the PI. Calculations will emphasize
experimentally measurable physical properties of these multilayer systems. This
RUI award will have an impact on the education of undergraduates at Boise State;
they will be exposed to problems at the frontiers of theoretical condensed
matter physics research. Although the nature of the subject is technical, the PI
has been successful in carrying out and publishing condensed-matter-physics
research with undergraduate students, including students from groups that have
been traditionally underrepresented in physics. %%% This grant supports research
and education at an undergraduate institution (RUI) and focuses on the novel
aspects of the physics of strongly interacting electrons that are confined to
two or more closely spaced two-dimensional layers. The PI will study new
electronic phases in these high mobility semiconductor structures that are
stabilized by a strong magnetic field applied perpendicular to the layers. A
major emphasis is placed on mentoring and educating undergraduate students by
involving them directly in carrying out original research and publishing their
work. This RUI award will expose undergraduates at Boise State to areas of
fundamental condensed matter physics that are at the forefront of current
theoretical research and may shape future electronic device technologies.
Although the nature of the subject is technical, the PI has been successful in
carrying out and publishing condensed-matter-physics research with undergraduate
students, including students from groups that have been traditionally
underrepresented in physics. ***

