* 0206674
* Survey and Inventory of the Aquatic Macroinvertebrates of the Selenge River Drainage Basin, Mongolia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Barbara Hayford, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 361,850.00

This project is an inventory of the macroinvertebrates (insects, mollusks,
crustaceans and other animals) of the Selenge River and its tributaries in north
central Mongolia. Occupying over 300,000 sq. km., the Selenge River basin lies
in an active geologic zone, and connects Lake Hovsgol, one of the world's most
pristine ancient lakes, with Lake Baikal, the world's oldest and most
biologically diverse lake. In freshwater aquatic habitats, macroinvertebrates,
particularly insects, comprise a large portion of biological diversity. Studies
of their taxonomy (identification) and distribution provide important results
for understanding the evolution, biogeography, and ecology of aquatic
communities. Increasing economic development and population in the Selenge basin
are stressing the aquatic community through mining, untreated wastes,
agriculture, over-grazing, fires, and climate change. The project proposed here
will generate not only basic scientific knowledge of the biodiversity of the
Selenge basin, but will also provide the Mongolian government a yardstick for
monitoring water quality. This project encompasses a comprehensive, three-year
sampling program. Three month-long expeditions will be undertaken to sample a
range of aquatic macroinvertebrates, assess habitats and measure physical
characteristics of the waterways. The principal investigators are established
insect scientists with a broad range of field experience around the world,
including the completion of a major inventory project at Lake Hovsgol, Mongolia.
The expeditions will be collaborative with Mongolian scientists and students,
and other scientists, with a focus on training of Mongolian students to develop
in-country scientific expertise. &lt;br/&gt;Goals for this project include
surveying the major groups of aquatic insects and other invertebrate groups,
collaborative publication of the survey results, and development of associated
databases for literature, specimen-based distribution records, locality and
habitat classification, and specimen images. Databases will be assembled by
Mongolian and American scientists and will be available over the Internet. Based
on the previous work in the Lake Hovsgol watershed by these investigators, this
proposed field survey should increase by 85% the currently known 700 aquatic
macroinvertebrate species in the groups to be studied. Among these additional
species, we expect to find 100 or more species new to science and to add nearly
600 first records for species within Mongolia and the central Asian plateau.
Beyond a strictly scientific research importance, this survey and resulting
research will provide many associated benefits. Knowledge of species and their
abundance is applied as an important measure of the health of aquatic habitats
and is used routinely throughout the world to monitor water quality. Broad
sampling of aquatic invertebrates along with the collection of water quality and
riparian zone measurements will directly benefit efforts to establish a baseline
for future water quality monitoring programs. The scientific knowledge will be
useful in guiding Mongolia's government in its attempts to protect the
environment and to develop eco-tourism. The proposed survey will allow these
U.S. scientists to develop meaningful collaborations with current Mongolian
scientists and to train Mongolian students in the field and laboratory.