* 0206508
* Dissertation Research:  Genetic Architecture of Correlated Evolution in Gametophytes and Sporophytes of Ceratodon Purpureus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,974.00

A central goal of biology is to understand how organisms adapt to their
environment. This project seeks to clarify the constraints imposed on adaptation
in plants by the alternation of morphologically distinct haploid and diploid
generations in their life cycles. If traits in the two generations are
controlled by the same suite of genes, as populations adapt, these traits should
change in a correlated fashion. This project will utilize a bryophyte model
system (Ceratodon purpureus) in which both generations are sufficiently large
and morphologically complex to facilitate genotypic and phenotypic analysis.
Multiple populations from throughout the distribution of the species will be
grown in a common environment to assess the degree of correlation between the
two generations. Genome mapping techniques will then be used to test whether the
same genes are associated with changes in the two
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will answer fundamental questions
concerning the genetic basis of adaptation, in addition to providing a deeper
understanding of life cycles that are common to all plants. It will be the most
comprehensive examination of the whole plant life cycle using modern genetic
tools. The Ceratodon experimental system is being utilized by many scientists
working on applied as well as basic problems in biology, and the genetic
insights generated by this study will further increase its utility for other
research.&lt;br/&gt;