* 0206497
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Role of Chemical Signaling in the Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in Terrestrial Salamanders
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Lynne Houck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,995.00

THE ROLE OF CHEMICAL SIGNALING IN THE EVOLUTION OF REPRODUCTIVE ISOLATION IN
TERRESTRIAL SALAMANDERS

Lynne D. Houck and Catherine A. Palmer

Terrestrial salamanders communicate by using chemical odors, termed pheromones.
Certain pheromones are used only during courtship. These courtship pheromones
are produced by the male and delivered to the female during courtship. These
male courtship pheromones typically function to increase female receptivity, as
indicated by a more rapid completion of the courtship. These same pheromones may
also be used by the female to identify incorrect mating partners (males from
other species), and hence prevent hybridization between species. The male
courtship pheromones are comprised of proteins. One protein in particular can
act alone to substantially increase female receptivity. The gene for that
protein was identified, and was found to be expressed in a series of closely-
related terrestrial salamander species. This setting, for which the ancestry of
the species is known, offers an opportunity to investigate the evolution of
changes that occur from gene to protein to behavior. This study will focus on
genetic and biochemical variation in courtship pheromones. This information will
be compared with existing data on female behavioral response to courtships with
males of her own and of different species. The results of this investigation
will provide a novel perspective on the evolution of female response to a male
chemical signal.

