* 0206542
* Dissertation Research:  Key Traits Underlying Invasion Success: A Comparison of Gambusia Species
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Andrew Sih, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,945.00

Biological invasions are recognized to be one of the greatest threats to
natural&lt;br/&gt;communities and biodiversity. A central question in the study
of biological invasions is: Do&lt;br/&gt;invasive species have certain
attributes in common that contribute to their success while
others&lt;br/&gt;fail? Despite the importance of this issue, few empirical
studies have systematically tested&lt;br/&gt;potentially important traits or
trait combinations, especially in aquatic systems. To
address&lt;br/&gt;variation in invasiveness, studying closely related and
morphologically similar taxa should allow&lt;br/&gt;us to identify relevant
traits. A good system is the poeciliid fish Gambusia, where the
differences&lt;br/&gt;in geographic range and invasiveness are extreme.
Differences in key ecological, life history, and&lt;br/&gt;behavioral traits
might account for the observed variation in invasiveness among
Gambusia&lt;br/&gt;species. We propose to examine how invasive and noninvasive
Gambusia species might differ in&lt;br/&gt;their: (1) life history responses to
abiotic stress, (2) population-level responses to biotic stress,&lt;br/&gt;(3)
community function, (4) aggression levels, and (5) dispersal patterns. We expect
that the&lt;br/&gt;proposed work in combination with our previous experiments
will provide valuable insights into&lt;br/&gt;which key species-specific traits
enhance the probability of success of species invading
novel&lt;br/&gt;communities.