* 0206251
* RUI:   Formation and Evolution of Galactic Disks in a Cosmological Setting
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Clayton Heller, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2007
* USD 152,709.00

AST 0206251&lt;br/&gt;Heller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Heller and his
collaborator will conduct a broad based study of galactic disk formation and
evolution, examining the role of non-axisymmetric instabilities in driving the
formation and evolution of all components of disk galaxies, including the
gaseous and stellar disk, bulge, and halo in a cosmologically relevant setting.
Galaxy disks are believed to form over an extended period of time, growing from
the inside out. Star formation in the disk will convert gas to stars, perhaps
also forming a bulge. However, this simple picture will not be non- axisymmetric
instabilities. Since even mild oval distortions can be efficient engines of
structural change, these instabilities can drive gas toward the center of a
forming galaxy produce profound changes in the structure and stability of all
the galactic components. This mechanism can produce a rich assortment of
possible evolutionary paths for a galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
focus on the following aspects of the problem: 1) Disk formation in triaxial
halos. 2) Analysis of the effects of star formation on the long-term stability
of the disk and flow rates. 3) Analysis of the secular evolution of stellar
bars, and their role in disk-halo coupling. 4) Analyses of the broader question
of how the different cosmological parameters affect the formation and evolution
of disk galaxies.. 5) Determination of the effects of a background UV radiation
field on the formation and evolution of low mass disk galaxies. These analyses
will be done using numerical simulations. The project will involve the active
participation of a professor and his students at an undergraduate institution
and will include the establishment of a state-of-the-art Linux computer at that
institution, providing the undergraduates with hands-on computer systems
experience. Technical support for this development will be provided by personnel
at the University of Kentucky. This award is made under the auspices of the
Research at Undergraduate Institutions program. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;