* 0206739
* Dissertation Research: A Molecular Phylogenetic Study of Geographic Genetic Variation and Speciation in Salamanders of the Eurycea bislineata species complex
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,554.00

For stream-associated organisms with limited dispersal abilities, the historical
connections among streams generate predictions about genetic interactions among
populations and routes of dispersal between drainage systems. We use the
temporal and spatial variation present in mitochondrial gene lineages to
investigate the relationship between the geological history of stream drainages
and geographic genetic fragmentation in plethodontid salamanders of the Eurycea
bislineata species complex. Plethodontid salamanders of the Eurycea bislineata
species complex are common in streams throughout the Interior Lowland,
Appalachian Highland, Piedmont and Coastal Plain physiographic provinces of
eastern North America. Intensive research on the plethodontid salamander fauna
of eastern North America has uncovered high levels of genetic structuring among
populations and numerous cryptic species in this group, whose endemism and
species diversity are greater in the southern Appalachian Mountains than any
other region in the United States. Our research provides insight into the
historical factors affecting diversification in this species-rich group of
vertebrates. At a broader level, this research has implications for
understanding factors that generate and maintain biodiversity in stream-
associated organisms of eastern North America.