* 0206605
* Dissertation Research:   Periwinkle Grazing On and Control of Spartina Alterniflora.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2004
* USD 4,075.00

Project Summary Many aquatic communities have been shown to be under top-down
control, while most systems dominated by vascular plants are assumed to be
controlled by bottom-up forces. For nearly 50 years, the prevailing paradigm in
salt marsh ecology has been that bottom-up forces, such as nutrient
availability, are the primary determinants of marshgrass production. In this
proposal, we show that the standing crop of the dominant plant in western
Atlantic salt marshes is reduced wholesale and the substrate completely denuded
when predators do not suppress densities of the most common grazing invertebrate
in southeast marshes, the periwinkle Littoraria irrorata. Before these results
can be generally accepted, however, the apparent contradiction between our
observations that Littoraria graze extensively on live Spartina and the current
paradigm which holds that Littoraria is the most important detritivore in the
marsh system must be resolved. To do this, we present a detailed research plan
to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the Littoraria - live Spartina
interaction. Results from this study will likely force us to reevaluate our
current understanding of marsh systems and add critical information to the
ongoing debate as to whether or not vascular plant communities are susceptible
to run-away consumer effects.