* 0206435
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Influence of Ecological Conditions on Maternal Antibody Transmission: Consequences for Offspring Immunity and Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Ellen Ketterson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2004
* USD 9,430.00

Disseration Research: The Influences of Ecological Condtions on Maternal
Antibody Transmission: Consequences for Offspring Immunity and
Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ellen D. Ketterson &amp; Jennifer
Grindstaff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to resist disease is an important
component of survival and reproductive success. Previous research has addressed
the influences of genes and physiology on adult immune function. However, early
in life, offspring immunity may be determined largely by antibodies transmitted
by the mother during egg production, gestation, or lactation. The amount and
types of antibodies transmitted to offspring may be determined by the mother's
physiological condition. Through experimental manipulation of two ecological
factors, resource availability and disease exposure, the effect of maternal
physiological condition on offspring immunity and growth will be addressed. The
PIs will examine the influence of resource limitation on immunity in adult
females of a well-studied songbird species, the great tit (Parus major), by
asking whether food supplementation enhances antibody transmission to offspring.
In a second experiment, they will vary pathogen exposure in females prior to egg
laying. They anticipate that food shortage will reduce the ability of females to
protect their offspring and that exposure to specific diseases will render
offspring better able to withstand infection. Both findings would suggest a
larger role of the mother's environment in offspring development than has
previously been appreciated.