* 0206501
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematic Biology of Costaceae(Zingiberales): Using Molecular and Morphological Data to Investigate Phylogenetics and Floral Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* W. John Kress, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,520.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Dennis Wm. Stevenson, W. John Kress, and
Chelsea D. Specht at the New York Botanical Garden to study the systematics and
evolution of Costaceae, a tropical plant family of approximately 130 species
closely related to the economically important bananas and gingers as well as
prominent ornamentals such as Heliconia and Strelitzia (Bird-of-Paradise). Also
known for their ornamental appeal, Costaceae have showy flowers and floral
structures with shapes and colors that are closely linked to the attraction of
pollinators. The proposed research is designed to determine evolutionary
relationships among species within the family and investigate the historical
context in which Costaceae has achieved its current level of diversity.
Approximately 2500kb of DNA sequence data will be generated for 75 species
chosen to represent floral and biogeographic diversity within the family. These
data will be analyzed along with morphological character data using contemporary
phylogenetic techniques. In addition, the development of the different floral
shapes will be studied to determine potential mechanisms involved in the
evolution of floral form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certain species in the genus
Costus are pollinated by hummingbirds, while others are bee-pollinated. The
genus has thus been divided into two groups based on these overall floral
characteristics, however recent evidence has shown that these groupings are not
reflective of evolutionary history. Rather, it seems as though individuals can
switch back and forth between hummingbird and bee pollination, possibly based on
environmental conditions such as pollinator availability or efficacy. Since
similar floral forms are found in South American and African species, it may be
concluded that common types of pollination pressures occur in these
geographically distant forest, yielding similar shapes and colors in distinct
lineages of plants. This study will increase our understanding of the forces
that promote speciation and diversity in tropical plants. In addition, floral
development studies may help to indicate how genetic factors are involved in the
evolution of diverse forms, leading to a clearer understanding of the genetic
basis for biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;