* 0206063
* Dissertation Research: Historical Biogeography of the North American Deserts: A Comparative Phylogeographic Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Joseph Mendelson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,600.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Joseph Mendelson and Mr. Daniel Mulcahy at Utah
State University to conduct a comparative phylogeographic study among three
reptile species in western North America. Phylogeographic studies estimate
within-species relationships, generally based on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
sequences. These population-level phylogenies-branching diagrams of relatedness-
are then overlain on the geographic distribution of the species. Inferences can
then be made on the origin, dispersal, and subsequent fragmentation of the
species, along with estimates of gene flow, population level interactions, and
genetic diversity. As a recently developed technique in biogeography,
phylogeographic studies tend to focus on one species at a time. In this study,
the authors compare individual phylogeographies among three widespread,
distantly related reptile species (Night snake, Side-blotched lizard, and Desert
Spiny Lizard). These reptiles occur throughout all the deserts and other major
biogeographic regions of western North America. Phylogeographic hypotheses for
each species are compared and tested for congruence across these biogeographic
regions, with the hypothesis that the formation of these regions themselves
influenced gene flow, genetic diversity and evolution within each independent
group.&lt;br/&gt; Phylogeographic studies provide an evolutionary framework for
studying life-history traits. A wealth of literature exists on the comparisons
of body size, and clutch sizes in the lizard species of this study. Providing a
phylogenetic hypothesis within these species allows for an evolutionary
perspective of such traits. Comparative phylogeographic studies on widespread-
common species also provide a framework for assessing patterns of genetic
diversity within these species. The geographic range of the species in this
study encompasses the entire western United States and northern Mexico,
including virtually every National Park west of Colorado and south of the state
of Washington. This study will provide data essential for directing conservation
efforts across this region.&lt;br/&gt;