* 0206254
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Ant Mutualisms in Piper: Morphological and Molecular Evidence
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Linda Watson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 8,439.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Linda Watson, Mr. Eric Tepe and Dr. Michael
Vincent at Miami University to study the evolution of symbiotic interactions
between ants and plants. This study focuses on several New World tropical
species of Piper, the genus of black pepper and kava, and explores the
mutualistically beneficial interactions these plant species have with certain
ant species. The ants protect the plants against herbivores and fungal infection
in exchange for plant-provided nesting space and nutrients. This relationship is
important for both organisms because neither the ants nor the plants are able to
survive in the absence of the other. In addition to specialized associations,
some species of Piper have resident ants only sometimes, and still other species
are never found with ants. An understanding of relationships between species in
this continuum will allow insights into the evolutionary patterns that lead to
the highly specialized relationships between ants and some species of Piper. To
this end, this study integrates molecular phylogenetics with comparative anatomy
of the plant structures involved in the ant associations. Mutualistic
interactions are important in the evolution of a vast majority, if not all
organisms, and are responsible for a large part of the biodiversity seen today.
Despite this, surprisingly little is known about the properties and potential
benefits of most tropical plants. As an example, species of Piper are used
medicinally by a number of traditional cultures throughout the tropics against
maladies ranging from tooth decay to internal parasites, but the biochemistry
behind these benefits remains to be studied. To study the benefits of these
plants accurately and effectively, a reliable classification is essential. This
study will result in a classification of a large and poorly known genus, in
addition to a better understanding of the evolutionary patterns of these unique
organisms.