* 0206550
* Dissertation Research:  Empirical and Theoretical Studies of Seed Dispersal in Jacaranda copaia.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Stephen Hubbell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the study is to directly measure seed
dispersal distances and differential deposition patterns in a common, wind-
dispersed, gap colonizing tropical tree, Jacaranda copaia. Dispersal will be
measured by genotyping maternal tissue surrounding dispersed seeds captured in
large seed trap arrays. These will be matched to adult genotypes within the
mapped population. The data will be used to answer the following questions: (1)
How frequent is long distance seed dispersal (here defined as dispersal at
distances greater than 100m) in Jacaranda? How does long distance dispersal vary
within and among years? (2) How well do current inverse and mechanistic
dispersal models estimate and predict dispersal patterns measured above? (3)
What biotic and abiotic factors determine dispersal distances? And (4) Are
Jacaranda seeds disproportionately dispersed to tree fall
gaps?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As humans continue to alter and fragment tropical
forest landscapes, knowledge of the processes that regulate populations and
maintain diverse communities is critical for predicting how these populations
will respond in the future. Dispersal is chief among the processes that will
determine the ecological and population genetic response over time and space.
There is a considerable void of data on the frequency, patterns, and mechanisms
of seed dispersal within and among natural plant populations. This study is
among the first and most comprehensive attempts to obtain direct measurements of
seed dispersal distances using genetic techniques. It will directly inform
conservationists and land managers about the appropriate size of habitat
required to maintain populations of tropical trees in light of the spatial
extent of seed movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;