* 0206277
* Determining the Relation between Dark and Luminous Matter: SDSS Weak Lensing Studies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* August Evrard, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2006
* USD 317,867.00

AST-0206277&lt;br/&gt;McKay, Timothy A.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of
hierarchical structure formation based on N-body simulations now provide a
relatively complete picture of the formation, evolution, and clustering
properties of dark&lt;br/&gt;matter halos around galaxies. Unfortunately,
experimental determination of structure relies on observations of luminous
galaxies, whose formation involves gas dynamics, star formation, and the
feedback of entropy into the interstellar medium. These processes are complex,
hampering direct simulation. As a result, the detailed relationship between
luminous galaxies and their dark matter environments (the "bias") is poorly
determined.&lt;br/&gt;This uncertainty seriously limits our ability to compare
cosmological observations of galaxies to theoretical models. This program will
conduct a closely coordinated observational and theoretical study of the
relationship between luminous galaxies and their dark matter environments. McKay
and his students will pursue weak lensing measurements within the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey, while Evrard and Wechsler will make parallel measurements within
N-body simulations. This will allow direct comparison of theory and observation
at the level of the fundamental observables, without recourse to intermediate
model fitting. By comparing lensing measurements to parallel studies of
simulations this work will probe bias in new ways.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;