* 0206080
* UPCLOSE
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Katrina Klaphake, COSI Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 358,951.00

"UPCLOSE" is an after-school program designed to engage and develop the interest
of underserved, inner city, middle school girls in the areas of science,
engineering and technology. Working with an early adolescent population, the
"UPCLOSE" program recognizes the developmental needs of this group and has
structured its curriculum to provide a holistic approach to learning. Although
the focus of the workshop inquiry activities is to increase knowledge and
understanding of science, engineering and technology, the program goals include
enhancement of self-esteem and self-confidence, development of teambuilding
skills, refinement of communication and interpersonal skills, and enhancement of
critical thinking skills. Each year 26 girls in grades 7 and 8 will be recruited
to attend the fall and summer sessions of the three-year program. Fall sessions
will be conducted two hours twice each week and one Saturday per month; summer
sessions will operate five weeks. Participants will be required to make a
commitment to attend the program for at least two years. Girls with satisfactory
performance during the fall and summer sessions will be invited to join the
Junior Discovery Leaders to assist in the summer camp. Six inquiry-based
workshops that incorporate science, engineering and technology with training on
workplace skills will be used. Professionals from the partner institutions and
older students in the pre-engineering high school will teach the workshops.
Partners institutions include the University of Toledo, Bowling Green State
University, The Family Learning Center and the Toledo Technology Academy.