* 0206440
* Dissertation Research:  The Roles of Edaphic Shifts and Long-Distance Dispersal in the Evolution of the American Desert Genus Tiquilia (Boraginaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Robert Jansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,057.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Jansen and Mr. Michael Moore at the
University of Texas to study how the differing soil tolerances of individual
plant species have influenced plant evolution. Plant biologists have long known
that boundaries between different soil types often promote the evolution of new
species. However, they have rarely examined the importance of such shifts in
soil tolerance on the evolutionary history of whole groups of related plant
species. Jansen and Moore will specifically address this larger scale
evolutionary question by assessing the influence of shifting soil tolerances
during the evolution of the genus Tiquilia. The 27 species of small desert
shrubs in Tiquilia are ideally suited for this study because they differ
remarkably in soil preference despite occurring in the climatically similar
deserts of North and South America. Individual species of Tiquilia grow in one
of three substrate regimes: deep sand, gypsum, or both gypsum and limestone. To
determine the evolutionary pattern of substrate shifts in this genus, DNA
sequences of several genes will be collected for all species of Tiquilia. These
sequences will be utilized to develop an evolutionary tree detailing the
relationships among these species. This tree will then be used as a basis to
infer the history of soil preference in the genus.&lt;br/&gt; This project
represents one of the first studies to assess the significance of substrate
shifts in patterning the evolutionary history of an entire plant group.
Considering that soil type ranks second behind climate in determining the
geographic distribution of plant species, it is surprising that only a handful
of studies have addressed the relationship between evolutionary history and soil
preference among closely related plant species. This study therefore promises to
advance substantially our understanding of an underappreciated and potentially
important influence on the evolution of plant groups.&lt;br/&gt;