* 0206062
* Dissertation Research: Gene Flow, Reproductive Success and Inbreeding Depression in Fragmented Populations of Three Tropical Understory Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Donald Waller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,650.00

As tropical forests are cleared for agriculture, tropical trees become
restricted to isolated "islands" of habitat. If pollen and seeds do not move
effectively among these fragments, local mating occurs, increasing inbreeding
and the erosion of genetic diversity. Inbreeding and reduced genetic diversity,
in turn, can diminish seed production and seedling vigor, threatening population
viability. This study uses genetic markers to study how fragmentation affects
pollen movement and inbreeding in three animal-pollinated tropical tree species
in Costa Rica. DNA fingerprinting will be used to determine pollen sources for
seeds produced in forest fragments and how levels of inbreeding and genetic
diversity are affected by pollen movement. Comparing patterns of gene flow and
seedling vigor between fragments and a nearby continuous forest will allow
assessments of genetic threats posed by fragmentation. Geographic analyses will
show how patterns of gene flow are affected by fragment size and surrounding
landscapes.

Declines in biological diversity represent a profound global threat. This study
will illuminate how habitat loss and fragmentation are affecting reproductive
success, genetic diversity and inbreeding, all of which can reduce population
viability. Because they depend so obviously on animals for pollination and seed
dispersal, tropical trees in forest patches are at particular risk of
extinction. As plants represent the foundation for biological productivity and
diversity, such losses can result in cascades of extinctions. The data from this
study are thus needed to identify both proximal threats to tropical trees and to
guide longer-term management.