* 0206683
* Investigation of Diverse Representational Modes in the Learning of Physics and Chemistry
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2004
* David Meltzer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* WALTER C. ERMLER
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,949.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the role played by diverse
representational modes&lt;br/&gt;in the learning of physics and chemistry
concepts. We will explore the relationship between the&lt;br/&gt;form of
representation of complex concepts in physics and chemistry, and students'
ability to learn&lt;br/&gt;these concepts. We will determine the specific
learning difficulties that arise as students struggle to&lt;br/&gt;master
concepts posed in different representational forms, and we will apply our
findings&lt;br/&gt;immediately to the development of improved curricular
materials and instructional methods. We&lt;br/&gt;will then assess the
effectiveness of these new materials and methods in bringing about
greater&lt;br/&gt;student mastery of the targeted concepts. The issues we will
investigate include the following:&lt;br/&gt;1) What subject-specific learning
difficulties may be identified with various forms of&lt;br/&gt;representation of
particular concepts in the introductory physics and chemistry
curriculum?&lt;br/&gt;2) What generalizations may be possible regarding the
relative degree of difficulty of various&lt;br/&gt;representational modes when
compared with each other, in learning of particular concepts?&lt;br/&gt;3) Do
individual students do consistently well or poorly with particular forms of
representation,&lt;br/&gt;with widely varying types of subject
matter?&lt;br/&gt;4) Are there any consistent correlations among students'
relative performance with different&lt;br/&gt;representational modes, and
parameters such as major field, gender, age, learning style, etc.?&lt;br/&gt;5)
Does the overuse or under-use of certain types of
representational&lt;br/&gt;forms in standard instruction have any potential
impact on members of traditionally&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups? Test
instruments, consisting of sets of closely matched problems presented in several
different forms of representation, will be administered simultaneously to all
students in a class.&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of students' responses will allow us to
determine whether the learning difficulties are&lt;br/&gt;concept-related or
representation-related, or both. We will develop and validate many of
these&lt;br/&gt;closely matched problem sets, dealing with a wide variety of
basic topics in the introductory&lt;br/&gt;curricula. These will be administered
to students enrolled in both algebra-based and calculus-based&lt;br/&gt;courses,
at Iowa State University and at other institutions. We will also conduct and
record many&lt;br/&gt;clinical interviews with individual students in order to
probe in more depth their understanding of&lt;br/&gt;multiple representations.
As we identify widespread learning difficulties related to
representational&lt;br/&gt;mode, we will develop and test curricular materials
specifically designed to address and remedy&lt;br/&gt;these obstacles to
learning.&lt;br/&gt;