* 0206660
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Evolution of the Endo16 cis-regulatory System
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,720.00

&lt;br/&gt;The sea urchin gene Endo16 will be used to examine molecular
evolution in DNA sequences responsible for gene regulation, called promoters.
The functional consequences of the observed evolutionary changes will be tested
among several closely related species. These issues will be addressed using DNA
sequence comparisons, gene expression localizations, and experimental tests of
promoter function. The ability to perform analyses of promoter function in any
sea urchin species will provide a detailed picture of how promoter sequence
variation arises within populations and accumulates to create more extensive
species-level differences in promoter sequence, organization, and regulatory
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The widespread conservation of protein products
across the animal kingdom and the evolutionary correlation of changes in gene
expression with changes in morphology suggest that change in gene regulatory
sequences is an important basis for phenotypic evolution. Previous studies of
molecular evolution in gene regulatory sequences have been limited by incomplete
knowledge of the structure and function of the promoter region and the inability
to perform the necessary functional experiments in more than one species. This
project will provide one of the first detailed pictures of genetic variation in
promoter sequences, furthering our understanding of the genetic differences
underlying phenotypic evolution between species.&lt;br/&gt;