* 0206009
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Architecture of Flower-color Differences in Ipomoea Species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2004
* USD 8,600.00

Flower color is an important ecological trait because it is used by plants to
attract pollinators. Differences in flower color between species of Ipomoea
(morning glories) will often lead to the presence of different sets of
pollinators and a lack of pollen exchange. In order to understand the genetic
basis for differences in flower color, one can study the major biosynthetic
genes that produce flower pigments. Differences in these genes should be
manifest as differences in DNA sequence, expression level, or expression time. A
combination of crossing studies, DNA sequencing, and gene expression assays will
be used to identify the gene or genes responsible for flower differences between
two closely related species of Ipomoea: the white-flowered I. lacunosa and the
purple-flowered I. triloba. &lt;br/&gt; The number and type of mutations fixed
during adaptive evolution is a long-standing question in biology. Recent work
has suggested that, contrary to longstanding views, only a few mutations of
large effect may be involved in adaptation. Furthermore, with increasing
evidence of the conservation of most proteins over long time periods, it has
been suggested that important mutations may occur primarily in regulatory
sequences. In order to address these issues, the genetic basis of flower color
differences between I. lacunosa and I. triloba will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;