* 0206520
* Understanding Vanishing Endemism: Survey of the Invertebrates and Plants of Threatened Montane Habitats in Hispaniola
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Chen Young, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 553,014.00

Understanding Vanishing Endemism: Survey of the Invertebrates&lt;br/&gt;and
Plants of Threatened Montane Habitats in Hispaniola&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
biological survey investigates insects, plants, and other organisms from
mountain forests on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola (Dominican Republic,
Haiti), including some of the most threatened natural habitats on earth. A high
percentage of animal and plant species in these habitats are endemic, found
nowhere else. Destruction of montane habitats is occurring at an alarming rate
and many species are threatened with extinction, including many which provide
information essential for understanding biological aspects of related species
elsewhere in the New World, especially circum-Caribbean regions such as the
southeastern United States, Mexico, Central America, and northern South America.
Plants of Hispaniola are the least known of any island in the Antilles. An
estimated 80% of invertebrate species in mountainous regions is uncollected and
unknown to the scientific community. Project goals are (1) to further an
understanding of biological diversity in threatened Caribbean habitats, (2) to
improve infrastructure in Hispaniola for research on biodiversity, (3) to
rapidly provide recommendations for conservation of endangered Hispaniolan
habitats, and (4) to foster creative research on diverse and ecologically
significant groups of Caribbean animals and plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal project accomplishment will be a comprehensive, multi-seasonal biotic
inventory of great urgency starting Sept. 2002, ending Aug. 2005. Regions
targeted for intensive sampling encompass all six fault-delimited mountain
systems in Hispaniola (two in Haiti, four in DR). Sampling emphasizes insects
and plants from terrestrial and freshwater systems, especially megadiverse
lineages (Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, Diptera, angiosperms). More than 5,320
plants, 150,000 invertebrate specimens, and DNA samples of both will circulate
to 170 cooperating specialists worldwide for identification, research, and
publication on diverse Caribbean lineages. The project will (1) collect,
prepare, and circulate specimens for research, (2) discover and publish on
previously unknown organisms, (3) document spatial and temporal occurrence of
species and their associates, (4) communicate biological information over the
World Wide Web, and (5) apply survey findings to urgent problems in resource
management. The findings from this project have significance for scientific
research, including systematics, evolution, ecology, and conservation. This is a
multi-institutional and international effort based at Carnegie Museum of Natural
History (Pittsburgh) with collaborating co-PI's from Smithsonian Institution and
Harvard University, staff from key institutions in DR and Haiti (Jardin Botaico
Nacional, Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, State University of Haiti),
government agencies (Direccion General de Vida Silvestre y Biodiversidad (DR),
Ministere de L'Environnement (Haiti)), and private foundations (Fundacion
Moscoso Puello, Grupo Jaragua). The project will provide the most complete
biotic documentation of Hispaniolan habitats available anywhere, will be
essential to preservation and management of these endangered montane habitats,
and will be a model for future multinational, multi-institutional biotic
inventories in the Caribbean and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;