* 0206010
* New Gravitational Lenses, Time Delays, and Microlensing with the Magellan Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2002,01/31/2007
* Paul Schechter, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 01/31/2007
* USD 327,552.00

AST-0206010 Schechter, Paul L.

In this project two distinct strategies will be used to search at optical
wavelengths for gravitationally lensed quasars. First, conventional (but highly
automated) pointed direct images will be obtained of 6500 known quasars with the
Magellan I (Baade) telescope. Second, direct images in three filters will be
obtained for 1000 square degrees with 0.24 arcsecond pixels and subarcsecond
resolution with the MPIA 2.2-m telescope. A conservative estimate of the
expected number of lenses is 32, exceeding the number of systems found
separately in the past two decades by either optical or radio techniques. As 90%
of quasars are radio quiet, these two searches will complement recent successful
radio searches and furnish systems bright enough for extensive followup at
optical wavelengths. Gravitationally lensed quasars select galaxies by mass,
rather than light. Samples of lensing galaxies, typically at intermediate
redshifts, complement intermediate redshift samples selected by apparent
magnitude. They give mass functions rather than luminosity functions, an
important component of galaxy evolution models. Lensed quasars also permit
measurement of the Hubble constant, the cosmological parameter which sets the
scale for the Universe. The Hubble constant is sufficiently important that it
warrants a measurement completely independent of the traditional parallax and
standard candle based methods. ***