* 0206659
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogenetically-Based Analysis of Plastid Genome Evolution in the Photosynthetically Variable Parasitic Flowering Plant Genus, Cuscuta
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Claude dePamphilis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Claude dePamphilis and Mr. Joel McNeal at
Pennsylvania State University to study how different species of a group of
parasitic plants known as dodders are related to each other and how genes that
produce proteins necessary for photosynthesis differ between species in the
lineage. Dodders, which are vines that possess only tiny, useless leaves and no
roots whatsoever, attach to the stems of other plants and are dependent on these
hosts for all of their water, inorganic nutrients, and most, if not all, of
their carbohydrate needs. Because of this habit, the parasites have a reduced
need to photosynthesize for themselves. Genes located within chloroplasts, the
photosynthetic compartments of plant cells, are highly conserved across
flowering plants because most of these genes are necessary for carbohydrate
production from sunlight and atmospheric carbon dioxide. However, a large degree
of variation exists in these genes between different dodders, indicating that
different species may demonstrate differing abilities to photosynthesize.
&lt;br/&gt;By examining which genes are well conserved within chloroplasts of
different dodder species and related non-parasitic plants, an understanding of
which genes are most important for photosynthesis and which genes are more
expendable will be gained. These data will be verified further by comparison
with other parasitic plant lineages. Furthermore, knowledge of the relationships
between dodder species may eventually prove to be valuable to the control of
these parasitic weeds, many of which do serious agricultural damage and are
federally designated noxious weeds. The transition from being nutritionally
independent to being parasitic has occurred numerous times within plants and
also within many other lineages of life. This parasitic plant group will serve
as an excellent model to study the genetic changes that accompany this
transition. &lt;br/&gt;