* 0206517
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Comparative Morphology of American and Australian Gastrotricha: the Muscular System as a Source of Taxonomic and Phylogenetic Characters
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Marianne Litvaitis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Lipscomb
* 05/31/2003
* USD 6,513.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Marianne Litvaitis and Mr. Richard Hochberg of
the University of New Hampshire to conduct the first comparative anatomical
analysis of gastrotrichs from Australia and North America. Gastrotrichs are a
poorly known group of microscopic worms found throughout the world's oceans.
Most knowledge of gastrotrich diversity is limited to species from the Northern
Hemisphere, and much of this is exclusive to Europe. Anatomical knowledge of
gastrotrichs from the United States and Australia remains in its infancy.
Consequently, relationships between species from both continents are unknown.
The principle objectives of this research are (1) to describe several new
Australian gastrotrichs, (2) use characteristics of the body-wall and muscular
system to determine relationships between Australian and American species, and
(3) to place this information in an evolutionary context. Specimens will be
analyzed using a combination of high-resolution light microscopy, scanning and
transmission electron microscopy, and fluorescence
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will highlight the use of novel
characters to measure invertebrate biodiversity and determine evolutionary
relationships among widely separated populations of gastrotrichs. As a study of
the muscular system, it will also demonstrate how variation in muscle anatomy
contributes to dispersal of microscopic fauna. Results from this research will
provide much-needed taxonomic revisions of several new gastrotrichs and will
yield insight into the biogeography and evolution of the Gastrotricha and the
history of the Australian biota. With a greater anatomical knowledge of
gastrotrichs, we will gain better insights into the ecological and evolutionary
importance of this poorly known group of invertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;