* 0206362
* Dissertation Research: Limb Loss And Phylogenetic Relationships In Southern African Scincine Lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jack Sites, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,006.00

A grant has been awarded from the National Science Foundation to Dr. Jack Sites
and Mrs. Alison Whiting at Brigham Young University to study the evolutionary
patterns of limb loss in a group of Southern African lizards. Limb loss is a
trend seen in many squamate groups, including snakes and various lizards. The
lizard family Scincidae (skinks) is arguably the best system in which to study
patterns and processes of limb loss because limb reduction (to some degree) is
postulated to have occurred over 30 independent times. The southern African
genus Scelotes contains species exhibiting the full range of limb reduction,
from fully functional pentadactyl limbs (i.e., those with 5 digits) to complete
lack thereof, with many intermediate forms. However, the evolutionary
relationship among skinks is unknown. The objective of this research is to
establish a robust hypothesis of phylogenetic (i.e., genealogical) relationships
within southern African scincines, using both DNA sequence and skeletal data,
and to evaluate the evolutionary pattern of limb loss within Scelotes in light
of phylogeny. Preliminary results support multiple occurrences as well as
reversals of limb loss in this group.&lt;br/&gt;The loss of limbs in snakes and
multiple lizard groups has long been an area of intense interest. This study
will lead to a greater understanding of the morphological changes associated
with, and the ecological pressures that lead to limb loss, and indirectly may
also help scientists understand details about the origin of snakes. In addition,
studying limb loss in a group where it has occurred multiple times will lay the
foundations for understanding the developmental genetic mechanisms involved in
limb development. &lt;br/&gt;