* 0206632
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Covariation of opsin proteins and coloration in a Caribbean goby species complex
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Michael Hellberg, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2004
* USD 9,955.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michael Hellberg and Mr. Michael Taylor at
Louisiana State University to study whether the brilliant colors displayed by
coral reef fishes are important for mate attraction and species recognition.
Color perception by most vertebrate animals is conferred by proteins in the eyes
called opsins. Color sensitivity of opsins can be altered by genetic changes to
the genes coding for the proteins. The surrounding environment also affects
color perception. The ecologically important cleaner gobies (genus Elacatinus)
are brightly colored fishes that remove parasites from other fishes. Thus,
coloration in cleaner gobies may be important both for mate recognition and for
recognition by fishes that need cleaning. The investigators will determine
whether changes in opsin proteins correspond with coloration changes of the
cleaner gobies by comparing DNA sequences of opsin genes from two differently
colored populations of a single species, and between two species with different
colors. Additionally, the investigators will use an underwater spectroradiometer
to quantify the color reflectivity of the corals occupied by these gobies to
determine whether gobies choose coral colors that maximize the apparent
intensity of their color display to other fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral
reefs contain some of the greatest biodiversity on earth, and gobies are the
largest family of marine fishes. This study will provide insight into the
processes that lead to such diversity. Coloration differences between similar
gobies can allow them to occupy different niches while advertising their
cleaning services. An enhanced ability to distinguish potential mates by
coloration could help to reduce genetic exchange between differently colored
populations, leading to the formation of new species. Together, these concepts
could provide clues about how environment and color vision interact to help
generate the biodiversity observed on coral reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;