* 0206756
* Dissertation Research: Nucleotide Variability at G6pd and the Signature of Malarial Selection in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Michael Nachman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,077.00

Malaria is a major cause of illness and mortality in humans. Every year nearly
500 million people suffer from malaria and upward of 2 million people die from
this tropical parasitic disease. Some human populations that have historically
lived in regions with high levels of malaria infections carry genetic resistance
factors to the disease. Among these genetic resistance factors are some variants
(alleles) of the gene coding for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). Thus
G6pd is subject to positive natural selection in some human populations in
malarious areas. Few examples of positive natural selection are recognized at
the molecular level in humans and the effect of selection on the genome is not
yet well understood. To understand the effect of selection on DNA nucleotide
variability and to identify a signature of positive natural selection at the
molecular level, this research will describe patterns of nucleotide variability
within and around the gene coding for G6PD in humans. Specifically, this
research will describe patterns of nucleotide variability within G6pd, and at
ten other neighboring genes spanning over 2 Mb around G6pd in two distinct human
populations from Africa and Iraq that bear independently arisen polymorphisms at
G6pd that confer resistance to malaria. A random sample of 50 individuals from
the Luo of Kenya, and 50 Iraqi Jews will be used in the study to (i)
characterize the signature of selection on G6pd, (ii) characterize variation at
loci linked to G6pd, (iii) estimate the age of the selected alleles based on
patterns of nucleotide variability, and (iv) compare G6pd systems in Africa and
Iraq to distinguish between deterministic factors (e.g. natural selection) and
stochastic factors (e.g. genetic drift) that are responsible for shaping the
observed nucleotide patterns.&lt;br/&gt;Patterns of nucleotide variability found
in this study at G6pd that are due to selection by malaria will shed light on
the evolutionary history of the association between Plasmodium falciparum (the
primary human malaria parasite) and humans, a topic that is still not clearly
understood. Furthermore, the ability to recognize the signature of positive
natural selection in general at the molecular level in humans will be useful to
possibly identify additional human genes that are subject to selection by
various infectious diseases and ecological factors.&lt;br/&gt;