* 0206158
* Probing the Growth of Galaxies with the Bolocam Millimeter-Wave Galaxy Survey
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jason Glenn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 334,581.00

AST-0206158&lt;br/&gt;Glenn&lt;br/&gt;This program is a millimeter-wave survey
that will directly probe the formation of galaxies in the early universe by
detecting thermal dust emission from more than one hundred ultraluminous
galaxies at redshifts z &gt; 1. The survey will be uniquely efficient at finding
galaxies at the highest redshifts, and is designed to detect extremely luminous
galaxies. This will maximize the likelihood of identification with optical,
infrared, and X-ray observations, and allow redshifts to be constrained for
objects even without optical spectroscopic identifications. The key to the
survey is Bolocam, a millimeter-wave bolometer camera with high mapping speed on
the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory. The detected galaxies will be followed-up
with 350 micron photometry with SHARC II on the Caltech Submillimeter
Observatory. The Bolocam galaxy catalog generated by this survey will provide a
rich source list for follow-up multi-band observations by many investigators.
The science program will be integrated with an education and public outreach
program that takes advantage of the unique Fiske Planetarium at the University
of Colorado. A two-part, multi-media show suitable for public nights and
introductory astronomy lectures will be written. They will showcase our rapidly
evolving understanding of the Universe as revealed by microwave and
sub/millimeter observations: (I) "Evidence for the Fiery Big Bang" and (II) "The
Formation of Galaxies". The award will support a Ph.D. graduate student and
provide partial summer salary for the Principle Investigator to carry out the
science and outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;