* 0206606
* Dissertation Research: Chemical Discrimination of Predator Diets in Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2004
* Dale Madison, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,126.00

CHEMICAL DISCRIMINATION OF PREDATOR DIETS IN AMPHIBIANS

Dr. Dale M. Madison Aaron M. Sullivan

Essentially all animals must be wary of predators, but usually must perform
daily tasks such as obtaining food. In many cases, animals measure the threat of
a nearby predator, and take evasive action (and cease foraging) only when attack
seems imminent. Some animals use chemical information not only to detect local
predators, but also to assess threat by determining the diet of the predator. In
this case, a diet consisting of other individuals of the same species would be
most threatening and the most likely to evoke evasive action.

Given the importance of predator-prey interactions in ecological communities,
and the relative neglect of chemical defense mechanisms among terrestrial
vertebrates, the proposed research focuses on chemical defense and assessment in
an important prey-predator unit in the woodlands of northeastern USA,
specifically that between a common salamander (Plethodon cinereus) and the
predatory garter snake. The researchers have documented diet-based threat
assessment by the salamander, and in the proposed study, will examine the degree
to which salamanders use the ecological familiarity or genetic relatedness of
alternative prey in the snake's diet to assess the threat imposed by the snake.
Ecological familiarity will be assessed by using chemical cues from alternate
salamander prey species occupying a variety of different niches in the same
general P. cinereus habitat. Genetic relatedness will be examined by using cues
from alternative prey of varying genetic relatedness to P. cinereus, ranging
from individuals of the same subspecies to individuals of different species and
higher taxonomic categories. These studies should reveal how some animals are
able to decipher subtle chemical information in their environment that is
important to individual survival and interpreting community-wide interactions.