* 0206562
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeography and Population Genetics of the Dyeing Poison-Dart Frog (Dendrobates Tinctorius)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Paul Chippindale, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 27,508.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Chippindale and Mr. Brice Noonan of the
University of Texas at Arlington to study relationships, genetic and
morphological variation, and population fragmentation in the poison-dart frog
Dendrobates tinctorius. This species occurs only in the northeastern corner of
South America (Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana, and Brazil). It is the largest
species of poison-dart frog, and its biology is poorly understood. Dendrobates
tinctorius exhibits a tremendous amount of variation in size and color pattern
among populations. Although all of the morphologically diverse populations are
currently considered a single species, the remarkable degree of variation among
them may indicate major barriers to gene flow, and perhaps even the existence of
multiple species. The investigators will use microsatellite and mitochondrial
DNA to analyze geographic genetic structure of D. tinctorius from throughout its
range.&lt;br/&gt; Dendrobates tinctorius is restricted to the Guianan Shield of
South America. This region encompasses the largest undisturbed tract of tropical
rainforest in the world. The distribution of D. tinctorius represents an extreme
with respect to natural fragmentation; understanding how this pattern of
isolation affects population dynamics and genetic diversity will help biologists
predict effects of human-induced fragmentation on other, more continuously
distributed species. Additionally, D. tinctorius may be in the early stages of
speciation, and this study will provide insight into the degree of gene flow
that is necessary for genetic cohesion within species. This work will involve
collaboration with researchers in the countries in which D. tinctorius occurs,
and will contribute to efforts to conserve biodiversity in the Guianan Shield in
the face of increasing human pressure. The current decline of amphibians
throughout the world makes an understanding of their biology, diversity, and
distributional constraints vital to their continued survival, and this research
will provide key insights in these respects.&lt;br/&gt;