* 0206950
* NER:  Novel Electrochemically Self Assembled Nanowire Infrared Photodetectors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2004
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2004
* USD 88,502.00

This research is focused on demonstrating novel ROOM
TEMPERATURE&lt;br/&gt;infrared photodetectors based on electrochemically self
assembled nanowire&lt;br/&gt;arrays. Photodetection is based on photoexcitation
of electrons from&lt;br/&gt;subband states in the nanowire to trap states in the
surrounding&lt;br/&gt;insulator. This leads to an "inverse" photodetection
effect whereby the &lt;br/&gt;conductivity of the photodetector drops when
irradiated with infrared radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary experiments
[Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 79, 4423 (2001)] have&lt;br/&gt;shown that these
photodetectors can operate at room temperature with a&lt;br/&gt;signal to noise
ratio of 45 dB. The purpose of the NER project will&lt;br/&gt;be to extend this
result to create (1) multi-colored detectors using&lt;br/&gt;different sized
nanowires self assembled on the same wafer, and (2) a&lt;br/&gt;complementary
photodetector where a normal photodetector is synthesized&lt;br/&gt;in series
with an inverse photodetector. The complementary photodetector&lt;br/&gt;will be
able to detect a very narrow band.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
involve significant work by undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;The samples that
exhibited the novel photodetection effect were&lt;br/&gt;prepared by an
undergraduate student in the PI's lab.&lt;br/&gt;