* 0206411
* The Living Machine
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2002,10/31/2005
* David Elisco, Sea Studios Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 10/31/2005
* USD 2,263,515.00

Sea Studios Foundation is developing a five-hour television-based project that
will examine "Earth System Science," which will be produced in association with
the National Geographic Society (NGS). Geologists, biologists, oceanographers,
climatologists, social scientists and others are joining forces to understand
the planet's rapidly changing environment. The series will follow the on-going
research of these scientists as they investigate the links between Earth's
geosphere, biosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere. These programs are planned as
the first season of an annual series on the topic.

Educational outreach will include a hands-on traveling exhibit to be developed
and tested by the Maryland Science Center; an Educator's Guide for print and
electronic distribution to informal science centers and community organizations;
a "resource toolkit" to augment the Educator's Guide and an Internet site hosted
by NGS that provides links to existing and new environmental resources. The
series content also will be integrated into several NGS venues including:
National Geographic Today, the daily news program on the National Geographic
Channel; National Geographic Magazine, which will create a "global report card"
as an annual feature; and National Geographic for Kids magazine, which is
distributed to children in grades three through six.

The project advisory board includes:

Richard Barber, Professor of Biological Oceanography, Duke University Robert
Costanza, Professor of Zoology, University of Maryland Gretchen Daily,
Interdisciplinary Research Scientist, Stanford University Robert Dunbar,
Specialist in Global Environmental Change, Stanford University Habiba Gitay,
Senior Lecturer, National Centre for Development Studies, Asia Pacific School of
Economics and Management, Canberra, Australia Michael Glantz, Senior Scientist,
the Environmental and Societal Impacts Group, National Center for Atmospheric
Research John Katzenberger, Executive Director of Aspen Global change Institute
Jane Lubchenco, Professor of Marine Biology, Oregon State University J. R.
McNeill, Professor of History, Georgetown University Harold Mooney, Professor of
Environmental Biology, Stanford University Steven Schneider, Professor of
Environmental Biology and Global Change, Stanford University Brian Walker,
Coordinator of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization's Biodiversity Sector, Adelaide, South Australia

