* 0206055
* Collaborative Proposal: Through the Gas Darkly: Birth and Death in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* David Helfand, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Phelps
* 06/30/2005
* USD 244,830.00

AST 020655&lt;br/&gt;Helfand&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of stellar births
and stellar deaths in the Milky Way take place shrouded from&lt;br/&gt;the view
of optical telescopes. Centimeter radio waves and hard X-rays can penetrate the
gas and&lt;br/&gt;dust which obscure our vision, but the limited angular
resolution and sensitivity of all previous&lt;br/&gt;searches has left us
peering through the gas darkly in an attempt to construct a census of
star&lt;br/&gt;formation and demise in the Galaxy. Drs. David Helfand, at
Columbia University, and Robert Becker, at the University of California at
Davis, will carry out a new survey of the Galactic Plane with the Very Large
Array (VLA), as well as extensive optical and near-infrared follow up
observations, to complement a new hard X-ray Galactic plane survey now underway
using the XMM-Newton satellite. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of this group's
observations (approved and proposed, at X-ray and radio wavelengths) are
nonproprietary, and they intend to follow the FIRST survey model in creating a
public website which will make available all reduced images as soon as they are
constructed and verified. Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;survey will provide databases of
use to any astronomer working in Galactic astronomy. However,&lt;br/&gt;these
researchers have identified a number of specific problems on which they intend
to focus: a complete census of Galactic supernova remnants, a census of massive
star formation, and the definition of complete samples of accretion-powered
binary systems. The surveys will open a new window on massive star formation in
the Milky Way. All HII regions powered by stars more massive than B0 will be
clearly visible to the solar circle on the opposite side of the Galaxy as radio
sources coincident with infrared emission detected in the MSX satellite mid-
infrared maps of the plane; in addition, many of these star formation complexes
will be detectable in the XMM-Newton maps, providing a distance estimate from
the X-ray absorption column density. This group will follow up all HII region
candidates with a new infrared camera on the MDM 2.4m telescope.
The&lt;br/&gt;result will be the most complete census yet of massive star
formation in the Galaxy. Luminosity functions for several classes of X-ray
transients and steady binaries, derived from extensive optical and near-infrared
follow up of selected samples of X-ray point sources from the XMM
Newton&lt;br/&gt;images, will extend 2-3 orders of magnitude fainter than
existing data allow, providing important new constraints on close-binary
evolution and models for accretion. With both X-ray and radio observing time
already allocated, with a new 8K optical camera and a near-infrared
imager/spectrometer on the MDM 2.4m telescope and access to the Lick and Keck
Observatories, these researchers have the resources in place to provide a
striking new view of the Milky Way. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;