* 0206372
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Speciation as a Function of Cultivar Switching in Fungus-Growing Ants
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2004
* Ulrich Mueller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Speciation is the basic process that generates biodiversity. In the tropics,
leaf-cutter ants and their sister species the lower attine ants comprise a
significant proportion of tropical insects, but little is known about their
diversification. Patterns of speciation by switching fungal cultivar types
between ant species will be examined in three Central American species complexes
of lower attine ants (Cyphomyrmex longiscapus, Mycocepurus smithi, and
Apterostigma pilosum). The goals of this study are to: split each species
complex into valid species using molecular genetic techniques; assess genetic
diversity of each species; examine biogeographic patterns of each species
complex in Central America; and differentiate between allopatric and sympatric
modes of speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the fundamental
process of forming new species. By investigating patterns of diversification in
cryptic attine ant species, the attine-fungus mutualism may emerge as a new
model system for speciation studies, thus contributing to our understanding of
biodiversity. This research will provide training for a graduate student in
molecular genetic, entomological, and field techniques, and the graduate student
will train and supervise several undergraduate assistants. These results will
add new information to the already astonishing level of complexity that has
evolved within the attine system over the fifty million years that these ancient
farming ants have been cultivating fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;