* 0206068
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Proximate Causes and Adaptive Significance of Individual Variation in the Behavior of Kangaroo Rats
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Stephen Jenkins, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 05/31/2004
* USD 9,410.00

PROXIMATE CAUSES AND ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE OF INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN THE
BEHAVIOR OF KANGAROO RATS

Dr. Stephen H. Jenkins Amy M. Barber

Comparative studies of closely related species or different populations of the
same species have contributed greatly to our understanding of the evolutionary
significance of various kinds of behavior. More recently, researchers have begun
to focus on variation among individuals in the same population, especially
individuals belonging to the same age and sex class. Study of this kind of
variation holds as much promise for advancing understanding of the evolution of
behavior in the future as study of interspecific variation and geographic
variation within species has contributed to such understanding in the past.
There are several recent reports of intraspecific variation in diverse
behavioral traits. Some of this variation is organized into syndromes that are
correlated with differences in hormone levels; these syndromes have been
described as different strategies that may be important for how individuals
interact with one another or their environment. However, most of this work has
been done in the laboratory and so is unable to address how these different
behaviors function under natural conditions. This study of Merriam's kangaroo
rats (Dipodomys merriami) builds upon the current evidence by using an
experimental approach in the field. Corticosterone is a major stress hormone in
kangaroo rats and other animals and is an important basis, or proximate
mechanism, for a variety of behaviors. Levels of corticosterone will be altered
within the natural range for kangaroo rats using hormone implants of
corticosterone to increase levels and metyrapone implants to decrease the
natural production of corticosterone. These manipulations will be used to
examine how individual differences in behavior change in response to changes in
hormone levels. A newly developed technique for sampling hormones in the feces
of rodents will be used to non-invasively measure differences in hormone
profiles among individuals. The foraging behavior, spatial memory ability, and
response of focal individuals to novel situations will be measured to quantify
behavioral differences both before and after manipulation of hormone levels. In
addition, the consistency of behavior will be characterized for focal animals.
Modification of typical laboratory methods for use in the field will allow focal
animals to remain in their natural habitat for a longer-term study; most
importantly, the survival of individuals will be monitored in relation to their
corticosterone levels and behavior over the course of the study. Survival is one
key measure of the adaptive significance of behavior for kangaroo rats. This
study, using a population of kangaroo rats in the field as a model system,
provides a unique opportunity to understand in detail how individual variation
in hormones influences the survival of individuals through its effects on a
suite of interrelated behaviors. The study will also provide both graduate and
undergraduate training.

