* 0206826
* Development of a Simplistic Method for Processing Intermetallic Sheet Materials Using Cold Roll Bonding and Reaction Annealing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2007
* USD 554,605.00

The project is aimed at developing and optimizing a new process for making
titanium aluminide sheet materials that find application where structures are
required to be fabricated using strong and light-weight materials that maintain
their strengths at elevated temperatures. Intermetallic compounds such as TiAl
are difficult process using conventional methods and require
specialized/expensive techniques such as hot isostatic pressing with controlled
inert atmospheres to minimize contamination. The goal of the project is to
develop and optimize cold roll bonding process followed by reaction annealing of
TiAl sheet samples. The study includes experimental investigation to determine
the influence of surface preparation, rolling pressure, and annealing
temperature on the microstructures and mechanical properties of the processed
sheet. In addition to the tensile and hardness measurements, fracture toughness
will be determined. Along with the experimental study, simulation of the cold
roll bonding process will made using numerical modeling so that the effects of
deformation on the rate of reaction during annealing can be assessed. The
fundamental metallurgical investigations will lead to a better understanding of
the factors controlling the microstructures and properties of materials
processed by cold roll bonding. The funding of this research provides an
opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students including underrepresented
minorities to develop understanding and experience in the metallurgical and
process areas of research.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a new
processing method to fabricate intermetallic metals and alloys that find
application in several technologies with high temperature applications including
aerospace. It is anticipated that this process on a commercial scale can produce
relatively large intermetallic sheets measuring several meters. These materials
preserve their mechanical strength at relatively high temperatures. The proposed
processing eliminates expensive hot isostatic pressing in inert atmospheres
making it relatively more cost-effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;