* 0206029
* Spectroscopy and Photometry of Black Hole Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Edward Robinson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 229,380.00

AST-0206029&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Robinson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Soft X-Ray Transients are short-period, X-ray binary stars in which a compact
star - either a neutron star or a black hole - is stripping matter from a
relatively-normal companion star. The stripped matter spirals down to the
compact star, releasing gravitational potential energy and forming a hot
accretion disk. It is this superheated accretion disk that is the source of the
X-ray emission. Such bursts of X-ray emission may last a few months and can
reach extraordinary luminosities, 100,000 times the sun's luminosity. The bursts
are caused by an increase in the flow of mass through the disk. The X-ray
luminosity between outbursts is low, so the quiescent binary system is
undistorted by strong X-ray irradiation, allowing reliable measurements of
system properties. The high proportion of black holes among the short-period
X-ray binaries, their variable accretion flows, and their low X-ray luminosity
between outbursts make them superb laboratories for studying black holes and
black hole accretion. Although they are generally discovered at
X-ray&lt;br/&gt;wavelengths, disentangling their properties requires
observations at optical as well as X-ray wavelengths. The known binaries are,
however, all faint at optical wavelengths during quiescence and, thus, have been
slow to yield their secrets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure the
dynamical masses of the x-ray binary black holes, measure the structure and
evolution of the accretion disk and other accretion flows by Doppler Tomography
of the emission lines, and will take advantage of the queue-scheduled operating
mode of the 8-meter Hobby-Eberly Telescope of McDonald Observatory to obtain
synoptic measurements of the optical spectral energy distribution of any
northern x-ray transient that goes into outburst, mapping their full outburst
behavior for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;