* 0207886
* Investigation of Archean Ophiolites and Oceanic Crust and Mantle Fragments in Melange, North China Craton:  Implications for Archean Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Timothy Kusky, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 109,907.00

Understanding Archean crustal and mantle evolution hinges upon proper
identification and characterization of oceanic lithosphere. The PI has
discovered and reported a complete, albeit slightly dismembered and
metamorphosed, Archean ophiolite sequence in the North China Craton. The top of
the ophiolitic succession is marked by sulfide-rich chert and banded iron fon-
nation overlying several tens-to one hundred meters of variably deformed pillow
lavas. These grade down through a mixed dike/pillow lava section into a 2 km
thick I 00% sheeted dike complex mapped continuously for more than 5 km along
strike; reconnaissance mapping suggests that the dike complex may extend for
more than 20 km. The dikes consist of diabase, basalt and hb-pyx-gabbro. Most
have chilled margins developed on their NE sides, but not their SW sides,
indicating one-way chilling. The sheeted dike complex is underlain by several km
of mixed isotropic and foliated gabbro, which develop compositional layering
approximately 2 km below the sheeted dikes, and then over several hundred meters
merge into strongly compositionally layered gabbro and olivine-gabbro. The
layered gabbro becomes mixed with layered pyroxenite/gabbro marking a transition
zone that grades into cumulate ultramafic rocks including dunite, pyroxenite and
wehrlite, and finally into strongly defon-fied and serpentinized olivine and
orthopyroxene-bearing ultramafic rocks that may be depleted mantle harzburgite
tectonites. The PI has obtained a U/Pb zircon age of 2.505 Ga from gabbro of the
Dongwanzi ophiolite, making it the world s oldest recognized, laterally-
extensive complete ophiolite sequence. Study of this remarkable ophiolite may
offer the best constraints yet on the nature of the Archean oceanic crust and
mantle, and offer insights to the style of Archean plate tectonics and global
heat loss mechanisms. The Dongwanzi ophiolite is one of the largest well-
preserved greenstone belts in the Zunhua structural belt (part of the Central
orogenic belt),that divides the North China craton into eastern and western
blocks. More than I 000 other fragments of gabbro, pillow lava, sheeted dikes,
harzburgite, and podifonn-chromite bearing dunite occur as tectonic blocks in a
blotite- gneiss matrix in the Zunhua structural belt. The PI interprets these
rocks as an Archean ophiolitic melange and recognize that some of the blocks
preserve deeper levels of oceanic mantle than the Dongwanzi ophiolite. The PI
and co-workers have designed a comprehensive series of studies to fully document
the field, structural, geochronological, mineralogical, and chemical
characteristics of this ophiolite and related melange. They will assess what
these data mean in ten-ns of Archean crustal and mantle evolution, thermal state
of the early Earth, and ideas about Precambrian plate tectonics. They regard
this as an unsurpassed opportunity to evaluate fundamental properties of Archean
crust and mantle, and to understand processes critical for evaluating Archean
oceanic crustal and mantle evolution. Understanding Archean oceanic processes in
the North China craton will provide a valuable contrast with similar processes
recorded in younger ophiolites, indicating how mid-ocean ridge processes may
have evolved from a period of high heat production to one of lower heat
production. Detailed mapping will accurately delineate the extent, thickness,
and relationships between individual units, which is important for understanding
mechanisms of Archean sea floor spreading and heat loss. Structural analysis of
mantle tectonites will reveal deformation conditions in the Archean oceanic
mantle. U/Pb geochronology will be used to establish the age and duration of
magmatism represented in the ophiolite and document the structural chronology by
dating igneous dikes and plutons that intruded between different events, as
deten-nined by mapping. Geochemical analyses will be aimed at determining
relationships between the crustal and depleted mantle components of the
ophiolite, and comparing these data with younger ophiolites from different
tectonic settings, and also from Archean greenstone belts, some of which may
include severely dismembered Archean ophiolite fragments. Analyses will include
major, minor, trace, REE, and several isotopic systems (in collaboration with
geochemists from several cooperating institutions)and will be used to assess
crustal and mantle evolution. Archean oceanic lithospheric structure is likely
to have been as complex and variable as that in the present-day plate mosaic.
Documentation of the characteristics of the Dongwanzi ophiolite and related
rocks may serve as the first reference column for Archean oceanic lithosphere,
since it is the most complete Archean ophiolite known on the planet.