* 0207672
* Comparison of Microscale Fault Fabrics Formed in Creeping and Stick-Slip Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Susan Cashman, Humboldt State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2005
* USD 40,621.00

This research applies an innovative technique, microstructural analysis of
faulted sediments, to evaluate more accurately the hazard associated with
creeping faults. This project extends ongoing microstructural studies of faulted
sediment texture from stick-slip faults (Cashman and Cashman, 2000; Baldwin et
al., 2001, in review) to a selected study site on the creeping portion of the
San Andreas Fault. The research goal is to develop microstructural criteria that
will allow paleoselsmologists to differentiate shear zones produced by aseismic
creep from those formed by coselsmic fault rupture.

Digital image acquisition and analysis enable researchers to quantify
characteristics of rock fabrics such as grain dimensions and grain orientations
in order to test hypotheses about processes governing the development of rock
texture. For example, computer-based image analysis has been used to measure
crystal size distribution (e.g. Cashman and Marsh, 1988) and vesicle size
distribution (e.g. Cashman et al. 1994) in volcanic rocks with the goal of
constraining dynamic rates of crystallization and vesiculation. This approach
has also proved useful for measuring particle size distribution, grain shape,
and grain orientation in shear zones in unconsolidated sand adjacent to the
active McKinleyville fault, California, (Cashman and Cashman, 2000) and New
Madrid North fault, Missouri, (Baldwin et al., 2001, in review) with the goal of
assessing the relative importance of compaction, grain breakage, and grain
rotation in shear zone development. Fault zone sediments from these two stick-
slip faults have several textural features in common, including compaction,
pronounced grain size reduction, preferred grain orientation, and development of
anastomosing micro-scale shear zones. Of particular interest is the high degree
of grain breakage in the unconsolidated sand.

This study is a microstructural analysis of fault zone sediments from a site on
the creeping portion of the San Andreas Fault. Preliminary data indicate
significant quantifiable differences in the degree of grain breakage between
unconsolidated sand subjected to stick-slip faulting and that defon-ned by
ascismic creep. Image analysis of fault zone sediment from a well-documented
creeping fault site will provide data on grain breakage and other textural
changes produced by creep. These data will be used to evaluate the relative
importance of grain breakage, grain rotation, and compaction in sediment defon-
ned by stable fault creep, and to determine if specific textural criteria are
unique to stick-slip or to creeping faults.