* 0207962
* RUI: Volcanic, Petrologic, and Geochemical Evolution of Darwin Volcano, Galapagos
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Terry Naumann, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 11/30/2006
* USD 115,000.00

Naumann&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207962&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The western Galapagos
archipelago is one of the most active volcanic areas on Earth. This
volcanologic, petrologic, and geochemical study of Darwin volcano is designed to
test competing hypotheses for the growth of Galapagos-type shield volcanoes and
their geochemical variations. The origin of their distinct "overturned soup
plate" morphology is not merely a provincial issue: Galapagos-type shields may
be characteristic of many seamounts and extraterrestrial volcanoes. Little is
known of Darwin volcano, but several reconnaissance specimens from the lowermost
flanks indicate that it is mostly made up of basalts with isotopic compositions
are between those of lavas erupted from mid-oceanic ridges and those erupted
from hotspots. Despite their isotopic character, the same lavas are rich in
incompatible elements, more typical of ocean-island basalts. Darwin volcano was
chosen for this study because although it remains virtually unstudied, it is
situated between the two well-studied volcanoes of Alcedo and Wolf on Isabela
Island. Alcedo and Wolf volcanoes represent two end members in the western
Galapagos with respect to geochemical variation, elevation, shape, and caldera
depth, and the study of Darwin volcano will allow for testing and refinement of
models that predict the origin of these diverse geochemical systems and volcano
morphologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project seek insights into
the fundamental processes of ocean-island magmatism. These include: 1)
documentation of the eruptive processes and the chronology, distribution and
volume of eruptions that have constructed Darwin volcano; 2) determination of
the petrologic and geochemical variation of Darwin's lavas in order to document
the processes involved with the generation, storage, and eruption of magmas; and
3) a comparison of Darwin volcano with other well-studied western Galapagos
volcanoes in order test the hypothesis that the magma supply rate to each
volcano is the dominant control not only of the geochemical variation of lavas
but also each volcanoes unique size, shape and caldera morphology.&lt;br/&gt;