* 0207242
* Random Models for Turbulent Fluid Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Peter Kramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 115,990.00

This research is directed toward the general goal of developing some fundamental
understanding of nonlinear processes in turbulent fluids, with particular
attention to the development of effective equations which describe the dynamics
of complex systems on a coarse-grained level. Two particular physical phenomena
are examined: the mixing and transport of substances immersed in a turbulent
fluid and the interaction between weakly nonlinear waves. The common mode of
investigation is a precise analysis of simplified stochastic models. The main
feature of the turbulent transport model is its inclusion of both a large-scale
mean flow, which can depend on both space and time, and a small-scale
fluctuating component of the velocity field. This allows a study of how the
large and small scales of a turbulent fluid interact in determining the
effective evolution of the passive scalar density. The work will be directed
toward extending some rigorous homogenization theorems and investigating some
physical phenomena which arise from the new features of the model. The second
research area concerns the development of simplified equations to describe wave
propagation under the influence of weak nonlinearity. A well-known weak
turbulence theory has found some success in treating such systems in a number of
contexts, but its foundations and limitations are still under active
investigation. Some particular aspects of the weak turbulence theory will be
scrutinized and illustrated on the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam model. The outcomes of this
analysis will be used to suggest modifications of the standard kinetic equations
of weak turbulence theory which may improve their accuracy and generalize their
domain of applicability.

Both of these studies are directed toward achieving a better understanding of
how turbulent systems can be effectively described through simplified equations.
A chief application of this research theme is in atmosphere-ocean models
designed for climate and weather prediction. Limitations on both available data
and supercomputing resources make fully detailed simulations impossible for the
forseeable future, and the effects of turbulence must be represented by some
managable set of parameters. The research described above will contribute toward
a better understanding of how turbulence can be parameterized in atmosphere-
ocean science models in a more rational and effective manner.