* 0207365
* Collaborative Research:  Recent Kinematic Evolution of the Northern Eastern California Shear Zone from Geologic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Lee, Central Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 127,789.00

Plate circuit calculations indicate that motion of the Pacific plate relative to
North American plate changed from westerly to NW at ~8 Ma. This observation
corresponds extremely well with geologic data which indicates that motion of the
Sierran-Great Valley block relative to the Colorado Plateau changed from
westerly to NW at ~8-10 Ma. Geologic studies indicate that the rate of right
lateral shear at ~8 Ma within the Eastern California Shear Zone north of the
Garlock fault was ~15 mm/yr accounting for ~30%of relative plate motion.
Geodetic studies indicate a present-day dextral shear rate of 10-12 mm/yr,
providing clear evidence that the Eastern California Shear Zone is still an
important component of deformation within the Pacific-North America plate
boundary zone. In spite of its tectonic importance, the space-time evolution of
much of the Eastern California Shear Zone is only broadly understood. This
proposal requests support for investigating the kinematics of a system of
intraplate dextral faults in the northern part of the Eastern California Shear
Zone using an integrated approach of field mapping, tectonic geomorphology,
paleoseismology, and geochronology. The proposed research is motivated by
ongoing geodetic investigations on present-day magnitude of strain accumulation
and spatial distribution across the Eastern California Shear Zone. In light of
these geodetic constraints on strain accumulation, it is timely to improve the
understanding of the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release during the
late Neogene and Quaternary. The two data sets will provide important
constraints on geodynamic hypotheses proposed for the evolution of the Eastern
California Shear Zone. An accurate characterization of the spatial and temporal
patterns of strain release within the Eastern California Shear Zone is crucial
for understanding tectonic processes over a much broader area of intraplate
deformation associated with the interaction of the Pacific and North American
plates.&lt;br/&gt;