* 0207090
* UMEB: Integrating Inquiry-Based and Cooperative Learning with Expanded Career Horizons in Environmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2008
* Edward Connor, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

0207090&lt;br/&gt;Connor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
stimulate students from groups that are currently underrepresented in the
sciences to choose careers in environmental biology. This objective will be met
by involving students in positive and productive research experiences and by
providing close mentoring, group learning activities, and careful advising.
Students will work with experienced and aspiring research scientists and
environmental professionals in seminars and informal gatherings, thus providing
a basis for students to imagine themselves in careers in environmental biology.
Students will participate in research focused on understanding 1) the impact of
urbanization and agriculture via habitat loss, fragmentation, and degradation,
and 2) the effects of introduced species on native species and communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting students from groups underrepresented to
careers in environmental biology will broaden participation of all parts of our
society in learning how to preserve the natural environment. Focusing on the
impact of habitat loss, fragmentation, and introduced species associated with
urbanization and agriculture will provide valuable information that may enable
us to preserve native species and communities within a human-dominated
landscape. &lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;