* 0207222
* Plate Motions in 3D Cartesian Convection:  The Role of Internal Heating and Plate Reorganization
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Scott King, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 144,713.00

King&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207222&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have
documented a mode of convection in both 2D and 3D Cartesian convection
calculations with mobile plates where the plate motion changes on a time scale
comparable to the time scales of plate reorganizations observed on Earth. This
proposal will further our understanding of coupled plate-mantle convection. Over
the past few years, the field has developed a substantial understanding of the
interaction of geometrically fixed plates and mantle convection; and it is
appropriate to consider calculations where the plate boundaries evolve with
time. It is proposed to use a yield-strength constitutive-law rheology in a
series of calculations using the aspect ratio, Rayleigh number and internal
heating values used in the plate reorganization studies by Lowman, King and
Gable (2001, submitted). There are two specific questions that this proposal
will address: When plate boundaries are allowed to evolve dynamically in the
yield-strength rheology calculations, are the rapid plate reorganizations that
we have seen in previous calculations accompanied by changes in plate
boundaries? Second, under what conditions (i.e., what activation energies and
critical yield-strengths) are the constitutive-based plate methods able to
produce plate-like surface velocities during and after a plate reorganization
event?&lt;br/&gt;