* 0207870
* BAC Libraries for the Reptilia, Including Birds: Genomic Resources for Comparative Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2002,04/30/2004
* Chris Amemiya, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2004
* USD 1,095,539.00

0207870&lt;br/&gt;Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial artificial chromosome
libraries are collections of large (100, 000 - 200,000 DNA base pair) DNA
fragments that are made retrievable and manipulatable by insertion into a
specialized vector. As resources for easily obtaining large amounts of DNA
sequences for comparative purposes, for understanding the structure of
eukaryotic genomes, and for expressing and manipulating genes and their
phenotypic effects in developing embryos, BAC libraries are unsurpassed.
However, constructing BAC libraries is beyond the abilities of most laboratories
not specifically tailored for this purpose. This project will consist of
constructing, archiving and disseminating to the international community of
scientists BAC libraries from five species of Reptilia, including a bird. The
five focal species will be Painted Turtle (Chrysemys picta), Tuatara (Sphenodon
punctatus), South American Worm Lizard (an amphisbaenian; Amphisbaea alba),
American Alligator (Alligator mississippiensis), and the flightless Emu
(Dromaius novaehollandiae). In the event that an appropriate Tuatara sample is
not available (a distinct possibility given its endangered status and restricted
range in New Zealand), a BAC library from a snake will be constructed. Reptilia,
consisting of birds as well as species commonly referred to as reptiles, are
poorly studied from genetic, developmental, genomic and phylogenetic
perspectives; although Reptilia are much more diverse than their sister group,
the mammals, mammals are much better studied as model biological species. The
construction and arraying of BAC libraries from these species will open up many
new avenues of research into reptile genomics that were previously
unapproachable. There will be many scientific uses for these BAC libraries,
including facilitating acquisition of comparative DNA data for phylogenetic and
comparative genomic purposes, and a better understanding of the function of
genes responsible for many features first appearing in the reptiles, such as
feathers, temperature-dependent sex determination, limb reduction and loss, and
large-scale genome reduction compared to mammals. Thus these libraries will fill
a major gap in our understanding of vertebrate genomics, a rapidly progressing
discipline spurred on by the recent sequencing of the complete human, mouse and
pufferfish genomes.&lt;br/&gt;