* 0207339
* N-body Aspects in the Kinetic Theory of Plasmas and Gravitating Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,05/31/2003
* Carlo Lancellotti, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 05/31/2003
* USD 72,455.00

Proposal: 0204939&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michel
Jabbour&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Some studies on phase segregation and the
influence of microstructure on multispecies thin film
growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phenomenon of
phase segregation is commonly observed in many multispecies thin films, where
secondary-phase islands may nucleate and grow on the surface of a film and thus
influence the properties of the film. The influence may be detrimental or
beneficial. For example, barium-rich YBCO films may loose their superconducting
properties but, on the other hand, islands on YBCO films may act as pinning
centers for the magnetic field. Further applications of phase segregation and
the formation of secondary-phase islands are found in quantum dots and wires in
semiconductors. Understanding the mechanisms underlying phase segregation and
the stability of secondary-phase islands is therefore crucial for the design and
controllability of thin films. One objective of the present research project is
to provide, in the context of deposition of multispecies thin films, a
mathematically rigorous and thermodynamically consistent derivation of the
equations governing the evolution, away from equilibrium, of interfacial triple
junctions along which the film, vapor, and secondary phases intersect. Such a
continuum model lends itself to a stability analysis and may thus shed light on
the conditions under which surface precipitates can be expected to form and
grow. When the film surface is a vicinal one, growth can occur via step flow---
that is, lateral motion of atomic-high steps which separate several-unit-cell-
wide terraces. In multicomponent films, the deposition of gas-phase atoms can be
competitive---that is, adsorption of distinct species on individual terraces can
occur on the same site. The second objective of this proposal is to develop a
micromechanical model for multicomponent films that accounts for the combined
effects of the terrace-and-ledge microstructure, adatom diffusion, and
competitive adsorption-desorption kinetics. A third objective of this project is
to link the nanoscale to the microscopic scale by incorporating averaged
information obtained by homogenization of the micromechanical model of film
growth discussed above into macroscopic models in the form of constitutive
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin films constitute a fundamental component of
numerous novel technologies. Examples include semiconductors in micro- and opto-
electronic device applications, diamonds in industrial cutting tools, various
anticorrosion and antiwear coats, shape-memory alloys as actuators in
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and superconductors in wireless
communication devices. In most industrial applications, multispecies films are
more widely used than their single-component counterparts. The properties of
these films and their performance under very stringent conditions depend on
their chemical composition and the morphological details of the film surface. To
better control the chemistry and microstructure of thin films during the growth
process, a mathematically rigorous understanding of the fundamental physical and
chemical mechanisms at play is necessary, especially as the atom-by-atom
fabrication of materials is no longer a remote dream. Applied mathematicians can
(and already do) make a significant contribution to such a global effort by
developing physically sound predictive models which can be analyzed rigorously
and implemented for numerical simulations. The concepts of modern continuum
physics, when combined with the tools of modern mathematics (for example,
homogenization and the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations),
constitute a potent methodology with which to address many of the challenging
issues related to the growth of multicomponent thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;