* 0207466
* Searching for Seismic Discontinuities in the Lower Mantle Using Broadband Seismic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2002,10/31/2005
* Stephen Gao, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2005
* USD 186,108.00

EAR-0207466&lt;br/&gt;Kelly Liu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose
to perform a comprehensive search for lower mantle discontinuities by using tens
of thousands seismograms recorded by about 450 broadband seismic stations
worldwide in two global and one regional seismic networks, and two large
portable seismic arrays. About 70,000 three-component, source-normalized
seismograms with strong P (or P_diff) arrivals will be used to image the
discontinuities by stacking P-to-S converted phases, and about 25,000 source-
normalized seismograms with strong SS arrivals will be used to study
discontinuities by stacking bottom-side reflected S waves at the mid-point of
the source-receiver path. The same amount of synthetic seismograms will be
stacked to verify the results. Preliminary work from stacking about 20,000
P-to-S receiver functions recorded by the Global Digital Seismic Network
revealed several possible discontinuities at the depths of 1100, 1600, 2000,
2450, and 2650 km. The stacking amplitudes of those discontinuities are about
1/6 to 1/2 of that of P410S, implying that the velocity contrasts across those
apparent discontinuities are in the order of 1 to 2%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work includes improving the preliminary observations by using three
times more data, complementing and verifying the P-to-S results by stacking SS
precursors and using synthetic seismograms, mapping spatial variation of lower
mantle discontinuities by stacking P-to-S conversions and SS precursors in small
caps, and finally, making the processed about 100,000 three-component, broadband
seismograms public by establishing a web-based database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;