* 0207643
* Structure and Reactivity of Metal-Induced 1D Nanostructures on High-Index Silicon Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2002,04/30/2006
* Alison Baski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2006
* USD 202,707.00

This project addresses one-dimensional nanostructures on silicon surfaces
extending prior re-search to the reactivity of 1-D templates with oxygen and
atomic hydrogen, and the growth of various metals on Si. It is anticipated that
fundamental studies of these nanostructures will enable possible applications in
devices, diffraction gratings, or as growth templates. This proposed work
includes the following: Reactivity studies of noble metal-induced 1-D
nanostructures grown on high-index Si. Based on previous work, noble metal-
induced 1-D arrays can be produced by de-positing Ag or Au on high-index Si
surfaces oriented at or near Si(5 5 12). Using STM, the reac-tivity of these 1-D
arrays to oxygen will be investigated for O2 exposure under both oxidation and
etching conditions. The project also includes studies on preferential etching of
1-D arrays using atomic hydrogen to enhance vertical surface corrugation. Growth
studies of other groups of metals on Si(5 5 12) includes the growth of metals
such as Fe and the rare earths (Dy, Ho, Er), and will be studied as a function
of coverage and temperature on high-index surfaces near (5 5 12). The rare earth
metals have recently been found to form robust nanowires on Si(001) and may
demonstrate interesting growth on the high-index templates as well.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues in a
topical area of electronic/photonic materi-als science having technological
relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong em-phasis on
education, and the integration of research and education. This research will
have a sub-stantial educational impact on VCU's relatively small physics
department. The PI places empha-sis on involving undergraduates in research. A
majority of the M.S. graduate students are trained in the PI's surface science
group in order to gain skills necessary to either enter industry or to continue
with a Ph.D. degree. It is anticipated that a number of students will be
involved in this work over its duration, including a full-time Ph.D. student
(Chemical Physics), three or four M.S. students, and a several undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;