* 0207869
* IIS/HCI SGER: The Iliad - Exploring Human Computer Interaction Research in the Performing Arts
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2002,07/31/2003
* Michael Dyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 07/31/2003
* USD 97,523.00

This small grant for exploratory research will support investigation of the use
of media-rich instrumented environments in the performing and media arts. Using
as the driver application a specific large-scale performance work, based on
Homer's The Iliad, this project will begin development of a distributed control
system. An important aspect of this system will be the ability of the audience
to interact with the performance environment. Participants start their
experience through a survey on a website, which populates a database used
throughout the performance process. In the venue itself, which consists of a
gallery as well as performance spaces, participants will be linked to their
database records using standard radio frequency identification tags in their
tickets, which are read by ubiquitous antennas. Media and story choices in the
space will be adapted, based on the particular audience members attending on the
particular day. As the experience progresses, the database will be updated with
sensor data and images collected from the performance. The responsive
environment is created by the interconnection of the database, sensors, and
automated production equipment for the control of lighting, sound, motorized
scenery, and video or image projection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the information
society of the twenty-first century, technologies to manage, enable, and advance
cultural innovation will be among the most valuable assets of civilization. This
project will explore an emerging area that could be of great commercial, social,
and scientific importance in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;