* 0207394
* Access to Technical Education Through Sign Language Interpreting
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2006
* Michael Stinson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2006
* USD 781,374.00

More than 23 million people in the United States have chronic, significant
hearing losses. More than 4.5 million of those individuals acquired their
hearing losses prior to 18 years of age. Recent evidence indicates that
educational challenges associated with are largely due to the lack of effective
communication between deaf students and their hearing parents and teachers.
Previous studies have described the need for sign language interpreters in
educational settings and the nature of the interpreting process, but little is
known about the factors actually influencing the comprehension of interpreted
material by deaf and hard-of-hearing learners. Such investigations are essential
if deaf individuals, or others with communication challenges, are to have full
access to available educational programs. The proposed research will (1) examine
factors thought to influence comprehension of educational interpreting, (2)
identify characteristics of students, teaching situations, and interpreters that
can foster comprehension of material in postsecondary technical education, and
(3) contribute to very limited knowledge about the education via sign language
interpretation in technology and science-related classrooms.&lt;br/&gt; The
project will take advantage of the unique setting of the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf, a college of Rochester Institute of Technology, which
focuses on science, mathematics, and technical education. Participants will be
drawn from more than 1300 deaf and hard-of-hearing students and more than 120
sign language interpreters. Eight experiments will examine the impact of
learners' language fluencies and content knowledge, interpreter skills and
preparation, interpreter knowledge of technical content, interpreter-learner
familiarity, and the effects of visual presentation formats on learning (e.g.,
distance learning). Of particular interest will be the impact of matching
communication skills/preferences and background knowledge of students and
interpreters in technical education classrooms, where complex material taxes the
impoverished background reading and educational levels typical of most deaf
students. Such settings also are challenging for sign language interpreters,
relatively few of whom have educational backgrounds in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt; Both the amount learned and students'
satisfaction/comfort with classroom experiences will be considered in terms of
the above factors. The findings will directly facilitate the access of deaf
learners to educational programs, improve our understanding of ways to
effectively communication technical material to deaf and hard-of-hearing
individuals, and describe the impact of new visual technologies on access to
educational programming by individuals with significant hearing loss. More
generally, the research will provide valuable new information for optimizing
technical education for students with language or communication challenges and
help to expand the pool of individuals with training in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;