* 0207709
* NER:  Can Aluminum Nanocluster Complexes Yield Rates of Ligand Exchange at Aluminous Mineral Surfaces?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2004
* USD 93,930.00

Casey&lt;br/&gt;NER-0207709&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157,
category NER, and is co-funded by the GEO Directorate. The reactions that
concern geochemists are often ligand exchange reactions, where one atom in the
inner-coordination sphere of a metal is replaced with another. Even complicated
processes like adsorption and mineral dissolution are really ligand-exchange
reactions because the coordination number of the metal is unchanged by the
process. The rates of these reactions vary enormously for different metals yet
very little is known about the reaction rates at mineral surfaces, which are the
key sites that affect natural water chemistry. Stated differently, the
functional groups on clays and metal-hydroxide minerals are ligands too.
Geochemists are coming to rely heavily on computational methods of predicting
reaction properties because so many of the key reactions are difficult to probe
experimentally. Unfortunately, the computational cost of predicting rates of
ligand exchanges at the aqueous-mineral interface are enormous because so many
atoms must be included in a realistic simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
pursue an alternative strategy where we attempt to establish a correlation
between measured rate coefficients of water exchange ( ) in aluminum complexes
and nanoparticles and structural parameters in the complexes that were
calculated using ab initio methods. This correlation is novel because it is
based on the easily calculated properties of the complexes instead of on the
costly transition-state structures and provides a simple and computationally
inexpensive way to predict rates of one of the most fundamental classes of
geochemical reactions. By hypothesis, this simple approach can be extended to
nanoparticles, colloids, and clays and is limited only by the feasibility of
computer simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is risky because there
is no guarantee that the important variables will scale with molecular size.
Nevertheless, if successful, it promises an inexpensive method to predict rates
of the most fundamental of reactions in aqueous media across an enormous range
of molecular sizes. It is a novel and far-reaching approach because it is based
on properties of ground-state structures rather than transition
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;