* 0207433
* Monkey Life Histories and Dental Hard Tissue Development
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2002,12/31/2004
* Rebecca Huss-Ashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2004
* USD 29,926.00

Monkey teeth are known to grow in an incremental manner like trees. Regular
layers of enamel and dentine are formed which represent known time intervals in
the life of the animal. There is some evidence to suggest that disturbances of
this regular laying down of dental tissue may be directly related to specific
life-events such as giving birth to an infant. These scientists are
investigating the feasibility of developing a method, using monkeys as a model,
to 'read' fossil primate teeth for such information. Such a tool would provide
invaluable information regarding how life-history events, such as the age of
first reproduction in females, changed over the course of human evolution. This
project aims to provide preliminary data to determine if further investigation
of this phenomenon is warranted. Teeth from five adult female rhesus macaques
will be sectioned and examined under both light and electron microscopes. Any
disturbances in their teeth will be precisely aged and the results will be
compared with the detailed records of their lives. All are known to have had at
least one baby while their teeth were still forming. The macaques have been
selected from a sample of primate skulls from individuals with known life-
histories collected as part of an National Science Foundation planning grant.
This work will support the research efforts of a female scientist and will also
provide data of value to the broader scientific community, especially those
concerned with the welfare or conservation of primate species.