* 0207372
* Seismic Trenching for the Pulse of the Earthquake Engine
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Ronald Bruhn, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2006
* USD 362,112.00

EAR-0207372: SEISMIC TRENCHING FOR THE PULSE OF THE
EARTHQUAKE&lt;br/&gt;ENGINE&lt;br/&gt;Ronald L. Bruhn and Gerard
Schuster&lt;br/&gt;Department of Geology and Geophysics&lt;br/&gt;University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;Salt Lake City, UT 84112-01
11&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research project is to study
how earthquakes occur on normal faults. The patterns of earthquake recurrence in
space and time provide the 'pulse' of the earthquake engine. Investigating these
patterns is revealing the complex processes that interact to generate
earthquakes within the earth. Successfully understanding the nature of past
heartbeats is the key to predicting the future behavior of large faults that
generate earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until now,
trenching across fault scarps has been the primary tool for revealing the past
history of earthquakes. By carefully logging the sedimentary deposits in
trenches, geologists have been successful in deducing the sizes and recurrence
intervals of past earthquakes. However, there are three shortcomings with the
trenching method: it is expensive and environmentally intrusive, it is limited
to depths no deeper than about 30 feet, and yields only a vei7tical cross-
section of the fault. These limitations mean that the earthquake heartbeat is
poorly sampled in both space and time, which can lead to erroneous conclusions
about the nature of earthquakes. To overcome these problems, and to answer
fundamental questions about the heartbeat of normal faulting, University of Utah
earth scientists are conducting more than two dozen shallow seismic experiments
over fault scarps in the Oquirrh, Stansbury and Wasatch faults. These are three
large normal fault zones located in the Wasatch Front of Utah. The first arrival
times of the recorded seismic waves yield velocity tomograms, or images, that
delineate both the shallow and deep patterns of sedimentary 'colluvial' wedges
that formed in response to the offset of the earth's surface during past
earthquakes. When identified, the colluvial wedges to a depth of 50 m or so are
cored by a powerful Odex drill, and samples of the deposits surrounding and
within the wedges are dated by a variety of dating methods. By this procedure
the science team is extending our knowledge of earthquake behavior beyond
100,000 years, and significantly extending the history of earthquakes along the
Wasatch Fault and other faults in the eastern Basin and Range Province. This
combined use of seismic tomography, drilling and dating methods is referred to
as seismic trenching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extended
earthquake history being determined during this study provides new information
for predicting the future history of earthquakes in the region, and for creating
a new generation of mechanical models of processes of faulting. The research has
significant impact on the applied field of earthquake hazards and the basic
science of earthquake mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;