* 0207764
* Collaborative Research: US-EAGLE (Ethiopia-Afar Grand Lithospheric Experiment): Modification of Lithospheric Structure During Continental Break-up
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Tanya Furman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 202,632.00

0207764&lt;br/&gt;Furman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The architecture of continental
margins in terms of how they are created is not well understood because most of
the previous work has been on successfully rifted margins after rifting is
complete. Both continental (fault dominated) end-members and oceanic (magma
dominated) rift end-members are well studied, but the transitional stage is not
understood. This project will document this critical transition from continental
to oceanic rifting. The PIs will carry out seismic experiments, integrated with
geochemical, gravity and structural studies, to study lithospheric structure in
one of the rare areas where the transition from continental rifting to incipient
spreading is captured - the main Ethiopian Rift (MER). In the MER the along-axis
transition to initial seafloor spreading provides a spatial proxy for temporal
variability. Specific objectives are: 1) to determine detailed crust and mantle
structure across and along a transitional rift segment and 2) to understand
magmagenesis beneath and within the rift. The PIs will obtain crustal P-and
S-velocity cross-sections that can be interpreted for lithology across the
Ethiopian rift at 10 deg. N where active magmatic centers first appear, and
along-strike to the north to study the transition into fully magmatic rifting.
They will interpret existing and new gravity data in light of their new seismic
data, and use geochemical data to constrain the physical state of the upper
mantle and magmatic inputs to the crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project (US -
EAGLE) is fully integrated with the already funded UK - EAGLE initiative.
Scientists at Leicester, Leeds and London, have been awarded UK funds to carry
out a single refraction profile across the Ethiopian rift in January 2003,
coupled with local seismicity studies and teleseismic recording. The US - EAGLE
PIs will shoot and record a complementary orthogonal along-axis wide-angle
profile; and will shoot fan shots into these linear arrays and the local seismic
network to provide a measure of 3D coverage. Together, these seismological
experiments form a nested, multi-scale seismic image of the Ethiopian rift and
plume. The seismic studies will be coupled with geochemical and petrological and
gravity studies (US), and structural, thermochronological, magnetotelluric and
additional gravity studies (UK).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;