* 0207819
* Collaborative:  Compressed Domain Search for Text and Images by Sorted Contexts
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2002,07/31/2005
* Amar Mukherjee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2005
* USD 91,500.00

With the dramatic increase in the amount of multimedia data,
efficiency&lt;br/&gt;considerations make it important to consider ways to keep
the data in the compressed form for as much as possible, even when it is
searched. We propose to develop methodologies for searching directly on
compressed text and images, when the compression is based on the family of
compression algorithms that depend on sorted context. We also propose to develop
search-aware data compression schemes for text and images based on sorted
context that will support compressed-domain search directly on the compressed
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For text, we will explore the applicability of the
classical linear exact pattern matching algorithms and binary search algorithms
for text&lt;br/&gt;compressed with the Burrows-Wheeler transform. We will
develop similar&lt;br/&gt;compression schemes for images based on sorted image
contexts, called&lt;br/&gt;LICSIC (Lossless Image Compression by Sorted Image
Contexts).&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research will be important in
environments&lt;br/&gt;that require the organization and management of huge
collections of text&lt;br/&gt;or images. Internet search engines, digital
libraries, satellite and space data , geographical information systems, bio-
informatics and medical diagnostics are typical candidate
applications.&lt;br/&gt;