* 0207257
* Magnetic Intensities of Ocean-Floor Basalts: Electron Microscopy, Rock and Paleomagnetic Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Rob Van der Voo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 222,786.00

VanderVoo&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207257&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;magnetic anomalies
generated by ocean-floor rocks have led to sea-floor spreading models and plate
tectonics. The magnetism resides in titanomagnetite in fresh basalts, but the
titanomagnetite oxidizes to titanomaghemite over geological time. Whether this
titanomaghemite carries a magnetization that faithfully reflects the ancient
magnetic field, is still an unanswered question. The investigators plan to study
the degradation of the magnetic signal as a function of age. In particular, the
intensity of the magnetization of the basalts (and, concomitantly, the peak
values of the anomalies) appears to show a gradual degradation up to some 20
million years ago, beyond which the intensity gradually increases for Early
Tertiary and Cretaceous times. The researchers will be studying the rates and
effects of oxidation, the magnetic intensity of unaltered and oxidized rocks,
and the idea that perhaps older basalts may have a natural remanent
magnetization that consists of two anti-parallel components, which were acquired
during successive normal and reversed polarity intervals. The methods to be
employed include paleomagnetic and rock magnetic techniques and electron
microscopy of the oxides. This project will show whether the causes for magnetic
degradation warrant a re-evaluation of the details of the global polarity time
scale, or whether magnetic intensity variations are a function of the global
geomagnetic field. The latter possibility would create new insights into the
origins of the geomagnetic field that are currently the subject of much debate.