* 0207071
* Quantum Fluids in One and Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 780,000.00

This is a low temperature physics research project. Liquid He-3 and liquid He-4
are paradigm systems that exhibit macroscopic quantum behavior, obeying
respectively Fermi and Bose statistics. While a great deal has been learned
about these quantum liquids in bulk, fascinating results are still being
discovered in atomically thin films of He-3 and He-4 adsorbed on surfaces.
Recent measurements found that He-3 atoms tend to float on top of a He-4 film
and phase separate into 2-dimensional vapor and liquid phases. Heat capacity
measurements are planned to elucidate the nature of this phase
separation/transition to determine whether this intrinsically quantum system is
also a physical realization of the celebrated 2D Ising model of Onsager. Nuclear
magnetic resonance and heat capacity measurements will study the properties of
He-3 and He-4 adsorbed in MCM-41, a highly porous substrate with one dimensional
pores of 2.5 to 5.0 nm in diameter and up to 500 nm in length. Results of these
measurements will be tested against the theories of one dimensional quantum
systems. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in these experiments
receive rigorous training in cryogenic, high vacuum and ultrasensitive
electronic measurements. They must integrate these skills to complete demanding
experiments, a process that quickly and elegantly prepares them for careers in
government, industry and academe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a low temperature
physics project. All substances freeze into solid when the temperature is
reduced. The exceptions being liquid He-3 and He-4, which remain liquid even at
absolute zero. The reason for this is related to the quantum uncertainty
principle. Although chemically identical, He-3 has one neutron and two protons
in its nucleus and He-4 has two of each. All atoms are either Fermion or Boson
depending on the total number of neutrons, protons and electrons they have. This
rule makes He-3 a Fermion and He-4 a Boson, and as a consequence, liquid He-3
and liquid He-4 behave quite differently, particularly when these "quantum
fluids" are forced into volumes where at least one dimension is "nanoscopic".
This project seeks to understand the properties of one and two-dimensional
Fermion and Boson systems, namely He-3 and He-4 atoms confined in atomically
thin films, or in tiny one-dimensional pores, with diameters in the range 2.5 to
5.0 nanometers. The knowledge we gain in studying these quantum liquids
contributes to the understanding of superconductors and other electronic
systems. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in these experiments
receive rigorous training in cryogenic, high vacuum and ultrasensitive
electronic measurements. They must integrate these skills to complete demanding
experiments, a process that quickly and elegantly prepares them for careers in
government, industry and academe.&lt;br/&gt;