* 0207212
* Collaborative Research:  Testing for Marginal Independence Between Two or More Multiple-Response Categorical Variables
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Christopher Bilder, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2003
* USD 51,812.00

Questions that ask respondents to "choose all that apply" from a set of items
occur frequently in surveys. Categorical variables that summarize this type of
survey data are called multiple response (or pick any/c) categorical variables.
It is often of interest to test for independence between two categorical
variables. When categorical variables can have multiple responses, traditional
Pearson chi-square tests for independence should not be used because of the
within-subject dependence among responses. This research will provide methods to
test for independence between two or more multiple-response categorical
variables. A modified version of the Pearson statistic will perform the test,
and bootstrap procedures will provide approximate sampling distributions. First
and second-order corrections will allow for chi-square distribution
approximations to the sampling distribution. Generalized log linear models and
multivariate binomial logit-normal models will provide a model-based approach
for the test of independence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many survey questions are
asked in a multiple-response manner. Examples include: "What types of cars do
you own?" and "For what criminal offenses have you been arrested?" Other
questions naturally fall into a multiple-response format, but some researchers
avoid asking them in this format due to statistical analysis problems. For
example, most survey questions dealing with ethnicity allow respondents to make
only one choice, which is entirely inappropriate in today's highly multicultural
population. Other researchers may analyze multiple-response questions as if they
came from single-response categorical variables, which can lead to very
conservative tests of independence. This research will allow researchers to
incorporate these types of questions into surveys and use statistically correct
methods of analysis. The research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement,
and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under
the Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.