* 0207141
* U.S.-Bulgarian Workshop:  Use of Information Technologies in Modeling the Bulgarian Firm in Transition from a Planned to a Free Market Economy, May 2002
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2002,02/29/2004
* Richard Alo, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/29/2004
* USD 22,000.00

This is a US-Bulgarian workshop on the use of information technologies in
modeling the Bulgarian firm in transition from a planned to a free market
economy. The workshop will be held in Bulgaria. The co-organizers of the
workshop are Drs. Madeline Johnson and Richard Alo from the University of
Houston-Downtown and Dr. Nikola Yankov from the Tsenov Academy of Economics in
Bulgaria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to bring together
faculty, students and other experts from the U.S. and Bulgaria to discuss and
develop joint research toward the development of a strategic and tactical
decision-making simulation of a Bulgarian firm in transition from operating in a
planned economy to a free market economy. The simulation will support research,
training and education on the strategic and tactical processes that will speed
the transformation required to operate successfully in a free market economy.
The objectives of the workshop are (a) the identification of the constructs to
be modeled in the simulation and (b) the identification of the relationships
among the constructs to be modeled in the simulation. The outcomes of the
workshop will include data collection, model building, and software engineering
to explicate the simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop in economics
fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S.
and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.