* 0207177
* Paleohydrologic Controls on Alluvial Deposition:   A Process-Simulation Approach to Reconstruct Aquifer Heterogeneity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Steven Gorelick, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

0207177&lt;br/&gt;Gorelick.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical process simulation can
be used as a too] to help reconstruct the spatial pattern of sediments
comprising aquifers used for water supply. Sedimentary evolution is simulated
using a process-imitating model, based on large-scale mathematics, that
describes hydrologic, sedimentary, and tectonic events which have occurred over
hundreds of thousands of years. The specific processes of interest are major
floods, sedimentation, erosion, compaction, subsidence, sea-level variation, and
regional-scale fault motion. The product is a quantitative too] to study aquifer
stratigraphy and its evolutionary link to paleohydrology and tectonic
conditions. This tool can be used in hydrogeologic investigations where the
large-scale pattern of relative flow paths and flow barriers is
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field area for application is the Santa
Clara Valley in northern California, which is &lt;br/&gt;Approximately 240 mi2
Groundwater provides approximately half of the public water supply in Santa
Clara Valley, yet pumping has caused a serious problem of land subsidence due to
clay compaction. In most areas, the controls on groundwater flow and land
subsidence imposed by aquifer heterogeneity and confining bed geometry are
poorly understood. The Valley occupies a structural depression within a block
bounded on the cast and west by the Hayward-Calaveras and San Andreas Fault
systems. Respectively. The multiaquifer system consists of coalescing alluvial
fans interfingered with estuarine deposits that have been formed over the past
600,000 years. The sedimentary process simulation model results will be compared
to geologic and hydrogeologic data covering certain portions of the Valley. The
goal is to use the model to interpret the roles played by various past
hydrologic and geologic processes on the development of alluvial-bay aquifer
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;