* 0207406
* Workshop on Bifurcations and Instabilities in Geomechanics, June 2-5, 2002, St. John's University, Collegeville, Minnesota
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2002,12/31/2002
* Andrew Drescher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2002
* USD 30,000.00

The objective of this workshop is to bring together international researchers
and practitioners dealing with localization in geomechanics. The focus of the
2002 workshop will be to collect and debate the applications that have taken
place since the first workshop in 1988. The scope of the workshop will include
analytical solutions, numerical methods, experimental techniques, and case
histories. Besides the presentation of fundamental research findings,
applications in geotechnical, petroleum, mining, and bulk materials engineering
will be emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Failure of many geotechnical structures
is characterized by the formation and propagation of zones of localized
deformation. For example, a noticeable feature of slope and underground failures
in soft rock and overconsolidated clay is the appearance of slip surfaces or
shear bands, the characteristics of which are associated with deformation being
concentrated in narrow zones and the surrounding material appearing intact. The
appearance of localization or other bifurcation modes often manifests itself in
specimen or system instability under specific loading conditions. The
mathematical formulation of bifurcation phenomena and related instabilities
constitutes the basis of a continuum theory of failure. This theory and its
applications, as well as the methodology of analyzing instabilities in general,
are crucial in adequate modeling and safe design of numerous geotechnical
engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five international workshops on
bifurcation and localization in geomechanics have been held in Europe, Japan,
and Australia: 1. Karlsruhe, Germany: 1988. 2. Gdansk, Poland: 1989. 3. Aussois,
France: 1993. 4. Gifu, Japan: 1997. 5. Perth, Australia: 1999. The University of
Minnesota was selected as the site for the 6th Workshop to be held on June 2-5,
2002.&lt;br/&gt;