* 0207957
* Collaborative Research: Tests of Postseismic Deformation Models with Continued Absolute Gravity and GPS Measursements in Alaska, Phase I
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2004
* USD 89,425.00

EAR-0207957&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Freymueller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
measuring the absolute value of gravity, co-located with GPS measurements, in
Alaska. Proposed explanations for the transient deformation after great
earthquakes include viscoelastic response, aseismic creep and combinations of
the two. Different models of postseismic viscoelastic relaxation predict
observable gravity changes over 1000 km length scales, with a complex spatial
pattern. To date, the viscosity profile is best determined by postglacial
rebound studies. Gravity and GPS measurements offer the opportunity to obtain
viscosity profile estimates for the Alaskan plate boundary. The area is
especially interesting, as the viscosity of subduction zone materials may be
very different from that beneath the centers of continental and oceanic plates.
Aseismic creep is predicted to produce deformation of a more limited and
markedly different spatial character than that of viscoelastic relaxation.
Determining the contribution of aseismic creep in postseismic deformation is
important in estimating recurrence intervals for great
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is establishing a baseline
gravity network of fifteen stations in Alaska. The bulk of the network forms a
transect perpendicular to the predicted contours of maximum gravity change in
the far field. Additional points are located within the deformation near field.
Gravity measurements are collocated with existing GPS stations. These initial
measurements form the basis for testing different postseismic deformation
models. Additional activities include collecting auxiliary data to correct the
gravity data for signals such as water table variations. A portion of a
1964-1965 relative gravity survey is being repeated as well, in order to
determine the total gravity change over the Kenai Peninsula since the
earthquake. Data are distributed through traditional means and an Internet
website.