* 0207475
* A Comprehensive Solution Model for Complex FeTi Oxides Relevant to Thermobarometry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2007
* Mark Ghiorso, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 79,340.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207475 &lt;br/&gt;Ghiorso and Evans&lt;br/&gt;University
of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use experimental phase
equilibria combined with thermodynamic modeling to revise and extend the
capabilities of the FeTi oxide thermobarometer. This thermobarometer is a
primary tool used to infer conditions under which certain rocks form. It uses
compositions of equilibrium pairs of Fe-Ti oxides (a rhombohedral oxide
coexisting with a spinel) to derive estimates of temperature and oxygen fugacity
(fO2) conditions under which a mineral assemblage last equilibrated. Recent
experimental studies have demonstrated the failure of current formulations of
the thermobarometer for conditions that exceed the nickel nickel-oxide oxygen
buffer. In addition, subsequent to the formulation and calibration of the
thermodynamic models that underlie the existing thermobarometer, new
experimental work has been published revising estimates of long-range cation
order and greatly clarifying the nature of short-range ordering as well as the
character of the symmetry-driven phase transition in the rhombohedral phase.
Together, these studies motivate a revision of the thermodynamic formulation of
the thermobarometer to place it on sounder theoretical footing and to address
the practical necessity of estimating T-fO2 in more oxidized parageneses, in
particular orogenic arc magmas. The revised geothermometer will be distributed
as a standalone and web-based software product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;