* 0207295
* Nonlinear Spectroscopy of Planar and Nano-Crystalline Silicon Interfaces: Experiments for ab initio Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Michael Downer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 364,190.00

This project addresses "epi-optic" spectroscopy of surfaces -including nonlinear
second har-monic and sum-frequency generation (SHG/SFG) and linear reflectance-
difference spectroscopy (RDS)-including quantitative comparison between
experiment and theory. Prior work reached agreement between experiment and
theory for SHG spectra of several semiconductor-adsorbate systems (H, Ge and B
adsorbed on Si(001)-(2x1)) in ultrahigh vacuum within a limited spectral range,
and theoretical treatment based on ab initio pseudopotential and full-potential
approaches reproduced essential features of SHG spectra. This project has
several aims: 1) widen the spectral range of SHG/SFG by nearly one order of
magnitude, thereby encompassing surface resonances from 0.5 to 4.5 eV, using a
new femtosecond Ti:sapphire parametric amplifier system. 2) acquire SHG/SFG
spectra from Si(001), Si(111) and Ge/Si(001) surfaces prepared with single-
domain reconstructions and small unit cells, using polarization configurations
in which only a single component of the nonlinear surface susceptibility tensor
contributes. 3) acquire RDS in parallel with SHG/SFG over a similar spectral
range (1.5 to 5.0 eV) on the same anisotropic surfaces. Linear and nonlinear
surface spectra will be calculated from a common theoretical basis, to link
these two surface spectroscopies. 4) perform femtosecond-time-resolved SHG and
RDS follow-ing resonant excitation of dimer-related surface bands. These
experiments are designed to isolate and characterize the role played by surface
dimer-related dipoles and electron-hole pair correla-tions in surface spectra to
elucidate some of the most challenging theoretical issues. 5) extend SHG/SFG
spectroscopy to Si nano-crystals embedded in SiO2, with which they form sharply-
curved, buried interfaces. Spectroscopic SHG/SFG will characterize interface
states that underlie light emission and charge trapping. Close contact will be
maintained with theoretical collabora-tors who are improving methods for
calculating surface SHG/SFG spectra under separate fund-ing. The broad goal is
to develop nonlinear surface spectroscopy into an exact, quantitative sci-ence
applicable to many surface systems. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of electronic/photonic
materi-als science having high technological relevance. Although the proposed
work will focus on semi-conductor interfaces, anticipated outcomes will have
broader implications because of the gener-ality and versatility of epi-optic
spectroscopy. The results are expected to be useful for eventual applications to
materials as diverse as metals, polymer films, and biological membranes, and
could motivate the development of commercial epi-optic spectroscopy systems and
computa-tional epi-optic software. An important feature of the project is the
strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education
involving graduate, and undergraduate students. Through direct involvement in
research, students will have unique learning and discovery op-portunities in the
areas of semiconductor and related materials, and advanced materials and inter-
face characterization. This project is jointly supported by the CHE/EPC and
DMR/EM programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;