* 0207949
* Cooperative Dynamics in Polymer Fluids:  Melts, Blends, and their Glass Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Marina Guenza, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2005
* USD 228,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research for the development of a rigorous
microscopic approach to describe polymer dynamics in structurally homogeneous,
but dynamically heterogeneous polymer melts and blends as a function of their
chemical structure and of the thermodynamic conditions. The achievement of a
molecular level understanding of the properties of polymer melts and blends is
relevant for the development of new materials. This research is an extension of
the original approach developed over the past few years of the prior grant,
where the equations were formalized and the dynamics of unentangled polymer
melts were investigated. For the first time, we were able to describe
quantitatively the onset of anomalous dynamics observed in computer simulations
and experiments of unentangled polyethylene dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
the new research we focus on extending our approach to describe the motion of
dynamically heterogeneous fluids in polymer melts, undercooled polymer melts and
polymer blends. The presence of dynamical heterogeneities, increasing in size
with decreasing temperature, appears to be the mechanism responsible for the
onset of the glass transition. A study of the interplay between heterogeneous
dynamics and concentration fluctuations is likely to explain the dynamical
anomalies present in structurally homogeneous polymer blends, such as the
breaking of time-temperature superposition.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports a theoretical investigation of the dynamical response of polymer
systems. The theory developed will fill an important gap in the desciption of
these materials and should have wide application.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;