* 0207217
* Investigation of the Relationships Between Iron Oxide - (Cu-Au) and Epithermal Precious Metal Mineralizing Systems in the Ar Rayn Terrane, Saudi Arabia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Murray Hitzman, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 176,462.00

Hitzman&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207217&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron oxide-(Cu-Au) deposits
are currently a prime exploration target worldwide. Understanding of this class
of deposits has been hindered by the scarcity of examples and by the large scale
of the systems themselves. There are fundamental disagreements on several key
features of this deposit class, particularly in regard to the source of the
fluids responsible for alteration and mineralization and the role of specific
magmas. Tied to these debates is how the iron oxide-Cu-Au class of deposits
relates in time and space to other deposit types. Such linkages between deposit
types are critical not only for mineral exploration but also for better
understanding the geochemical and hydrodynamic aspects of large-scale
mineralizing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Proterozoic Ar Rayn terrane
in central Saudi Arabia provides an ideal site to test the linkages between iron
oxide systems and low-sulfidation epithermal gold deposits. The terrane contains
a number of well exposed mineral deposits and prospects, including iron
oxide-(Cu-Au) and epithermal precious metal deposits which appear to be
genetically and temporally related based on geological relationships and limited
geochronology. The deposits, though described in reports by the Saudi Arabian
Deputy Ministry for Mineral Resources, are virtually unknown in the literature
outside of Saudi Arabia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document the
geology and geochemistry of the deposits. Descriptive information from detailed
outcrop mapping will be supplemented by mineralogic, fluid inclusion, and stable
isotope geochemical studies designed to quantify physical and chemical
conditions of the hydrothermal fluids across all parts of the zone of transition
from apparently deep-seated, magnetite-rich, Fe-oxide-(Cu-Au) deposits to much
shallower, low-sulfidation epithermal deposits. In addition, geochronological
studies will allow determination of the temporal relationships of these
mineralizing systems. These data will allow critical analysis of the possible
linkage between iron oxide systems and low-sulfidation epithermal systems. The
project will also aid in forging relationships between the Saudi Geological
Survey and research groups in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;