* 0207582
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Plio-Pleistocene Mammal Faunas and Environmental Change in the Meade Basin of Southwestern Kansas: A Combined Stratigraphic, Faunal, and Isotopic Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2006
* Robert Martin, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2006
* USD 64,686.00

The primary purpose of this project is to determine the effects of abiotic and
biotic factors on the community structure and morphology of small mammals,
especially rodents, during the past 5.0 million years in the Meade Basin of
southwestern Kansas. The Meade Basin is a unique natural laboratory, as more
than 100 fossiliferous localities (representing at least 40 superposed
intervals) spanning the entire later Cenozoic are found within a small area of
approximately 45 km2. Three radiometrically dated ashes at 2.1, 1.2-1.5, and
0.67 Ma provide calibration points for part of the sequence, and a
magnetostratigraphic chronology will be developed that will add considerable
refinement to the basic stratigraphic framework. Further field mapping will
hopefully solve a few remaining thorny stratigraphic problems, especially in the
upper part of the Rexroad Formation. Systematic studies at appropriate museums
will refine the rodent database. A preliminary stable isotope study of paleosol
carbonate nodules and caliche beds in Pliocene sediments has revealed
significant habitat and climatic gradient changes, reflecting the expansion of
tropical grasses throughout the Great Plains during this time. The isotopic
studies will be extended to additional localities and to mammalian tooth
apatite, to better refine the record of environmental change and to examine the
response of small mammal diets to environmental gradients. Finally, appropriate
analytical methods will be used with the rodent database to examine the dynamics
of community assembly and anatomical change within lineages. The Meade Basin
rodent database and stable isotopic record will generate one of the most
detailed historical records of habitat, climatic, and faunal change in a
terrestrial animal community anywhere in the world, and the stratigraphic model
resulting from this project will provide the primary source of late Cenozoic
stratigraphic information for the Great Plains region of North America.