* 0207848
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Tropical Vegetation during the Early Part of an Ice Age: An Intercontinental Comparison of Mid-Carboniferous Floras in their Geochronologic Setting
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Hermann Pfefferkorn, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 103,929.00

Collaborative Research: Tropical Vegetation during the Early Part of an Ice Age:
An Intercontinental Comparison of Mid-Carboniferous Floras in their
Geochronologic Setting

Hermann Pfefferkorn EAR-0207848

ABSTRACT

Earth history records major climatic intervals that can be generalized as either
globally warm or cold. Transitions to a globally cold Earth, representing the
onset of an ice age in the broadest sense, has happened only a few times since
the establishment of terrestrial ecosystems, for instance in the Carboniferous
and Late Tertiary (at the beginning of our current cold climate phase). At such
times of transition, there are expected to be significant changes in the flora
in all environments and at all scales. This project focuses on the changes in
tropical terrestrial floras during the initial phases of the Carboniferous ice
age, up to and immediately after the Mid-Carboniferous boundary (320 Ma). Fossil
plant-bearing rocks from coal basins in the United States, Poland, and the Czech
Republic provide remarkably stratigraphically complete macrofloral and
microfloral data sets, which have been collected for decades from rocks
overlying the coals (macroflora) and the coals themselves (microflora).
Additionally, volcanogenic ash-fall tuffs have been identified within some
sections, providing minerals that can provide isotopic ages, permitting control
of biostratigraphic correlations within and between the basins and other parts
of the world. From these unpublished data and the supporting collections, a
standard reference profile of vegetational changes will be established that will
document the rates of taxonomic turnover through time. These data will allow for
a quantitative analysis of the geographical extent and dominance-diversity
magnitude of vegetational community changes in the tropics. Results from this
project can serve as a baseline for the study of similar intervals in our
current ice age.

