* 0207850
* Lake-Level Chronology and Climate Change in the Southern Bolivian Altiplano
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2005
* USD 187,486.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is perhaps no more visible a record of low-
latitude shifts in climate than the hundreds of miles of tufa-encrusted
shorelines and dissected diatomites laid down by an enormous (about the size of
paleo-Lake Bonneville) paleolake that once
occupied&lt;br/&gt;Uyuni/Coipasa/Poopo basin in southern Bolivia. Appropriately
these deposits have been the focus of decades of research, including several
major coring efforts by both American and French teams. These lake records are
fuel for a heated debate over the relative role of regional tropical insolation
versus global temperature in controlling moisture balance in lakes and glaciers
in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For all the research effort expended on the
lake deposits, the geochronology is still in disarray. In particular, dating of
long cores from the Uyuni basin show poor agreement for the critical period
30-10 ka, with one chronology supporting the notion of regional summer
insolation control on lake level, and the other flatly contradicting
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in relating the lake-core records to
such parameters as regional&lt;br/&gt;insolation and global temperature is that
there is no direct physical evidence for lake depth. Such evidence, however, is
available in the superb natural exposures of dissected lake deposits, which we
surveyed for the first time two field seasons ago. The exposures are so
impressive that we are confident that they will provide the key to
reconstructing lake depths and lake chronology over the last ~120 ka. Our
results so far show that the lake reached high elevations only twice in the last
120 ka, from 17 (?) to 14 ka, and from 108 to 94 ka. We request funds to
continue our reconstruction of lake-level variations in the Uyuni/Coipasa/Poopo
basin in southern Bolivia. Our intent is to establish a
coherent&lt;br/&gt;stratigraphy and chronology of lake-level fluctuations using
the natural exposures of lake sediments and shoreline tufas, and by both U-Th
and 14 C dating of lacustrine tufas and mollusks. We also propose to employ
87Sr/86Sr and 234U/238U ratios in lake carbonates as tools for tracking changes
in the proportions of runoff to ground-water inputs to the lake, and to infer
lake depths from cores. Our revised lake-level chronology will in turn
constitute an important test of the potential linkages between lake-level stages
and variations in global temperature and low-latitude seasonal insolation over
land and sea.&lt;br/&gt;