* 0207853
* Real-Time Virtual Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Aloysius Mok, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 06/30/2005
* USD 282,000.00

Aloysius K. Mok&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0207853 &lt;br/&gt;"REAL-TIME VIRTUAL
RESOURCES"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As embedded systems become more complex, a
typical embedded system&lt;br/&gt;will probably involve a mix of soft and hard
real-time applications&lt;br/&gt;that share the same embedded run-time platform.
In general, an&lt;br/&gt;application may consist of one or more tasks. For
example, on a&lt;br/&gt;hand-held sensor-computer, a user may want to fix his
own location&lt;br/&gt;with respect to a target landmark and also be warned of
the power&lt;br/&gt;consumption status of the sensor-computer. While the power
consumption&lt;br/&gt;warning task may have very loose timing constraints, the
location&lt;br/&gt;fixing task has fairly stringent timing and other QOS
(quality of&lt;br/&gt;service) requirements. Ideally, an application developer
should be&lt;br/&gt;able to write his application program as if it were running
on a&lt;br/&gt;dedicated computer and not have to worry about interference
from&lt;br/&gt;other applications. This illusion can be maintained if
global&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the QOS requirements of all the applications
is&lt;br/&gt;accessible to the operating system scheduler, so that a
global&lt;br/&gt;schedulability analysis can be performed to ensure that every
task&lt;br/&gt;meets its QOS requirements. However, this is not possible in
the&lt;br/&gt;environment of "open systems" where the operating system may
not&lt;br/&gt;know about the timing requirements of all the application
tasks,&lt;br/&gt;as is the case with most commercial embedded and real-time
kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A simplistic solution is to assign a higher
priority to timing-&lt;br/&gt;critical applications and let the non-real-time
applications run&lt;br/&gt;only when the timing-critical ones are finished. This
approach is&lt;br/&gt;viable only for the simplest embedded systems where there
is only&lt;br/&gt;one real-time task and there is no interaction among the real-
time&lt;br/&gt;and the non-real-time tasks. If all the applications are to
various&lt;br/&gt;degrees timing-critical (hard or soft), then the distinction
between&lt;br/&gt;real-time and non-real-time applications becomes blurry. In
the&lt;br/&gt;sensor-computer example, if the power consumption warning task
is&lt;br/&gt;assigned a low priority because of its laxer timing constraint,
then&lt;br/&gt;it is possible that power may run out while the high-priority
location&lt;br/&gt;fixing task is monopolizing the CPU. This may in turn cause a
sensor&lt;br/&gt;reset that may affect the validity of the location fixing
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable the design of
robust embedded&lt;br/&gt;real-time systems that must function in an open
systems environment.&lt;br/&gt;The innovation we are investigating is an elegant
software abstraction&lt;br/&gt;called RTVR (real-time virtual resource). This
abstraction allows&lt;br/&gt;application programmers to design embedded real-
time systems as if&lt;br/&gt;each application had exclusive access to a set of
dedicated physical&lt;br/&gt;resources which provide service at a roughly
constant rate. The key&lt;br/&gt;to the RTVR concept is that of a "delay bound"
parameter on the rate&lt;br/&gt;of service provision. The delay bound
specification enables a&lt;br/&gt;programmer to specify the jitter allowance of
his/her application.&lt;br/&gt;As a result, we can simplify the verification of
the timing correctness&lt;br/&gt;of individual applications as if there is no
timing interference&lt;br/&gt;among application tasks. The RTVT concept also
simplifies the issue&lt;br/&gt;of guaranteeing the timing/QOS requirements of a
mixture of hard&lt;br/&gt;and soft real-time applications. To realize this
abstraction, we&lt;br/&gt;must make major advances in both theory and
engineering in operating&lt;br/&gt;system design and real-time scheduling
theory. Of particular interest&lt;br/&gt;to this project are the issues of
partition composition and the&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical decomposition of multiple
real-time virtual resources.