* 0207669
* Cosmogenic Constraints on Sediment Generation and Transport, Namibian Rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 05/31/2006
* USD 59,539.00

0207669&lt;br/&gt;Bierman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment samples were collected
from Namibian Rivers with a vision to answer several fundamental scientific
questions and in order to make a significant societal contribution. NSF funding
will provide for isotopic analyses of these samples. Overall, the data we
collect will be used to test the relationship between nuclide activity (a proxy
for basin-scale sediment generation rates) and drainage basin lithology, relief,
climate, and area. Such relationships will allow us to predict sediment
generation rates where landscape conditions are similar, an important tool for
land management.&lt;br/&gt;Cosmogenic nuclides provide a window into the past
behavior of landscapes. When measured in drainage basin sediments nuclides such
as 10Be and 26Al allow estimation of basin-scale sediment generation rates over
time scales determined by the speed at which the sampled landscape erodes; in
Namibia, nuclide activities integrate erosion rates over ~105 years. Samples
collected from headwater drainages and drainages with little sediment storage
will allow rigorous comparison between landscape-scale erosion rates over the
later Pleistocene using cosmogenic nuclides and rates integrated over the
Cenozoic using fission tracks. Such comparisons provide the fundamental data
that allow one to explain the behavior of Earth's surface over time and to test
models of landscape evolution such as those proposed to explain the retreat of
great escarpments over time. Namibian rivers have wet headwaters where most
floods are generated; the rivers lose water as they cross the hyper-arid Namib
Desert. Such loss means that most flood events are discontinuous with sediment
in transport being stranded at varying distances along the 300 to 400 km long
river courses. Only the largest and rarest floods move sediment to the ocean. We
will compare our nuclide-based findings related to sediment virtual velocity and
sediment source with sediment composition and the historical flood
frequency/magnitude records of the two rivers that we sampled in
detail.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding long-term sediment fluxes down rivers is
important for responsible management of water resources and river corridors.
Dams have been placed on several Namibian Rivers and there are plans in the
works for others such as a very controversial project in the Kunene River.
Clearly, the life time and thus cost-benefit analysis for such massive hydraulic
structures depends critically on knowing long-term sediment fluxes. Cosmogenic
analysis of river sediments will provide such data. Land use in parts of Africa
is intensive. In some places, desertification has been the result of overgrazing
and population expansion. Cosmogenic data will determine background rates of
sediment generation. Such rates can be compared to modern rates and thus provide
the basis for responsible land use management decisions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;.