* 0207781
* Design and Optimization of Non-Fluorous CO2-Philic Polymers: FTIR and Phase Behavior Investigations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Christopher Roberts, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 162,230.00

The application of CO2 to chemical processing continues to elicit significant
interest, as CO2 generally poses fewer hazards than conventional organic
solvents. At one time it was thought that CO2 could simply replace many organic
solvents, but subsequent work showed that CO2 is a rather feeble solvent, and
hence unrealistically high pressures are needed to dissolve compounds of
interest. The discovery during the 1990's of "CO2-philes" suddenly rendered a
number of applications technically possible, greatly raising interest in CO2 as
a solvent. These new CO2-philes, primarily fluoropolymers, allowed a host of new
applications for CO2, from heterogeneous polymerization to homogeneous
catalysis. Although fluorinated amphiphiles were technically successful, their
high cost renders the economics of a process unfavorable unless the
ihCO2-philelo can be recycled at greater than 99% efficiency. Complicating
matters further, recycle of additives from a high-pressure process is neither
easy nor inexpensive. The drawbacks inherent to the use&lt;br/&gt;of fluorinated
precursors have greatly inhibited the commercialization of most new applications
for CO2, and thus the full promise of CO2-based technology has yet to be
realized. The PI has investigated the design of non-fluorous CO2-philes. To
date, he has used a set of simple heuristics to design three types of non-
fluorous CO2- phile; he expects that others will ultimately be found, greatly
broadening the applicability of CO2 as a solvent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
number of possible design variables (copolymer composition and topology) creates
an impractically large program if we continue to synthesize and test all
potentially useful structures. Further, conventional thermodynamic models are
incapable of predicting the behavior of all of the possible permutations.
Consequently, The PI will conduct a coordinated program between the University
of Pittsburgh and Auburn University whose ultimate aim is to fully understand
the effect of composition and topology on the phase behavior of our new
CO2-philes in carbon dioxide. He will to combine targeted synthesis, measurement
of selected thermophysical properties, high pressure FT-IR, and development of
an accurate potential function from first principles to mathematically describe
the thermodynamics of mixing of his materials with CO2. Success will allow himto
numerically optimize the structure of non-fluorous
CO2-philes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program described herein
involves a fully integrated project at both the University of Pittsburgh (E.J.
Beckman, R.M. Enick, J.K. Johnson) and Auburn University (C.B. Roberts). The
tasks to be performed at Auburn University (C.B. Roberts) include both phase
behavior and FTIR studies, where high pressure IR measurements will be employed
to evaluate the strength of specific interactions of CO2 with the Lewis base
groups incorporated into our model polymers. The high pressure IR work provides
both input to the synthetic design and the construction of an accurate potential
model for CO2-polymer interactions.&lt;br/&gt;