* 0207126
* Physical Insight and Mathematical Methods in Seismic Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2002,05/31/2004
* Caesar Jackson, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,851.00

This grant supports an interdisciplinary research project in applied and
computational seismology between the Physics and Mathematics Departments at
North Carolina A&amp;T State University. Specifically, the PI will spend one
year working in the Seismic Physical Modeling and Data Processing Laboratories
in the Physics Department to gain physical insight into and knowledge of seismic
data acquisition, processing, advanced imaging and visualization, and to study
mathematical methods and open problems in seismic data analysis. The proposed
project activities include: (1) acquiring seismic data through seismic physical
modeling as well as field surveying; (2) processing acquired seismic data using
OMEGA Seismic Processing System and Seismic Unix software packages; (3)
simulating seismic data through mathematical modeling and numerical solutions of
appropriately formulated two- and three-dimensional point source acoustic wave
equations for seismic waves, and writing interactive Fortran, C++, Labview,
Matlab, OMEGA, and Seismic Unix programming scripts; and (4) studying
mathematical methods, current research trend and open problems in seismic data
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that upon completion of his
one-year residence in the Physics Department, the PI will not only enhance his
own expertise and experience in applied and computational seismology, but also
lay a foundation for a continuing collaboration between the PI and his two hosts
in the Physics Department in developing a well-defined interdisciplinary
geosciences research program which will engage other mathematics faculty members
and students. The proposed project activities will also further collaborations
and cooperation with the Allied Geophysical Laboratories of the University of
Houston, Western Geophysical/Baker Hughes Corporation, and Pyramid
Environmental, Inc. as well as enhance and expand the geophysical and
environmental science education and research training component of the Talent-21
project funded by the NSF HBCU-UP. This project will have immediate impact on
three proposed program initiatives at the proposers' institution: a
computational science program, a geosciences program, and an interdisciplinary
Ph.D. program, all of which aim at strengthening and upgrading the University's
interdisciplinary research efforts. This IGMS project is jointly supported by
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS).&lt;br/&gt;