* 0207863
* Using and Evaluating Strainmeter Data - A Pre-EarthScope Initiative
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Duncan Carr Agnew, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 161,936.00

0207863&lt;br/&gt;Agnew&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EarthScope is a major earth science
research initiative that will integrate scientific information derived from
seismology (US Array), geodesy (Plate boundary Observatory), subsurface sampling
and measurement (SAFOD), remote sensing (InSAR), and complementary geology and
geophysics to understand continental scale plate deformation and evolution.
Funding for the EarthScope initiative is currently being discussed in Congress
as part of NSF's FY 2003 budget. The Division of Earth Sciences has made FY 2002
funds available for projects that qualify as pre-EarthScope activity, i.e.
activities that will facilitate or enable the construction, fabrication,
installation or operation of EarthScope once it is funded under the MREFC (Major
Research Equipment Facilities and Construction) account. Such activities include
meetings and workshops, prototype development, site selection or
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds to support
activities which will make the data from the large number of strainmeters to be
installed as part of the Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) component of
EarthScope more useful, and more widely used. At present, strainmeter data are
used only by a small number of investigators, primarily those who install and
operate the instruments; to the larger geophysical community these data seem
somewhat mysterious, rather as GPS data originally did. The Principal
Investigator will undertake several activities which should "demystify"
strainmeter data for interested researchers, and thus make these data much more
generally accessible. These activities include both didactic and research
efforts, all drawing on the PIs recognized expertise in the area of strain
measurement and interpretation. The specific work to be undertaken includes four
activities: 1) the development of a strainmeter guide; 2) the development of
processing software; 3) facilitating data availability; and 4) data
characterization for array design. &lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;