* 0207748
* Space Weather: Construction of Web-based Empirical Models of the Earth's Ionosphere Using Data from Multiple Incoherent Scatter Radars
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* John Holt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 06/30/2005
* USD 339,244.00

Construction of three comprehensive web-based models of the ionosphere using
data from eight incoherent scatter radars (ISRs) is proposed. These models will
greatly extend recent models based on data from the Millstone Hill ISR. The
model will include three main parts. The first two are North American and
European regional models of basic and derived scalar parameters, including
electron density (Ne), electron and ion temperature (Te and Ti), neutral
meridional wind and exospheric temperature: the third is a model of the ExB
plasma drifts and corresponding electrostatic potential patterns as obtained by
the EISCAT mainland and VHF radars. The North American regional model will be
based on data from the Sondrestromfjord, Millstone Hill and Arecibo ISRs. The
European regional model will be based on data from the EISCAT Svalbard, EISCAT
mainland UHF and VHF, Kharkov and St. Santin ISRs. The parameters to be modeled
have been identified by the National Space Weather Program (NSWP) Implementation
Plan as important ones which must be specified and forecast in response to
customer operational support requirements. All of them have also been identified
by the NSWP Metrics Panel as either first, second or third priority parameters
which define the state and condition of the ionosphere-thermosphere (IT) system.
The high-latitude electric field and its variability has also been identified by
the Metrics Panel as one of two first priority "driver" parameters of the IT
system.