* 0207275
* The Red Bed Paleomagnetic Inclination Correction and the Accuracy of the Late Paleozoic North American Apparent Polar Wander Path
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Kenneth Kodama, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 184,313.00

The proposed work will investigate how the PI's recent magnetic anisotropy
studies, showing that hematite-bearing red sedimentary rocks can suffer up to 30
degrees of inclination shallowing, impact the accuracy of the Late Paleozoic
North American apparent polar wander path. Red bed paleopoles dominate and
control the position of the Late Paleozoic to mid-Mesozoic portion of North
America's apparent polar wander path, thus inaccuracies in red bed remanence
would greatly affect any paleogeographies based on this part of the pole path.
the PI's previous NSF-funded study has shown that a combination of isothermal
remanence anisotropy and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility can be used to
identify and correct inclination shallowing in red, hematite-bearing sedimentary
rocks. By using thermal demagnetization and chemical demagnetization, the
magnetic fabric of the characteristic remanence-carrying grains can be isolated.
This is critical for an accurate inclination correction. Though initial tests of
the accuracy of these corrections support their validity, given the importance
of red beds to the Late Paleozoic North American apparent polar wander path, the
PI proposes to further test the accuracy of the corrected inclination he has
determined for the Carboniferous Mauch Chunk Formation. Igneous paleopoles would
be the best way to test the corrected inclination, but igneous results for
Carboniferous North America are few and scattered. Therefore, his strategy is to
collect and correct the inclinations of other red bed units, and magnetite-
bearing sedimentary rocks, of the same age as the Mauch Chunk. If magnetic
anisotropy does truly control the accuracy of remanence, the corrected
paleopoles should agree with each other. The corrected magnetite-bearing
inclinations from the Brush Creek Limestone and Buffalo Siltstone in
Pennsylvania will be particularly important since the PI has established the
accuracy of the magnetite correction from a comparison of corrected results from
the Paleocene Nacimiento Formation to coeval igneous results. He will correct
the inclinations of the Maringouin, Shepody, and Enrage Formation red beds from
New Brunswick, Canada and the Deer Lake Group rocks from western Newfoundland
for the red bed part of the comparison. These rocks have given excellent
Carboniferous age paleomagnetic results for North America. Finally, although
Carboniferous North American igneous results are scattered, the PI plans to
restudy the remanence of the New Brunswick Volcanics, given their proximity to
the other New Brunswick units he proposes to study. He wishes to check the
accuracy and age of the New Brunswick Volcanics remanence to make sure they
provide a reliable record of the Carboniferous field. The proposed work will be
conducted over three years, including three field seasons, and will support a
graduate student's PhD dissertation work at Lehigh University.