* 0207482
* North American participation in the NSF-DELOS Working Group on Digital Archiving and Preservation.
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2002,06/30/2003
* Margaret Hedstrom, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 06/30/2003
* USD 31,543.00

The proposal is to establish a US-EU/DELOS working group on "Digital Archiving
and Preservation". The working group will meet over the next year to discuss and
evaluate fruitful joint activities and research paths for collaborative
activities in this general topical area. The EU component of the effort is
funded and managed by the DELOS Forum, a major organizer of digital libraries
research and planning activities in Europe. DELOS receives support from the
Information Societies Technologies (IST) 5th Framework Programme of the European
Commission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort continues the planning and
assessment activities begun by an earlier NSF-EU working groups' process. In
their final report "An International Research Agenda for Digital Libraries",
delivered in Brussels in October 1998, increased levels of collaboration and
interaction was seen as critical to building multi-lingual, multi-national
digital libraries. The objective of the new working groups, of which this is
one, is to define a research agenda on a specific topic and identify areas and
activities for cooperation between EU and US researchers. The efforts of this
particular group take the next step in the planning process by assessing future
directions for research and resource development related to archiving and
preservation of digital content.