* 0207370
* Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan: Eocene Whales from India
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2002,08/31/2007
* S. Taseer Hussain, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 264,026.00

Evolution is the process that governs the entire diversity of living organisms
on Earth. Evolutionary changes accumulate slowly, and, for most organisms,
cannot be studied within the life span of one human observer. The most
impressive evolutionary changes involve great modifications in all aspects of
the design of an animal, its bodyplan. Such macroevolutionary changes become
obvious only after they accumulate over a long time period. Actual examples are
rare because the fossil record rarely grant researchers this level of detail.
One of the best examples of macroevolutionary changes that are documented in the
fossil record is the origin of whales, dolphins, and porpoises.&lt;br/&gt;All
modern whales, dolphins, and porpoises (together constituting the Cetacea) are
fully aquatic mammals, perfectly adapted to their watery environment and unable
to survive on land. However, cetaceans have ancestors that lived on land, with a
body plan that roughly resembled that of a wolf, and very unlike that of modern
cetaceans. In less than 15 million years, this archaic body plan was modified
into that of modern cetaceans. The present proposal aims to study these
transformations from several points of view. First, PIs will collect cetacean
fossils in India that document the land-water transition. Second, they will
study the evolution of locomotor and sense organs, as cetaceans passed through
this transition. Finally, they will study dolphin embryos in order to relate
changes in cetacean embryology to evolutionary changes. &lt;br/&gt;The cetacean
bodyplan is determined, to a large extent, by the unusual mode of swimming of
cetaceans (swinging the horizontal tail fluke through the water). However,
fossil cetacean had very different modes of swimming and these can be studied
with fossils. The evolution of the cetacean bodyplan can also be studied
indirectly, by determining its interaction with the sense organs. The most
important sense organ with respect to this is the organ of balance and
(associated with it) the organ of hearing. These will be studied using CT-scan
methods. Finally, the modern cetacean bodyplan is also influenced, to an unknown
degree, by its embryologic development, and this will be studied using embryos
of modern dolphins. &lt;br/&gt;