* 0207686
* Collaborative Research: Paleoseismology and Paleogeodesy of the Sumatran Subduction Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* R. Lawrence Edwards, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 127,108.00

EAR-0207686&lt;br/&gt;R. Lawrence Edwards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
continues investigations of the paleoseismology and paleogeodesy of the Sumatran
subduction zone in order to determine possible regularity of periods between
fault ruptures, repeatability of pattern of slip on faults, influence of
geologic structure on fault rupture, and variation of seismic/aseismic coupling
with time. The centerpiece of the study is the use of coral heads (Porites and
other genera) that are sensitive to sea level changes with uncertainties of a
few centimeters. Annual growth bands give time-series with relative errors of a
few years and U-Th dating of the heads gives dates with errors of a decade. The
magnitude of vertical deformation associated with earthquakes (paleoseismology)
and deformation in intervals between earthquakes (paleogeodesy) are being
determined from these data. Results are being modeled and historical earthquakes
(seismograms from a variety of sources) are being used to determine if segment
boundaries influenced dimensions of historical ruptures. The specific goals of
this project are to: (1) better characterize source parameters of 1681, 1797,
and 1833 events; (2) determine southern limit of these events; (3) extend record
back to 14th century; (4) determine source characteristics of 1861 and 1907
quakes; (5) model historical seismograms of large quakes on Sumatran fault; (6)
characterize aseismic strain events in 1861, 1797, and 1833 regions.