* 0207761
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Processes and Timescales of Andesite Differentiation: A Comprehensive Petrological and Geochemical Study of Arenal Volcano, Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2005
* Craig Lundstrom, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2005
* USD 137,655.00

Collaborative Research: Investigating the processes and timescales of andesite
differentiation: a comprehensive petrological and geochemical study of Arenal
Volcano, Costa Rica&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207185; EAR-0207287; EAR-0207761;
EAR-0207316&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Gill; Reagan; Tepley;
Gardner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arenal Volcano in Costa Rica is an excellent
natural laboratory in which to test specific hypotheses regarding
differentiation mechanisms and the timescales of magmatic processes and their
relationship to eruptions. Our objective is to undertake a multi-pronged
petrological and geochemical investigation to take advantage of existing data
and models. &lt;br/&gt;The on-going eruption of Arenal volcano has undergone
complex changes in eruptive behavior, and a crucial question is whether those
changes relate to different magma storage conditions, such as varying depths and
hence initial volatile contents, or to different degassing styles and rates. We
will investigate this important issue through several techniques. We seek to
determine the timescales of degassing, the residence times and ascent rate of
degassed magmas, and the timescales of degassing-induced plagioclase
crystallization. We will measure short-lived nuclides within the uranium decay
series to constrain the timescales of magmatic processes as well as measure the
long-lived isotopic compositions of whole rocks, and mineral separates and
individual minerals in the case of Sr, to determine whether there is evidence
for involvement of isotopically distinct components during differentiation
processes. Lastly, we will measure a suite of major- and trace-element
concentrations to evaluate the secular change in Arenal lava
composition.&lt;br/&gt;The data from these tests will help answer questions such
as whether rates of differentiation depend on the depth and degree of
crystallization and on the extent and character of degassing; whether crystal
and magma residence times can be as short as days to months during near steady-
state eruptions of andesite; whether within-eruption changes of magma
composition are caused by open-system processes of fractional crystallization
plus recharge or assimilation or both; and whether eruption styles are related
to degassing history and magma residence time.&lt;br/&gt;