* 0207843
* A Comparison of RDD and Cellular Telephone Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2002,06/30/2004
* Charlotte Steeh, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2004
* USD 176,296.00

Since very little research has examined the impact on surveys of the exploding
growth of wireless communication devices, this study will assess the extent to
which these devices are likely to change telephone surveys. This issue will be
addressed by comparing the results of two national surveys, one using the usual
list-assisted RDD sample and the other employing a sample of mobile telephone
numbers. The questionnaire, which will be identical in both surveys, will
include substantive items on important policy issues as well as inquiries about
mobile telephone ownership and use. The analyses will search for significant
differences between surveys along four dimensions-coverage, nonresponse, data
quality, and relationships among variables. Methodological factors, such as the
number of attempts, the percentage of sample numbers whose status as working or
nonworking is indeterminate, and the effects of caller-id, will also be
compared. The basic hypothesis underlying all analyses is that there are major
differences between the two modes along each
dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given that wireless communication devices will
only become more widely used and more sophisticated in the very near future, it
is necessary to determine how they might enrich and supplement the survey
process. This research will provide initial evidence. Contact through mobile
telephones promises to make hard-to-reach respondents more accessible and to
give voice to groups either poorly represented or not represented at all in
current surveys. By gauging the reactions of respondents to survey contacts via
a cellular telephone, the project also will provide practical guidance on
incorporating wireless devices into the survey process. Since methodologists now
predict that future surveys will be multi-modal, mixing present and future
wireless communication devices with fixed line telephones and the web, this
study will describe both the opportunities and the pitfalls involved. The end
result will be an expanded definition of surveys and better and more valid data
upon which to base public policy. This research is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies under the Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding
Opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;