* 0207820
* Collaborative Research: Seismic and Aseismic Slip Interactions on a Subduction Megathrust, Guerrero, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Anthony Lowry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 45,686.00

A transient event in Guerrero, Mexico, propagated from east to west along-
strike, near the locking transition on the megathrust, and it affected the
entire length of the Guerrero seismic gap over a period of months during early
1998. Campaign GPS data suggest the possibility that the 1998 Guerrero event is
causally related to afterslip following the 1995 Mw=7.3 Copala earthquake. The
Copala earthquake was located about 120 km east of the Guerrero gap, but
afterslip appears to have propagated westward along-strike as much as 100 km
during the first six months following the seismic rupture. Curiously, background
seismic activity on the Guerrero megathrust unusually quiescent during the
several months before, during and after the aseismic slip event, but returns to
normal or above-normal levels several months after the transient ended. These
observations raise several fundamental questions. First, did the Guerrero
aseismic slip event really begin as afterslip following the Copala earthquake?
Or is the occurrence of aseismic slip east of Acapulco in 1995-96 and west of
Acapulco in 1998 merely coincidental? Secondly, how did the stress changes
generated by these aseismic slip events influence seismic activity on the
megathrust?&lt;br/&gt;This research project is examining these questions using
JERS-1 InSAR data collected during the years 1994.2 to 1997.3 to estimate
coseismic slip of the Copala event and postseismic afterslip in the region east
of Acapulco. Also, strong ground motion seismic data from the Guerrero
accelerograph network and broadband data from the Mexican regional network are
being used to estimate earthquake source parameters from events with magnitude
Mw&lt;7 that had never been examined previously. The events are being relocated
using modern network differencing techniques, and the focal mechanisms, moment
release, stress drops and other source parameters are also being characterized.
The research team is combining the geodetic and seismic source to the slip
history on the subduction megathrust during the past decade, and the associated
change in Coulomb failure criteria as a function of time. The researchers are
also assessing the space-time connection between Copala earthquake afterslip and
the Guerrero slip transient, as well as the relationship between aseismic slip
and seismic activity, using a model of nonlinear dynamic friction on the
megathrust.