* 0207088
* Development of an Optobioelectronic Switch Based on the Functionalization of Gold Nanoparticles with Photoisomerizable Thiols
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2002,09/30/2005
* Jennifer Shumaker-Parry, Shumaker-Parry          Jennifer       S
* Fellowship Award
* Charles Pibel
* 09/30/2005
* USD 130,176.00

An MPS Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-DRF)
will be used to develop an optobioelectronic switch by functionalizing gold
nanoparticles with photoisomerizable thiols. There will be three stages in this
project: (1) Synthesis and characterization of gold particles, (2)
functionalization of nanoparticles with photoisomerizable molecules and
characterization of the transduction of the optical signal using bulk
measurement techniques, and (3) use of STM-SNOM to simultaneously provide the
optical signal and measure the electrochemical transduction of that signal at a
functionized nanoparticle. Most of the program will be hosted at Wolfgang
Knoll's group at the Max Planck Institut fur Polymerforschung, where expertise
will be provided in surface functionalization and characterization and the
infrastructure necessary to achieve the objectives of this project. One month
will be spent at Franz Aussenegg's group at the Institut fur Experimentalphysik
at the Karl-Franzens-Universitat Graz, Austria, where there is expertise with
nano-optics necessary to use the STM-SNOM system for these experiments. Another
month will be spent with Itamar Willner in the Department of Organic Chemistry
at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel, where the thiols will be provided
and also advice will be obtained on implementing them in building the proposed
optobioelectronic switch.