* 0207617
* Constraining Non-Linear Lithospheric Viscous Flow Laws From Postseismic Surface Deformation Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2004
* USD 71,994.00

EAR-0207617 Roland Burgmann

This project relies on observations of postseismic surface deformation following
the 1992 Landers and 1999 Hector Mine earthquakes to infer the flow laws that
characterize the apparent non-linear viscous rheology of the lithosphere beneath
the Mojave Desert. Non-linear or power law behavior, in which strain rate is
proportional to stress raised to a power and exponentially dependent on
temperature, has been demonstrated in laboratory experiments and surmised from
an inferred change in effective linear viscosity following the Mojave quakes.
However, the specific non-linear flow laws that characterize the rheology of the
Mojave lithosphere have not been determined. Non-linear rheology has been
difficult to infer in the past due to a lack of sufficiently resolved
observational constraints. The unprecedented GPS and InSAR coverage of
postseismic deformation following the Mojave quakes, combined with the ability
to numerically model complex slip distributions and non-linear rheology, allow
for the determination of the appropriate flow law parameters governing
continental lithospheric behavior in this region. The work consists of compiling
the geodetic data sets in a form useful for constraining a numerical model and
development of a 3-D viscoelastic finite element model of the Landers and Hector
Mine ruptures. This constrained model is used to (1) partition postseismic
deformation between viscous processes and other mechanisms such as afterslip,
(2) determine the depth distribution of viscous flow, and (3) infer applicable
non-linear flow laws. The results provide insight into how forces generated
within the Earth's interior manifest themselves at the surface and how stresses
induced by earthquakes are redistributed during interseismic periods. The latter
of which is important to understanding seismic hazards. An additional byproduct
of this research consists of guidelines for conducting future geodetic
investigations of non-linear lithospheric rheology by noting the most useful
locations for instrumentation relative to strike-slip earthquakes.