* 0207114
* RUI:  Economic Relations and Social Inequality in Terminal Classic Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Julia Hendon, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 29,598.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Julia Hendon will conduct two
field seasons of archaeological research at the site of Cerro Palenque in the
Ulua River Valley of north-central Honduras. This large and fertile valley was
home to a number of Indian societies prior to Spanish contact with the earliest
settlement dating back to 2000 BC. Cerro Palenque is a later site, occupied from
AD 600-1000. During the Terminal Classic period, AD 850-1000, it became the
largest community in the lower Ulua Valley, with over 500 structures and a large
concentration of monumental architecture. Excavations and analyses will be used
by Dr. Hendon to address how control of economic production and distribution
contributed to the development of social inequality in the Ulua Valley. Three
explanations for the relationship between economic control and social inequality
will be examined: 1) control of exchange networks; 2) control of specialized
production; and 3) manipulation of social networks through competitive
generosity. The rapid development of Cerro Palenque as a dominant center during
the Terminal Classic period and its relatively short period of occupation make
it an ideal case study for testing these three
explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first season of research will be devoted
to the excavation of the largest residential compound at the site. This compound
is located next to the central public area where religious and administrative
buildings made up the political core of the community during its peak
occupation. The excavations will concentrate on recovering stratified deposits
associated with the houses and other structures in the compound that will yield
evidence for the location and intensity of specialized craft production and for
the participation of Cerro Palenque's residents in long-distance trade in exotic
resources such as the volcanic glass obsidian, used for blades and other cutting
tools, and marine shell, used for religious offerings. The second season will
draw on the expertise of specialists in archaeological chemistry, faunal
analysis, and paleoethnobotany by concentrating on technical analyses and
specialized study of the variety of materials recovered during the excavations.
X-ray diffraction will be used to characterize the chemical composition of the
obsidian tools, allowing identification of the source of the raw material. Fine-
paste pottery, some of it manufactured at Cerro Palenque or at nearby sites in
the Ulua Valley, will also undergo chemical characterization through the use of
petrographic and neutron activation analyses to determine manufacturing
locations more specifically. Carved marble vessels, a hallmark of the Terminal
Classic period in the Ulua Valley, will also be studied to determine their
source. The diet of the residents of Cerro Palenque will be studied through the
identification of animal bones and plant remains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to the development of valid models of social change and
the emergence of social complexity, a goal which lies at the heart of a
scientifically informed archaeology. The research will also contribute to
expanding our understanding of the history of ancient societies and the
processes that shaped them.&lt;br/&gt;