* 0207200
* The Rise and Fall of the Himalayan-Tibetan Plateau: An Integrated 3-D Finite Element Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2007
* Mian Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract: Much of the current understanding of the geodynamics of the Indo-Asian
collision has been based on two end-member models: the plane-stress viscous
thin-sheet model based on continuum mechanics, and the plane-strain plasticine
indentation model based on analog experiments. Both models have provided
important frameworks for understanding the Tibetan tectonics, but the two-
dimensionality and other simplifications of these models have left many
important issues in uncertainty. For example, the plasticine indentation model
predicts lateral extrusion of Tibet and SE Asia to be the dominant mechanism
accommodating the &gt;2000 km post-collisional crustal shortening, whereas the
viscous thin-sheet model emphasizes the role of crustal thickening. These
different predictions are biased by the model limitations: the plasticine
indentation model does not allow vertical strain and hence crustal thickening,
whereas the viscous thin-sheet model dose not includes the faults and the
frictional (plastic) rheology necessary to simulate the escaping tectonics.
Since these end-member models were introduced ~20 years ago, numerous
improvements have been made, but the continued debate on the strain partitioning
between crustal thickening and lateral extrusion and many other questions
manifests the need for a new approach. The proposed work is to develop a fully
three-dimensional (3-D) finite element model to investigate the rise and fall of
the Himalayan-Tibetan plateau. The large volume of multidisciplinary
observational data accumulated from decades of intensive studies is ready to be
integrated and interpreted in more sophisticated geodynamic models. The 3-D
finite element models are now feasible thanks to the advancement of computer
technology and maturation of the finite element method. The PI has already built
the prototype 3-D model and successful applied it to studies of active tectonics
in the Tibetan plateau and the Andes. Major model developments in this project
include implementing strike-slip faults in finite-strain calculations and
incorporating more realistic rheology. The finite-strain model will include
brittle&lt;br/&gt;deformation within the upper crust, often omitted in viscous
thin-sheet models, by using a mixed viscous-elastic rheology. Transient stress
and strain rates will be simulated in infinitesimal-strain models with
viscoealstic and plasto-viscoelastic rheology. The finite-strain and
infinitesimal-strain models will be combined to provide a more complete
simulations of the collision history. Systematic numerical experiments will be
conducted to explore the mechanics of the Indo-Asian collision. The results will
lead to a better understanding of these questions:&lt;br/&gt; What are the major
driving forces for crustal deformation in the Himalayan-Tibetan plateau? When
and how did the Tibetan plateau uplift? What controlled the strain partitioning
between crustal thickening and lateral extrusion? What caused the Tibetan
extension? How is the upper crustal deformation related to that in the lower
crust and the mantle lithosphere? The numerical modeling will be closely
integrated with ongoing geological and geophysical studies in the Tibetan
plateau through collaboration with US and Chinese scientists, including Yin
(UCLA), Nabelek (Oregon State), and Flower (UIC). The proposed 3-D finite
element models will be a major step forward in numerical modeling of large-scale
continental deformation and can be used for other plate boundaries. The PI will
document the computer codes and make them available to public. The
multidisciplinary data sets compiled for this study will be organized into a GIS
database and made available to the research community. This project will involve
undergraduate and graduate students; the integration of cutting-edge computation
with multidisciplinary studies provides a great opportunity for training a new
generation of geoscience students.