* 0207999
* Wavelength-division Multiplexing (WDM) Optical Interconnect Architectures for Parallel and Distributed Computing and Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2007
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 260,136.00

Optical communication, in particular, wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM)
technique, has become a promising networking choice to meet ever-increasing
demands on bandwidth from many emerging bandwidth-intensive
computing/communication applications. As optics become a major networking media,
optical interconnects will inevitably play an important role in interconnecting
processors in parallel/distributed computing systems. This research focuses on
fundamental challenges and issues &lt;br/&gt;on using optics in two converging
areas: parallel/distributed computing and communications. The objective of this
research is to design high-speed, cost-effective optical interconnects for
current and future generation parallel/distributed computing and communication
systems. Due to the unique characteristics of optics, many important issues of
optical interconnects, different from those of &lt;br/&gt;electronic
interconnects, need to be addressed. Specially, this research focuses on (1)
explore unique properties and classifications of WDM interconnects; (2) optimal
and cost-effective designs; (3) study the effect of wavelength conversion; (4)
performance modeling; (5) fault-tolerance issues. The proposed research combines
architecture/circuit design, algorithmic, probabilistic, combinatorial and
simulation &lt;br/&gt;techniques to conduct comprehensive studies on the above
issues. The research results will provide viable solutions for designing high-
bandwidth, high-connectivity, low-latency and low-cost optical interconnects.
The proposed research will have a significant impact on next generation
arallel/distributed computing and communication systems and future networking
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;