* 0207713
* Hydraulic Jump Mechanics and Channel Interactions in Mountain Rivers
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Gregory Pasternack, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2006
* USD 255,010.00

0207713 Pasternack

Hydraulic jumps in mountain rivers are turbulent mixtures of air and water that
produce significant kinetic energy dissipation, air entertainment, surface
waves, and spray. Despite their prevalence, the role of natural hydraulic jumps
on river flow mechanics, sediment transport, channel change, and basin evolution
is unknown primarily because of adverse site conditions that previously limited
field data collection. The overall goal of this project is to overcome past
constraints on investigating hydraulic jump fluid mechanics in the natural
setting and its relevance to fluvial geomorphology with the aid of new
technologies that enable precise in situ measurement for the first time. New
technologies developed and tested at UC Davis include a River Truss, an air
content sensor, and large-scale particle image velocimetry. The new technologies
will be used to address three hypotheses that predict how systematic changes in
the external controls of channel geometry and discharge directly affect the
response variables of water surface topography, velocity, pressure, air content,
air entertainment, and energy dissipation. The role of response variables in
sediment transport, channel change, and basin evolution will follow from a
thorough investigation of the response variables themselves, especially when
addressing conditions near the bed. Observing 13 natural hydraulic jumps in the
American River basin over a 3-year period will test hypotheses. Results will be
compared between jumps and against results from engineering flume-based studies
using theoretical and empirical equations. A better understanding of the role of
natural jumps in channel change is very important to science because it would
improve the physics of landscape evolution models, provide needed guidance for
including in-stream features in river restoration and rehabilitation, and make
interdisciplinary contributions to ecology and aquatic geochemistry. In future
research, other scientists will be able to apply the newly proven field
technologies and resulting models to better understand the complex flow
mechanics and channels interactions occurring in mountain rivers.

