* 0207176
* CSEDI: Collaborative Research:The Influence of Thermal Conductivity on Stabilization and Feedback in Mantle Convection
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* David Yuen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 223,251.00

EAR-0207176&lt;br/&gt;David A. Yuen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose a three-year collaborative investigation of the pressure
(P), temperature (T), and compositional-structural (X) dependence of thermal
conductivity (k) to shed light on possible feedback mechanisms and plume
stabilization in the mantle. The current spectroscopic model of k(T,P,X), based
on classical damped harmonic oscillators, reproduces the essential features of
available measurements. The spectroscopic model will be improved as follows: (1)
The theory for the radiative component of k will be made exact by including the
dependence of the emitted light on frequency. Impurities (hydrous species, Fe2+
and Fe3+) will be focused on because their vibrational and electronic
absorptions greatly modify the black-body curve. (2) IR and visible spectra at T
and P will be acquired from mantle candidate phases. (3) The model will be
benchmarked against k(T) obtained using the laser flash technique: this method
circumvents previously encountered experimental difficulties. Geodynamical
models incorporating k(T,P,X) will be independently constrained by analogy with
convection experiments on colloids that have a strongly nonlinear diffusion
coefficient, through collaboration with an Italian physics group performing
these laboratory studies. The issues in geodynamic numerical modeling include
(1) how the mechanics of the lithospheric and slab dynamics are affected by the
interplay of k with rheology, and (2) whether variable k and phase transitions
can induce layered convection, delay secular cooling of the core-mantle system,
or stabilize mantle flows. The geodynamic modeling will reveal which variable
(T, P, X) has the greatest influence on mantle convection, and thus will guide
the mineral physics experiments. The team plans to disseminate findings on the
effects of nonlinear diffusion, because of its far-reaching, fundamental nature,
to educational institutions in disciplines other than geosciences.