* 0207649
* Developing Teacher's Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Heather Hill, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,112,498.00

Despite repeated calls for improved scholarship and more empirically grounded
policy recommendations, research into teacher learning has suffered from a
number of chronic methodological difficulties. Most importantly, this research
has been constrained by what scholars have been able to measure: the processes
of teacher learning as they appear in in-services or study groups; teacher
attitudes and beliefs which result from those processes; and, to some extent,
teacher practices which emerge after such encounters. Left unmeasured, however,
is a component which threads through all these observable outcomes and,
ultimately, which proves the most significant target of interventions designed
to improve teaching: teachers knowledge of content matter and content-specific
teaching methods. Without direct measures of this knowledge, researchers have
had few opportunities to learn which teacher education practices contribute to
its development. In a recent review of teacher preparation, Wilson, Floden, and
Ferrini-Mundy (2001) show the vast gaps in the field's knowledge of the content
required for good teaching and of the ideal combination of pedagogical and
content. The situation is equally weak with respect to knowledge about
professional development (Wilson &amp; Berne, 1999). The study we are proposing
would aim to help redress the lack of disciplined study of teachers'
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will take advantage of measures
developed recently at the Study of Instructional Improvement (Ball, Cohen &amp;
Rowan, Principal Investigators) to identify effective professional development
practices, and pioneers new methods for evaluators and scholars in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These items are designed to tap three constructs
critical to teachers' capacity to deliver high-quality mathematics instruction
to students: teachers ability to understand fundamental topics in elementary
mathematics; teachers' ability to use mathematical knowledge to interpret
students' thinking; and teachers' ability to make sound choices when faced with
common problems of teaching mathematics. In all three cases, items are drawn
from realistic dilemmas facing teachers of mathematics. The study will use these
measures in a longitudinal study of programs designed to improve teachers'
knowledge of mathematics and its teaching, tracking a large number of teachers
before, during, and after their involvement with professional development,
teacher-supportive curriculum materials, and innovative site-based initiatives.
We will also use this opportunity to conduct a small validation study of our
measures of mathematical learning opportunities and teachers' knowledge for
teaching. Finally, we will interview and observe a small group of teachers
before, during and after their participation in intensive mathematics
professional development, hoping to better understand, from teachers'
perspectives, what and how one can learn mathematics content for
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;