* 0207565
* Carbonate-Associated Sulfate in Modern Sediments of South Florida: Diagenetic Relationships
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Timothy Lyons, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 123,197.00

Carbonate-Associated Sulfate in Modern Sediments of South Florida:
&lt;br/&gt;Diagenetic Relationships &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemical
cycling of sulfur at and near the earth.s surface is intimately linked.through a
&lt;br/&gt;complex set of feedbacks.to ambient redox conditions, including the
availability of &lt;br/&gt;atmospheric oxygen. Our ability to delineate and
quantify these cycles and the associated &lt;br/&gt;biospheric impacts hinges on
the strong preferential utilization of 32S relative to 34S during
&lt;br/&gt;bacterial sulfate reduction. Historically, temporal trends in the
relative magnitudes of critical &lt;br/&gt;redox pathways have been estimated by
monitoring the 34S of the ocean as manifested in a &lt;br/&gt;limited
sedimentary record of gypsum. Consequently, the models are only as good as the
data, &lt;br/&gt;which fail to provide even minimal constraints for most of the
Precambrian. During the earth.s &lt;br/&gt;early history, gypsum deposition was
less abundant, and preservation is poor due to its &lt;br/&gt;vulnerability
during weathering. In light of these complications, carbonate-associated sulfate
or &lt;br/&gt;CAS, which is complementary to but generally not overlapping with
a promising new barite &lt;br/&gt;approach, has emerged as a viable alternative.
CAS, which often occurs at concentrations of &lt;br/&gt;hundreds to thousands of
ppm, is a component of most limestones and dolostones and shows &lt;br/&gt;great
promise for continuous, high-resolution records of ancient seawater sulfate.
Interest in the &lt;br/&gt;method is peaking, yet applications greatly outnumber
studies tracking even the basic &lt;br/&gt;systematics of CAS and the potential
loss of seawater signals through diagenesis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite
encouraging initial results for CAS in ancient sediments, no systematic attempt
has been &lt;br/&gt;made to test the method in a modern setting where the
controlling factors are more easily and &lt;br/&gt;independently constrained.
Furthermore, any attempts at modern calibration have neglected the
&lt;br/&gt;precursor of the most abundant carbonate component of the geologic
record.carbonate mud.&lt;br/&gt;and the effects of diagenesis. The primary
objective of the proposed study is to understand how &lt;br/&gt;CAS is
incorporated, distributed and preserved in modern carbonate sediments in south
Florida. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we will observe isotopic and concentration
trends across a carefully chosen set of &lt;br/&gt;well-characterized
depositional settings in Florida Bay and at lagoonal sites seaward of the Keys.
&lt;br/&gt;The resulting diversity translates into spatial and temporal
gradients in the parameters that &lt;br/&gt;control sulfur cycling, such as the
availability of labile organic compounds, salinity and the &lt;br/&gt;physical
and biological properties of the sediment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What is the
overall fidelity of the seawater isotopic signal recorded in bulk mud samples
that are &lt;br/&gt;undergoing carbonate dissolution, precipitation and mineral
transformations on early diagenetic &lt;br/&gt;time scales within the confines
of an evolving pore-water sulfate reservoir? Although we &lt;br/&gt;recognize
the profound differences between modern and ancient settings, it is these bulk
mud &lt;br/&gt;samples that will illuminate the conditions under which primary
signals may or may not be &lt;br/&gt;preserved. Various coarser sketetal
components will also be tracked from life through burial to &lt;br/&gt;depths up
to several meters. These goals are facilitated by Lyons. experience working in
modern &lt;br/&gt;settings, including south Florida, although many of the
questions asked will stem from the &lt;br/&gt;ultimate goal of testing the
robustness of a paleoenvironmental proxy. In particular, Lyons. past
&lt;br/&gt;work with sediment diagenesis, carbonate sedimentology/geochemistry
and sulfur geochemistry &lt;br/&gt;will be most helpful. The tight focus of this
study.as requested by the panel following review of an earlier version of this
proposalwill allow us to track CAS within a rigorous organic and
&lt;br/&gt;inorganic geochemical context. The multi-component approach,
including rate measurements &lt;br/&gt;and concentration and isotopic
determinations for a wide range of relevant species, is designed to
&lt;br/&gt;provide the biogeochemical sulfur mass balance necessary for
understanding ppm levels of &lt;br/&gt;sulfate within reactive carbonate grains.
In the end, CAS may help fill the many gaps in the &lt;br/&gt;.Claypool curve.
through use of continuous sections of shallow-water carbonates from even the
&lt;br/&gt;oldest rocks. But as with all carbonate proxies for ancient seawater,
our interpretations are only &lt;br/&gt;as good as our understanding of the
multiple diagenetic pathways.