* 0207086
* The Chemical Synthesis, Self-Assembly, and Facial Crosslinking of Dendrimers for the Study of Ultra-Tough Mimics of Spider Dragline Silk
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2002,05/31/2005
* Christopher Clark, Clark, Christopher G
* Fellowship Award
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2005
* USD 189,609.00

An MPS Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-DRF)
will be used to perform research at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Science
(MPIP) in Mainz, Germany with the guidance of Prof. Dr. Klaus Mullen and
additional collaborators for specialized techniques that are not available the
MPIP, including Prof. Dr. Martin Moller at the University of Ulm. The iterative
design, synthesis, and characterization of a morphological, composite mimic of
spider dragline silk, an ultra-tough tensile fiber, is the subject of this work.
The branching units of prototypical dendrimers will be modified with multiple,
chemically-immiscible oligomeric side chains. One side chain phase of the
dendrimer will be crosslinked, and length of the chain ends at the periphery of
the dendrimer will be optimized in order to suppress bulk crosslinking in a
columnar mesophase. Upon dissolution, conformationally-restricted, dendrimeric
dimers should be afforded. The accessibility that the non-centrosymmetric,
dendrimer conformation needs to reach before dimerization will be probed using
atomic force microscopy with chemically-modified surfaces, in solution through
the interaction with phospholipid vesicles using fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy, and in the bulk using differential scanning calorimetry. A second
dendrimer scaffold will be synthesized bearing similar, chemically-immiscible
side chains and chain ends, but with an additional, latent functionality in the
branching unit side chain which will not initially undergo crosslinking. After
dimerization, the latent functionality will be unmasked and used to incorporate
linear chains for bulk crosslinking or physical entanglement in a final
composite. The mechanical properties of the resulting composite are expected to
mimic those of spider dragline silk.

While this work is not expected to produce materials amenable to commercial
application, it is expected to assess the theoretical mechanism of spider
dragline silk responsible for its remarkable mechanical toughness. It is the
hope that such conclusions will be drawn about the future of advanced composite
materials and that they will be invaluable to the development of more practical
materials.