* 0207546
* Experimental Petrology of Planetary Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* David Walker, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 481,605.00

Walker&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0207546&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general aim of this
project is to understand planetary differentiation by igneous processes.
Laboratory experiments are used to simulate those processes. The major
expression of planetary differentiation is the separation of core and mantle.
The highly siderophile elements of the Pt group are a key suite of elements for
understanding the formation and evolution of Earth's core. Their geochemical
partitioning between silicate and metal has been poorly understood because of
technical problems in the interpretation of the dispersed metal nuggets found in
experimental silicates equilibrated with metal at the low pO2 relevant to the
core formation process. New experiments show that for Pt the nuggets are not
artificial contaminants but are Pt recovered from solution during the incomplete
quenching process. This preliminary result makes many of the enigmas of the high
abundance of Pt in the Earth's mantle less perplexing. Pt is orders of magnitude
more soluble in silicate than conventionally thought. We will continue to
explore this result with time and temperature series studies. If verified, we
will extend the study of nugget formation to Re and Ir, two elements of the
group also known to also have their geochemical behavior clouded by nugget
formation in experimental work.&lt;br/&gt; Additional projects to be undertaken
include the completion of studies of the volumes of garnets across the solid
solution series grossular-pyrope at simultaneous high-P and T by synchrotron
XRD. This study has shown some interesting anomalies compared to conventional
practices used to make these measurements. The results are relevant to the
mixing and melting properties of garnets in mantle peridotite. Garnet is one of
the important repositories of fusible components that liberate basalt upon deep
peridotite partial melting. A related study will use the NaCl-KCl system to
model the behavior of a solvus in a binary solution at high-P,T. We will also
measure the melting points of B1 and B2 RbCl to ~30 kbar to investigate the bond
weakening which seems to take place on conversion of phases to higher density,
higher coordination number polymorphs. This study is relevant to expected
convective style changes across phase change boundaries in the Earth. Finally,
we hope to complete the data reduction of epithermal neutron resonance pyrometry
measurements of the effect of P on thermocouple emf. This subproject is relevant
to the calibration of widely used thermocouple pyrometry in use at high
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;