* 0207293
* 2002 National Conference of Black Physics Students (NCBPS), Alabama A&amp;M University; March 13-17, 2002; Huntsville, Alabama
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2003
* Manmohan Aggarwal, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/2003
* USD 57,200.00

This award provides partial support for the National Conference of Black Physics
Students (NCBPS), which will be held at Alabama A &amp; M University on March
13-17, 2002. This will be the 16th of these national meetings. NCBPS seeks to
increase the diversity of the United State community of researchers and
educators in physics and related fields by providing student participants with
the motivation and practical skills to further their education and assimilation
into the scientific and technical professions. The NCBPS is annually attended by
approximately 250 students, and is supported by a combination of gifts from
foundations, national laboratories, industry, federal grants, and support from
the host institution. This award will provide direct support for the attendance
of approximately 50 students. Also meeting concurrently at A &amp; M is the
National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP). This format has proven to be highly
effective and allows for joint meetings of the two groups, as well as separate
meetings appropriate to the objectives of each group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides partial support for the National Conference of Black Physics
Students (NCBPS), which will be held at Alabama A &amp; M University on March
13-17. The award will provide direct support for the attendance of approximately
50 students. &lt;br/&gt;