* 0207097
* Black-Hole Dynamics and Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2004
* Charles Evans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2004
* USD 18,000.00

A theoretical and numerical study will be made of several problems in numerical
relativity and gravitational wave physics. A numerical method will be developed
to allow the calculation of wave fields that propagate in the vicinity of black
holes. This method will focus on directly computing the spacetime metric, which
is the object that describes a gravitational field. Related to this effort, a
study will be made to determine optimal non-reflecting boundary conditions, for
use in the above-mentioned numerical method and for use in more general
numerical relativity calculations. A study will also be made of matched-filter
techniques that can be applied in analyzing data from the LIGO detectors to
search for merging binary stars which involve&lt;br/&gt;significant levels of
spin (rotation) of the two stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a
numerical method for computing the spacetime metric on a black hole background
is important for several reasons. Such a method might be applied to calculate
the gradual merger of a small black hole that is orbiting around a larger,
rotating black hole. Mergers like this are potentially detectable events in LIGO
and the proposed NASA/ESA LISA mission. Computation of waves on black hole
backgrounds is also an important arena for testing the stability of numerical
calculations, which is a considerable general concern in numerical relativity at
present. Specification of non-reflective boundary conditions for such
calculations is complicated by the curvature of space around black holes.
Development of a more accurate non-reflecting condition is an important
component to accurately computing gravitational waves and may be an important
ingredient to stabilizing some numerical calculations. Existing techniques to
search through LIGO data will not detect weak signals from some merging binaries
which have significant individual stellar rotation rates. Including spin effects
is straightforward but leads to a computationally prohibitive task.
The&lt;br/&gt;goal will be to find a search technique that incorporates the
essential aspects of spin while remaining computationally viable.