* 0208619
* Collaborative Research: Rate-Based Resource Allocation Methods for Real-Time Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2005
* Stephen Goddard, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

Rate-Based Resource Allocation Methods for Real-Time Embedded Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #0208924&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. Revised Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Run-time executives and operating system kernels for
embedded systems have long relied exclusively on static priority scheduling of
tasks to ensure timing constraints and other correctness conditions are met.
Static priority scheduling is easy to understand and support but it suffers from
a number of significant problems such as: the complexity of simultaneously
mapping timing and importance constraints onto priority values, dealing with
tasks whose execution time is either unknown or may vary over time, dealing with
tasks whose execution time (or rate) deviates from the behavior expected at
design-time, degrading system performance gracefully in times of overload, and
ensuring full utilization of the processor or other resources in tightly
resource constrained systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rate-
based resource allocation schemes offer an attractive alternative to traditional
static priority scheduling as they offer flexibility in specifying and managing
timing and criticality constraints. In a rate-based system a task is guaranteed
to make progress according to a well-defined rate specification such as "process
x samples per second," or "process x messages per second where each message
consists of 3-5 consecutive network packets." This research investigates the use
of rate-based resource allocation methods for constructing embedded systems with
real-time execution constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is two-fold: an algorithm design
and analysis component, and a prototype implementation and use component. In the
design/analysis component, a framework is being developed using taxonomy of
rate-based resource allocation consisting of proportional share scheduling,
polling server-based scheduling, and rate-based extensions to classical Liu and
Layland scheduling. The goal is to relate the different scheduling models and
abstractions to one another and to understand the fundamental principles of
rate-based resource allocation such as the form and nature of timing guarantees
and the algorithmic overhead. In addition, the existing theory of rate-based
resource allocation is extended to deal with considerations such as preemption
constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation and use component of this
research explores rate-based resource allocation in operating system kernels and
applications. The objective is to assess the fit between the formal task model
used to develop a particular allocation algorithm and implementation constraints
that arise in practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
scheduling problems are considered: application-level scheduling (i.e.,
scheduling of user programs or application threads), scheduling the execution of
system calls made by applications ("top-half" operating system-level
scheduling), and scheduling asynchronous events generated by devices ("bottom-
half" operating system-level scheduling). This reflects the logical structure of
traditional, monolithic real-time (and general purpose) operating systems and
kernels with hardware enforced protection boundaries. The research results will
be distributed as an experimental version of FreeBSD that employs different
forms of rate-based scheduling and resource allocation at different levels in
the system.&lt;br/&gt;