* 0208334
* Continental Extension in the western Woodlark Basin: P-T-t-D constraints from Normanby and Misima Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Suzanne Baldwin, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2006
* USD 312,009.00

The Woodlark Basin of southeastern Papua New Guinea is one of the world's most
rapidly extending rifts and provides a natural laboratory to study how
continental lithosphere ruptures during the transition from rifting to seafloor
spreading. It is here that the active metamorphic core complexes of the
D'Entrecasteaux Islands were first discovered (e.g.,Hill et al.,1992). These
islands preserve some of the youngest, most rapidly exhumed metamorphic and
igneous rocks known on Earth (Baldwin et al.,1993).The exhumed lower plates of
the D'Entrecasteaux Island metamorphic core complexes provide a record of active
continental extension and magmatism synchronous with the westward propagation of
the Woodlark Basin&lt;br/&gt;seafloor spreading system. While the seafloor
spreading history (e.g.,Taylor et al.,1999) and the transition from rifting to
spreading in the vicinity of the Moresby Seamount (Taylor and Huchon, in review)
is known, more onshore geologic research is required to fully understand the
history and mechanisms of continental rifting in the Woodlark Basin. Rupturing
of continental lithosphere imparts a thermal record of events that are preserved
as isotopic variations within minerals. These events can be revealed using
thermochronology, and when integrated with P-T-D constraints, can be used to
determine the timing and rates of exhumation associated with continental
extension and magmatism. The PI's propose to further investigate the
relationship between continental rifting and seafloor spreading in the western
Woodlark Basin by 1) documenting the P-T-t-D histories of rocks exposed on
Normanby Island, the easternmost of the D'Entrecasteaux Islands, located west of
the active rift tip, 2) documenting the P-T-t-D histories of rocks exposed on
Misima Island, part of the southern rifted continental margin and 3) determining
the age of eclogite facies metamorphism in the exhumed lower plates of the
D'Entrecasteaux Islands core complexes. Results will be compared to previous
P-T-t-D studies on the D'Entrecasteaux Islands and Moresby Seamount.
Longitudinal and latitudinal variations (or lack thereof) in the timing of
continental extension and magmatism will be interpreted in relation to the
history of seafloor spreading in the Woodlark Basin and recently proposed models
for the evolution of the region.