* 0208125
* RUI: Fluctuating Resources and Mechanisms of Invasibility Along the Prairie-Forest Border
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2007
* Mark Davis, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2007
* USD 263,080.00

0208125&lt;br/&gt;Davis&lt;br/&gt;It is widely agreed that invasion ecology
theory needs to become more mechanistic,&lt;br/&gt;quantitative, and predictive
and that field experiments and better models are required to
help&lt;br/&gt;accomplish this goal. The initial goal of the proposed project is
to test a recent mechanistic&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis of invasibility and to develop
a quantitative empirical model that can be used to&lt;br/&gt;predict the
changing invasibility of an environment over time. The hypothesis tested
proposes&lt;br/&gt;that a mechanistic relationship exists between invasibility
and resource availability, and that&lt;br/&gt;changes in invasibility are often
due to changes in the competition intensity from resident&lt;br/&gt;vegetation,
which in turn result from fluctuations in resource availability. This project
will be&lt;br/&gt;conducted in a native grass environment located on a Minnesota
sand plain. Thus, a second goal&lt;br/&gt;of the project is to increase our
understanding of the invasion dynamics associated with&lt;br/&gt;grasslands and
woodland/grassland ecotones in semi-arid environments. These goals will
be&lt;br/&gt;accomplished in a study consisting of three parts.&lt;br/&gt;During
the first stage, an empirical model of invasibility will be developed using
data&lt;br/&gt;from a field experiment in which temporal patterns of resource
availability (water) will be&lt;br/&gt;manipulated in plots being experimentally
invaded. During this stage, data from the field&lt;br/&gt;experiments will also
be used to directly test predictions of the fluctuating resource
availability&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis. Water was selected as the resource to be
manipulated because previous studies of&lt;br/&gt;seedling establishment at
Cedar Creek have shown that establishment success of herbaceous
and&lt;br/&gt;plants was most strongly correlated with soil water conditions.
During the second stage, an&lt;br/&gt;existing mechanistic soil water model will
be used to produce season-long soil water profiles at&lt;br/&gt;the study site
under a variety of climatological (temperature and rainfall) data sets,
including&lt;br/&gt;climatological data recorded at the study site during the
project, historical climatological data for&lt;br/&gt;the region, and various
hypothetical temperature and precipitation regimes that might occur
in&lt;br/&gt;the future if the climate changes. During the third stage, the
season-long water profiles produced&lt;br/&gt;by the mechanistic model will be
used as input for the empirical model of invasibility.
The&lt;br/&gt;invasibility predictions produced by the integration of the
empirical and mechanistic models will&lt;br/&gt;compared to invasibility data
obtained from a separate field experiment conducted during the&lt;br/&gt;study.
If the integrated model is successful in its predictions, then it will be used
with the&lt;br/&gt;historical and hypothetical climatological data to determine
the extent of annual variability in&lt;br/&gt;invasibility of native grasslands
in the past, and the extent to which invasibility may change in&lt;br/&gt;the
future if temperature and/or precipitation regimes change.&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of the proposed study are both to advance ecological theory and the
ecological&lt;br/&gt;understanding of specific environments. In addition to
testing a recent mechanistic theory of&lt;br/&gt;invasibility, the study will
develop a method to model and predict invasibility that is intended
to&lt;br/&gt;be transferable to other environments. Recent evidence has shown
that grasslands and old fields&lt;br/&gt;are more responsive to fluctuations in
precipitation than other biomes and that water limited&lt;br/&gt;environments
such as grasslands and savannas are likely to be some of the biomes most
affected&lt;br/&gt;by future climate change. Thus, by testing a specific
mechanistic theory of invasibility in the&lt;br/&gt;water limited grassland-
forest ecotone at Cedar Creek with an experimental study culminating
in&lt;br/&gt;the development of a model of invasibility, this study will
contribute to the important pool of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge that will be necessary
to predict and prepare for the possible ecological consequences&lt;br/&gt;of
global environmental change in these environments.