* 0208449
* Optimization with PDE Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Randolph Bank, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 477,734.00

The investigator and his colleagues focus on several&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
computational issues involved in the parallel&lt;br/&gt;implicit solution of
optimization problems with partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equation The goal of
the research is to advance the&lt;br/&gt;state of the art in four fundamental
topics: (1) the formulation&lt;br/&gt;and analysis of algorithms for large-scale
optimization; (2)&lt;br/&gt;adaptive mesh generation for partial differential
equations; (3)&lt;br/&gt;multilevel partial differential equation solvers; and
(4)&lt;br/&gt;parallel computation. Although each of these topics can
be&lt;br/&gt;investigated in isolation, the exploitation of their
interactions&lt;br/&gt;is crucial for the creation of effective global
algorithms. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators are members of a Scientific Computation
Group that&lt;br/&gt;offers a program of instruction and research emphasizing
the role&lt;br/&gt;of scientific computation in the formulation, modeling,
and&lt;br/&gt;solution of problems from diverse and changing areas. A
major&lt;br/&gt;part of the project involves the development of software and
its&lt;br/&gt;dissemination within the manufacturing, engineering,
and&lt;br/&gt;scientific community. Software developed as part of the
project&lt;br/&gt;provides an effective method of technology transfer and
extends&lt;br/&gt;the scope and effectiveness of the existing codes PLTMG, MC,
and&lt;br/&gt;SNOPT developed by the investigators.&lt;br/&gt; Because partial
differential equations conveniently&lt;br/&gt;characterize the physical laws of
many complex systems occurring&lt;br/&gt;in science and engineering, they also
lie at the heart of the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models used to simulate and
predict the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;these systems. The need to optimize the
performance of such&lt;br/&gt;systems is the common feature of practical
applications that&lt;br/&gt;range over such diverse areas as the optimal design
of the hull&lt;br/&gt;of an America's Cup yacht, the cleanup of toxic waste
sites, the&lt;br/&gt;construction of bioartificial arteries in tissue
engineering, and&lt;br/&gt;the management of stock portfolios and hedge funds.
Software&lt;br/&gt;developed in this project provides engineers and scientists
with&lt;br/&gt;instant access to state-of-the-art methods for the modeling
and&lt;br/&gt;optimization of complex systems involving partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equation constraints. The resulting improvements in
the&lt;br/&gt;efficiency, accuracy and robustness of these models have
a&lt;br/&gt;substantial impact in areas of manufacturing and engineering
that&lt;br/&gt;are vital to US global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;