* 0208281
* RUI: Intensive Collecting of Fossils from an Earliest Wasatachian (Wa0) Locality in the Southeastern Bighorn Basin, Wyoming
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Suzanne Strait, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 265,376.00

The Paleocene-Eocene boundary is marked by substantial global warming. The
beginning of the Eocene (55 million years ago) in North America included the
first immigration of many modern mammalian orders that dispersed during this
warm interval. The objectives of this project are to collect and identify
mammalian fossils from an earliest Eocene (Wa0) locality. A new Wa0 locality,
"Castle Gardens", was discovered by the PI in the southeastern Bighorn Basin of
Wyoming. Preliminary fieldwork indicates that it is the richest North American
fossil vertebrate site of this age; over 300 specimens have been found including
at least two new species and twelve other taxa unknown from other earliest
Eocene localities. The recovered specimens will be documented in a detailed and
interactive electronic database. All diagnostic specimens and appropriate
comparative material will be scanned using a 3-D laser digitizer. Three-
dimensional images will be created and published. The images will be able to be
rotated, quantified, and downloaded by any Web user. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance of this study is threefold. Firstly, with this new collection of
earliest Eocene mammals, it will then be possible to use this fauna to
contribute to studies of community structure, biodiversity, biostratigraphy, and
faunal succession during this critical time period. The documented global
changes in climate and resultant faunal turnover can provide insights to the
possible effects of rapid climatic change today. Recent studies have suggested
that the great transient shift in the stable carbon-isotope ratio near the
Paleocene/Eocene boundary is similar to that currently being induced by humans
today. Studies of the effects of ancient "green-house" warming can be used to
model potential environmental outcomes of modern human activities. Secondly, the
approach used to make the interactive database is unique. This database
formation will serve as a model for other researchers and institutions that wish
to make their collections easily and usefully accessible. Thirdly, this study
will include substantial undergraduate participation (a minimum of 22 students).
Students will be exposed to modern field methods and high-end state of the art
technology and software.&lt;br/&gt;