* 0208548
* Toward a Unified Approach to Diffuse Wave Inverse Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Eric Miller, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 374,846.00

Miller, Eric&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
work is the creation of a unified approach to characterizing the internal
structure of a medium given diffuse wavefield data collected at the boundaries.
Diffusive inverse problems are found in a&lt;br/&gt;number of areas including
(1) medical imaging for breast cancer detection using diffuse optical tomography
(DOT); (2) non-destructive evaluation (NDE) in the steel and semi-conductor
industries with photo-thermal methods; and (3) monitoring of environmental
cleanup processes via electrical resistance&lt;br/&gt;tomography (ERT). Despite
the ubiquity of these problems, researchers have typically treated them in
application-specific ways due to differences in the physical scale, materials
under consideration, and sensing systems. Here, a unified approach to solving
this class of inverse problems is constructed by exploiting the underlying
similarities in the physics and processing objectives of each of these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators focus on three fundamental
difficulties. First, they design regularization techniques to overcome the ill-
posedness of these inverse problems. Specifically they explore the use of
adaptive, geometric, low-order models for the unknown and reconstruct the
relatively small number of descriptive parameters in these models. Second, they
design inversion methods that, unlike traditional approaches, do not require
precise knowledge of the background structure of the medium. Solving these
nonlinear inverse problems is extremely computationally intensive, in part
because a three-dimensional forward problem must be solved thousands of times.
Therefore, a third focus of the research is the development
of&lt;br/&gt;computationally efficient inversion techniques by exploiting the
relationships among the forward problems. The resulting theory and algorithms
will be validated using real sensor data from the three&lt;br/&gt;application
areas described in the first paragraph: DOT, photo-thermal NDE, and
ERT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;