* 0208577
* Computational Information Theory and Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2005
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 06/30/2005
* USD 190,197.00

Computational information theory is concerned with techniques (such
as&lt;br/&gt;channel coding) for achieving channel capacities. The field
has&lt;br/&gt;achieved dramatic scientific breakthroughs in recent years, and
codes&lt;br/&gt;that come close to theoretical limits have been discovered.
Today,&lt;br/&gt;the development of coding and information theory is closely
related to&lt;br/&gt;the explosion of information technology, with applications
to the&lt;br/&gt;Internet and the next generation of networks technologies. The
rapid&lt;br/&gt;development of a myriad of networked devices for computing
and&lt;br/&gt;telecommunications presents new and exciting challenges for coding
and&lt;br/&gt;information theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore interconnections among coding theory,&lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer
science, information theory, and related areas of&lt;br/&gt;computer science and
mathematics in order to deal with research&lt;br/&gt;challenges arising from
optical/magnetic recording and optical&lt;br/&gt;transmission, the interface
between information theory and symbolic&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, the development of
network information theory, advances in&lt;br/&gt;high speed data transmission
in wired channels, the connection between&lt;br/&gt;coding theory and related
mathematical approaches (especially using&lt;br/&gt;discrete mathematics), the
role of compression in all layers of data&lt;br/&gt;networks, and exploiting the
connections between algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;complexity and notions of entropy and
randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research efforts will be carried out by
``working groups'' that will&lt;br/&gt;come together at DIMACS for several
meetings aimed at catalyzing&lt;br/&gt;communications and collaborations.
Subgroups will investigate problems&lt;br/&gt;of interest. The working groups
will be concerned with Data&lt;br/&gt;Compression in Networks and Applications
and with Optical/Magnetic&lt;br/&gt;Recording and Optical
Transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research and
education through a series of&lt;br/&gt;workshops aimed at identifying areas for
research, involving large&lt;br/&gt;groups of researchers in the field of
computational information theory&lt;br/&gt;and coding, and introducing many
people (including outstanding junior&lt;br/&gt;people and students) to the
field. Workshops are&lt;br/&gt;planned on the topics of High Speed Data
Transmission in Wired&lt;br/&gt;Channels, Network Information Theory, Complexity
and Inference,&lt;br/&gt;Information Theory and Symbolic Dynamics, and Coding
Theory and&lt;br/&gt;Discrete Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;