* 0208127
* Hydrogen Isotope Studies of Submarine Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* John Eiler, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2003
* USD 47,178.00

Eiler&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208127&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogen is arguably the most
important minor element in the solid earth: It dominates the melting behavior
and rheology of mantle rocks; it is the principle solvent for metasomatic
transport in the crust and mantle; its concentration in silicate minerals
controls rates of diffusion of other elements; and its abundance in silicate
melts strongly influences crystallization-differentiation. However, the
geochemistry of hydrogen is less well described than that for virtually any
other element (and certainly any of similar importance): Reasonable estimates of
the total abundance of H in the earth span a range of nearly an order of
magnitude; concentrations, residence times, and sources and sinks of hydrogen in
major mantle reservoirs are poorly known or only guessed at; and partitioning of
hydrogen between minerals and melts has yet to be described with the same
experimental sophistication given to studies of other minor
elements.&lt;br/&gt;We believe that our understanding of the global hydrogen
cycle can be advanced by studying the hydrogen isotope composition (i.e., D/H
ratio) of well characterized suites of submarine basalts whose origin and
evolution is influenced by mantle hydrogen. The potential for such studies has
been recognized for many years, but has not been realized due to sparse data,
the large proportion of isotopic measurements on samples that are not
characterized for other important geochemical parameters, and lack of inter-
laboratory standardization. We propose to characterize the variation in D/H
ratio among submarine basalts associated with the Mariana arc and its back arc
basin, which are a key set of samples for our current understanding of the role
of water in magma genesis at convergent margins. We will approach this study
using a new analytical method for determining D/H ratios and H contents of small
quantities (10's to hundreds of micrograms) of hydrous solids and glasses at a
rate approximately 10x that of conventional analyses but with similar accuracy
and precision. This method will let us produce relatively large, well
standardized and well replicated data sets in a reasonable time
frame.&lt;br/&gt;