* 0208580
* COM-MTDP: A New Approach for Analysis of Multiagent Teamwork
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2006
* Milind Tambe, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2006
* USD 314,426.00

Despite significant progress in the Belief-desire-intention theories of teamwork
and their applications, existing multiagent teamwork research suffers from at
least two serious shortcomings. First, there is no quantitative analysis of the
optimality of its prescriptions for agent behavior in teamwork. Second, there is
no analysis of the complexity of the general teamwork problem or specific team
coordination decisions. To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel
framework, the COMmunicative Multiagent Team Decision Problem (COM-MTDP). COM-
MTDP is based on the decision-theoretic work in economic team theory, but with
significant extensions to introduce dynamics and interagent communication. As a
result, at its core, COM-MTDP is driven by communicating partially observable
markov decision processes (POMDPs). The projected impact of the development of
COM-MTDP will be a new, general framework for theoretical and empirical analysis
of teamwork. Thus, rather than simply providing teamwork heuristics, researchers
could analyze the computational complexities of the optimal team problem, and
analyze the complexity-optimality tradeoffs in proposed team coordination
heuristics and implementations. Such analysis would lead to improved, robust,
general team coordination algorithms that explicitly reason about such
tradeoffs. Finally, COM-MTDP ideas could potentially be more generally
applicable (e.g., in analysis of multiagent contracting algorithms.)