* 0208336
* Collaborative Research: Ge/Si as a Tracer of Terrestrial Silica Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Andrew Kurtz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2006
* USD 70,794.00

ABSTRACT

Weathering of silicate minerals on continents is a major source of silicon (Si)
for formation of secondary silicate minerals in soil, opal phytoliths in plants
and ultimately for diatoms in the oceans. Even though Si is a significant
element in the biogeochemistry of Earth, it does not have a well developed
tracer to provide a clear understanding of how organic and inorganic processes
affect Si behavior and the pathways that Si follows as it moves from rock to
clay or water or organism. Germanium (Ge) and Si behave chemically in a similar
fashion and have been treated as a pseudo-isotopic tracer of the behavior of Si
in the surficial environment. We have conducted preliminary research that
demonstrates clear and logical changes in the Ge/Si ratio in response to soil
and plant processes. Here we propose a systematic analysis of Ge fractionation
from Si during: 1) incongruent weathering and the formation of secondary
alumino-silicate clay minerals, 2) formation of iron oxides in soil, and 3)
plant uptake and opal biosynthesis leading to formation of phytoliths.

We propose a field-based project where we quantify the Ge/Si ratios of rock
minerals, soil minerals, soil water and plant phytoliths in soils forming on
extrusive volcanic rock and on intrusive plutonic rocks in a humid tropical
weathering environment. Ge/Si ratios will be determined on fresh parent
materials and soils from a series of well-studied tropical soil sites in Hawaii
(basaltic substrate) and Luquillo, Puerto Rico (granitoid substrate). Pore
waters and mineral separates (where applicable) from the same horizons as the
soil samples will be analyzed. We will also analyze plant phytoliths from
dominant vegetation. We will use the data to test specific hypotheses about
processes that control Ge/Si fractionation in the weathering environment. The
proposed research will compare and contrast the behavior of the Ge/Si system in
aphanitic basaltic environments with plutonic granitoid environments, where we
expect that the mechanisms of fractionation will differ because of the
differences in chemical composition, mineralogy, and crystallinity. It will also
specifically investigate the role of plant uptake of Si and the biogenic silica
cycle in soil systems. The results of this study will provide the basic data
needed to develop Ge/Si ratios as a quantitative tracer of silica during
weathering, plant cycling, and in surface waters.