* 0208029
* ROLE: Fostering Understanding of Chemistry through MORE Metacognitive Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2002,10/31/2006
* Dawn Rickey, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 10/31/2006
* USD 975,884.00

The research goals of this project are (1) to determine how the metacognitively-
focused instructional tool called the Model-Observe-Reflect-Explain (MORE)
Thinking Frame can be used in both high school and college chemistry laboratory
courses to enhance metacognition, understanding, and problem solving, (2) to
investigate how instructor professional development experiences can be designed
to sustain the effective use of the MORE Thinking Frame, as well as specifically
what instructors learn from such experiences, and (3) to augment and refine the
model of how people use their metacognitive skills in the contexts of chemistry
learning, problem solving, and instructor professional development. Design
experiments will be employed to study the complex and dynamic interplay between
instructor and student cognition (understanding, beliefs, metacognition);
instructor professional development experiences; and classroom practices of
communities of learners using the MORE Thinking Frame as instructional and
professional development designs are simultaneously refined. Throughout the
course of the project, a sequence of instructional and curricular developments
that centrally involve the Model-Observe-Reflect-Explain (MORE) Thinking Frame
will be implemented, studied, and refined. During the first year of the project,
high school and college instructors will collaborate with the developers of the
MORE Thinking Frame to learn about, adapt, and implement the MORE Frame in their
own laboratory courses (without changing the experiments used in their existing
curricula). In the second and third years of the project, the project team
(including many of these instructors) will design problem-based laboratory
modules to complement the use of the MORE Thinking Frame and to infuse more
authentic inquiry into the chemistry laboratory courses.

Throughout the professional development experiences and successive
implementations of the MORE Frame in various instructors' classrooms, data will
be collected from a broad range of sources (both qualitative and quantitative)
and analyzed to address the research questions and to inform future practice. In
addition, a website will be constructed to provide information and support for
implementing MORE curricula and instruction as well as to provide instructional
materials for the problem-based modules developed. Finally, the project team
will conduct workshops to disseminate information and materials. This project
will generate new knowledge about how metacognitively-focused instructional
tools can be used to enhance students' science learning in various instructional
contexts; how to structure effective professional development experiences and
what instructors learn from such experiences; how laboratory teaching practices
are linked to students' chemistry learning; and the relationships among
metacognition, chemistry teaching, and chemistry learning.