* 0208879
* Scheduling of Random Processes and Quantum Information
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2006
* Peter Gacs, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 263,113.00

The research addresses problems in two topics: scheduling of random processes
and quantum information theory. Scheduling problems arise in many areas of
computer science. The investigator studies the possibility of scheduling two
random sequences of activities in a way that prevents certain conflicts between
them. The methods applied also advance the state of the art in percolation
theory (a fundamental area of probability theory and statistical physics).
Quantum information theory extends the questions concerning conditions and
methods for reliable transmission of information to the setting of quantum
mechanics. It has applications in cryptography, and also relates to the
promising area of quantum computing. The theory of description complexity has
been useful in clarifying concepts of classical information theory. The research
extends description complexity theory in order to help study the much more
complex questions of quantum information theory.

In the scheduling problem, given are the sample paths of two or more random
processes (like queues) and some condition telling when these processes
``collide''. The task is to introduce delays into each of the processes in a way
that avoids collisions. Reformulation introduces a dependent percolation model
with novel convergence properties that aroused much interest. The principal tool
of the solution is renormalization, greatly refined. The achieved results are
qualitative, leaving much quantitative work to be done. In the application of
description complexity to quantum information theory, a universal semicomputable
density matrix (``universal probability'') is taken as a starting point, and
complexity (an operator) is defined as its negative logarithm. A number of
properties of Kolmogorov complexity and von Neumann entropy extend naturally to
the new domain, and the quantity reflects appropriately some of the
peculiarities of quantum information (no cloning). The approach taken unifies
other approaches made by several researchers in this direction.