* 0208130
* Genesis of the Western Slope of the Altiplano Plateau and Atacama Basin
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2006
* Bryan Isacks, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The common association of thrust belts with the slopes of the great mountain
belts has resulted in the common assumption that topographic relief and surface
shortening are intrinsically linked. For example, many of the world's great
mountain belts are doubly vergent, with well-developed thrust belts facing away
from the interior of the orogen. However, in some key cases, significant
topographic relief has developed in the absence of major faulting. These
orogenic scale monoclines and their along-strike discontinuities have the
potential to elucidate crustal mechanical and rheological controls on
continental orogenesis. An exceptional example of an orogenic-scale monocline
occurs along the western border of the Altiplano-Puna plateau of the central
Andes. Although climate, and in particular precipitation, has a strong influence
on the morphology of a mountain belt, in this region the climatic input is
minimized because it is one of the driest places on Earth. The profound lack of
precipitation causes the landscape to evolve extremely slowly and extend the
preservation potential of landforms and surfaces from the thousands of years
typical of mountain belts into millions of years. Therefore, the western edge of
the plateau's morphology reflects a nearly pure tectonic signal, making it the
most logical starting point for studies aimed at improving our understanding of
continental plateau formation and orogenesis. A chronologic framework for the
Miocene to present uplift of the Andean monocline will be derived from
investigation of: 1) the geometric relationships between strata accumulating in
sedimentary basins at the toe of the monocline, and 2) estimations of the degree
of rotation of stream paleo-gradients in a set of drainages which are deeply
incised into the monocline surface. Paleo-gradients will be determined by
correlation and high accuracy surveying of terrace surfaces preserved in stream
valleys. Extensive volcanism and large-volume ignimbrite eruptions are well
distributed throughout the Neogene rock record, so that existing chronologic
constraints can be improved upon by identification and collection of volcanic
material for dating. The Atacama and Tamarugal Basins are ideal field areas in
which to conduct the stratigraphic research in both outcrop and seismic. Both
basins lie at the foot of the monocline and are hydrologically closed.
Therefore, they preserve complete Neogene depositional histories. The Atacama
Basin contains an especially valuable record because it lies within the largest
along-strike anomaly in the monocline. Determining if a genetic link exists
between the basin and the deflection of the monocline (temporally and spatially)
will be an important research focus, as it may yield insight into processes
fundamental to plateau uplift. This study is extremely timely and has the
potential to be an excellent contribution to the understanding of surface
processes, orogenesis and plateau uplift. The outcomes of this work will advance
the present state of knowledge concerning the causes of plateau uplift by
testing whether monocline warping is synchronous with deformation on the
opposite side of the orogen, as expressed in the Sub-Andean belt and Eastern
Cordillera. It will also test the significance of large topographic anomalies in
otherwise continuous mountain-fronts. This study will explore the feasibility of
plateau-derived groundwater as a substantial factor in landform genesis. The
results of this study will contain many parallels to research on the Tibetan
Plateau, where performing similar studies would be hampered by exposure
problems. This research will have educational and human resource impacts. At
Cornell University, results from this study will become components of
undergraduate courses in geomorphology, geophysics and basin analysis. All
results will be cataloged in GIS software and available to the public via the
internet. This research will also serve as thesis components for two Cornell
graduate students.