* 0208975
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Data Distribution Schemes for  Secure and Reliable Networked Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Lihao Xu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 12/31/2004
* USD 159,921.00

The rise of ubiquitous computing has prompted the need for a change in the way
we store and access information. It calls for the study of data storage systems
that distribute information over wide area networks, enabling users to store and
access critical data in a continuously available and highly trustable fashion.
The problem of data distribution, i.e., storing data in networked storage
systems while achieving data reliability, confidentiality and performance is
studied.

Data distribution schemes based on (n,k) error correcting codes are
investigated. The research will focus on two key questions: 1) how to achieve
strong and computationally efficient data encryption while storing data over a
distributed networked environment? and 2) how to place encoded data segments in
networked systems, while considering the structure of the network topology, to
enable high performance and reliable data retrieval?

Insights and results from this research program will provide guidelines for
efficient, secure and reliable data distribution schemes for wired and wireless
networks, as well as make significant contributions to related theory study,
such as cryptography, coding theory, graph theory and combinatorics. In
addition, efforts will be made to integrate this research program into
educational activities.







