* 0208830
* Adaptive Digital Signal Processing for Spatial and Temporal Sampled Coherent Imaging Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2002,05/31/2006
* Yibin Zheng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/2006
* USD 310,000.00

This research will develop advanced digital signal processing algorithms for
specific&lt;br/&gt;coherent imaging systems where complex signals are spatially
and temporally sampled,&lt;br/&gt;and subsequently processed by
computers.Modeling of the physics of data acquisition&lt;br/&gt;will play a
crucial role throughout the signal processing chain,from preprocessing at
the&lt;br/&gt;sensor level to adaptive processing/beamforming and final image
formation.The focal&lt;br/&gt;research areas will involve ultra wide band
medical ultrasound imaging,and&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic wave imaging in
millimeter spectral bands.Millimeter electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;wave imaging
could have important anti-terrorism applications such as detection
of&lt;br/&gt;plastic guns and knives in human body scanning at airports,and
surveillance of suspected&lt;br/&gt;safe houses,storage areas,and cargos by
imaging through walls or crates.&lt;br/&gt;In the medical ultrasound area,the
research will involve the following specific topics:(1)&lt;br/&gt;optimal
transmit/receive beam forming for near field dynamic focusing;(2)multiple
foci&lt;br/&gt;B scan imaging for increasing scan rates;(3).theoretical
performance bounds associated&lt;br/&gt;with combined random processes of random
scatterers and noise.and (4),phase&lt;br/&gt;aberration correction algorithms
for 3-D systems including new methods for dealing with&lt;br/&gt;dispersed
aberrators such as fat lobules,membranes,etc.,that can diffract and refract
the&lt;br/&gt;ultrasound beams.The research in electromagnetic coherent imaging
will involve:&lt;br/&gt;synergistic adaptation of the statistical ultrasound
autofocusing/phase aberration&lt;br/&gt;correction concepts to the
electromagnetic spectrum;development of millimeter wa e&lt;br/&gt;imaging
algorithms for surveillance functions such as rapid body scanning and
imaging&lt;br/&gt;through thin dry medium such as wood,plaster board or
stone.The research in all the&lt;br/&gt;coherent modalities will
involve:development of practical fast converging
computer&lt;br/&gt;implementations of reconstruction algorithms;extensive
simulations,and performance&lt;br/&gt;analyses of the new models and algorithms.