* 0208386
* Effect of Transient Hydrologic Events on Biogeochemical Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Aaron Mills, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2008
* USD 441,257.00

0208386&lt;br/&gt;Mills&lt;br/&gt;In field studies of groundwater in a range of
hydrogeological settings, the rates of microbially mediated geochemical
reactions have been shown to be far faster than hydrological transport rates.
These relative rates lead to large changes in concentration of a variety of
redox-sensitive chemical species over short distances within aquifers. In some
systems, however, transient hydrological events (e.g., heavy precipitation on
dry soil or floods in streams) can rapidly alter the geochemical environment in
which the microbes exist. In that circumstance, the time constants associated
with the physical events approach those of the microbially mediated processes.
The proposed research addresses the question: How do hydrological processes and
biogeochemical processes interact in the riparian-hyporheic zone of streams
where time scales of the various processes are on the same order - hours to
weeks? The proposed research will examine the effect of bank-storage events on
reductive microbiological processes occurring in the riparian-hyporheic zone of
a low-relief coastal plain stream. In particular, the concentration of nitrate-N
in the groundwater feeding the stream is about 15 mg/liter, but the stream-water
concentrations average only 1.6 mg/liter, suggesting high denitrification
activity in the riparian- hyporheic zone. We envision the disruption of
anaerobic processes during rain events in which rapid infiltration raises the
water table and "flushes" chemicals (viz., nitrate) in the pore water out into
the stream and perfuses the area with oxygenated water. We expect a similar
disruption without flushing during storms in which a rapid rise in stream level
pushes oxygenated water into the stream banks, thereby transiently extending the
hyporheic zone. We will also examine the effect of flushing or bank-storage
events on the denitrification and will document the rate of return of the
functional abilities of the microbial communities to the pre-disturbance levels.
Because these transient events have the potential to affect release of chemicals
like nitrate from the groundwater into the surrounding surface waters, we will
investigate how transient conditions in riparian soils affect the overall budget
of biologically active chemicals. The proposed work includes detailed field
observations, field manipulation experiments, laboratory batch and "mesocosm"
experiments and mathematical modeling. We anticipate that we will learn how
microbially mediated geochemical reactions and transient hydrological processes
with time scales on the same order are linked. We will develop quantitative
descriptions of these processes and investigate how frequently biogeochemical
processes are "reset" by different hydrological events the synoptic data that we
will examine how the transient effects of local processes influence regional
nutrient fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;